CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF COLUMBIA, MISSOURI 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER AND GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
COLUMBIA, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Published in 1985 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 7, 1985 
Effective: October 7, 1985 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF COLUMBIA, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Brian Treece 
Mayor 
____________ 
Clyde Ruffin, First Ward 
Michael Trapp, Second Ward 
Karl Skala, Third Ward 
Ian Thomas, Fourth Ward 
Matt Pitzer, Fifth Ward 
Betsy Peters, Sixth Ward 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Matthes 
City Manager 
____________ 
Nancy Thompson 
City Counselor 
____________ 
Sheela Amin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Columbia, Missouri, of a general and permanent nature. Part I of this volume contains the Home Rule Charter of the City, while Part II contains the Code of Ordinances. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state laws have been included. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. A reference to "Code 1964" refers to "The Revised Ordinances of the City of Columbia, Missouri, 1964," as supplemented through November 15, 1982. Only ordinances adopted subsequent to such date will be separately noted in such history notes. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the sixteenth section of Chapter 6 is 6-16. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of this volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and James S. Vaught, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff, particularly Mary Grace Tavel, Supplement Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editorial Assistant, for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to David E. Evans, City Counselor, and the other city officials and employees for their cooperation and assistance and for the interest shown by them in the preparation of the manuscript of this publication. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 10739 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia, Missouri; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri, As Follows: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 29, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri," which Code shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before March 4, 1985, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 1986, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Columbia enacted on final passage on or before March 4, 1985 and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the 1st day of January, 1986, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the city, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
Section 3. Whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the city council or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the city council and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of such Code shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of such Code. 
Section 4. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5. In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 6. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by such officer, to insert in their designated places all amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 7. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Columbia to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the "Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri." 
Section 8. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
Section 9. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage. 
PASSED this 7th day of October, 1985. 
ATTEST: 
/s/  Launa H. Daniel       
City Clerk 	/s/  Rodney D. Smith       
Mayor and Presiding Officer 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 	
/s/  David E. Evans       
City Counselor 	
  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Preamble 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Home Rule Charter of the city is set out in this Part as revised and readopted on November 11, 1974. Other amendments are noted in history notes following amended sections. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the citizens of the City of Columbia, Missouri, in order to secure the benefits of constitutional home rule under the Constitution of the State of Missouri, maintain a democratic form of government, establish the basic governmental structure of the City, maintain an economical city manager form of city administration, provide for full publicity and openness in the conduct of affairs of city government, public meetings and records, provide for equality of citizenship for all Columbians, and promote the common welfare, do ordain and establish this HOME RULE CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF COLUMBIA, MISSOURI.  
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS; WARDS 
 
Section 1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Columbia, within the corporate limits as now established, or as hereafter established in the manner then provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the City of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 13412, § 1, 8-17-92; passed by voters November 3, 1992)  
Sections 1.1—1.6. - Repealed by Ord. No. 13412, § 1, 8-17-92; passed by the voters on November 3, 1992.  
Section 2. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to the provisions of this charter and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city.  
Section 3. - Powers of the City. 
The city shall have all powers which the general assembly of the State of Missouri has authority to confer upon any city, provided such powers are consistent with the Constitution of this state and are not limited or denied by this charter or by statute. The city shall, in addition to its home rule powers, have all powers conferred by law. 
The powers of the city shall be liberally construed. The specific mention of a particular power in this charter shall not be construed as limiting the powers of the city. 
(11-11-74)  
Section 4. - Wards. 
The city shall be divided into (6) wards, the boundaries of which shall be established by ordinance. Wards shall comprise compact and contiguous territory and contain, as nearly a possible, an equal number of inhabitants. Ward boundaries shall be reviewed and revised from time to time, as may be necessary to maintain as nearly as possible an equal number of inhabitants in each ward. 
(3-7-72)  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 
 
Section 5. - Number and Term. 
The council shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be elected for a term of three (3) years and shall serve until a successor shall be elected and qualified, except as otherwise provided herein. One of the seven (7) council members shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large and shall be the mayor. The other six (6) council members shall be elected, one from each ward, by the qualified voters thereof. The terms of the council members shall be staggered in such a manner that two (2) of the council members shall be elected each year, provided that the council member-at-large shall be elected every third year as hereinafter provided. 
Prior to the effective date of this section, a lottery shall be conducted in a manner established by ordinance to determine which council members by ward are to be elected for one-, two- and three-year terms, such foreshortened terms being established for the purpose of staggering terms thereafter. The council member-at-large shall be elected to a three-year term. The elections conducted at the effective date of this ordinance shall provide for the respective one-, two- and three-year terms. Each council member thereafter elected shall be elected to a full three-year term unless sooner removed in accordance with the other provisions herein. The effective date of this section shall be April 5, 1983. 
(Passed by voters April 7, 1981; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 6. - Qualifications. 
A council member shall be a qualified and registered voter of the city. The six (6) council members elected by wards shall be residents and qualified voters of the respective wards from which they are elected. Council members shall hold no other lucrative public office nor any lucrative position in the city government during their terms as council members. If a council member shall cease to possess the above qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, the council member's office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Passed 1-20-75, effective 4-7-75; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 7. - Stipends. 
At the beginning of the terms of office of council members elected in 2014, the mayor shall receive an annual stipend of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) and all other council members shall receive an annual stipend of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). The amount of these stipends shall be adjusted every three (3) years thereafter, but the adjustment shall not take effect until three (3) years later so that no council member shall receive an increase in compensation during the member's term of office. The stipends shall be adjusted by the cumulative percentage cost-of-living adjustment given to city employees during the previous three (3) years. Council members may also be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in their capacity as council members. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20846, § 1, 4-5-11)  
Section 8. - Rules of Order. 
The council shall determine by ordinance its own rules and order of business. It shall keep a journal of its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection at all reasonable hours. It shall be the judge of qualifications of its members, and may punish its members for disorderly behavior. A majority thereof shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as the council may provide. The affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution or motion. The "ayes" and "nays" on any question shall, at the request of any member, be entered in the journal and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be recorded on the final passage of every ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 9. - Vacancies. 
Every vacancy in any elective office shall be filled by the council for a period running to the next regular election, unless such period exceeds one year. In the latter case, the council shall make provision for a special election.  
Section 10. - Mayor. 
The council member elected at large shall be the mayor, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The council member-at-large shall preside at all meetings of the council, and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all legal and ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. The council member-at-large shall have the same right to vote as any other member of the council, but shall have no veto power. The council shall also select from among the council members a mayor "pro tempore," who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. If a vacancy should occur, the mayor "pro tempore" shall become mayor for the completion of the unexpired term unless that term is for a period exceeding one year. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 11. - Appointment and Removal of City Manager. 
The council shall appoint an officer who shall have the title of city manager and who shall have the powers to perform the duties provided in this Charter. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which the council member shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration of the term. The appointment of the city manager shall be for an indefinite term, at the pleasure of the council. 
(11-11-74; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 12. - Prohibiting Interference. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or the removal of any person from office by the city manager or any of the manager's subordinates, nor in any way interfere with the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, or as otherwise provided in this charter, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative officers and services solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. The office of any council member violating the provisions of this section shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 13. - City Clerk. 
The council shall elect an officer who shall have the title of city clerk. The clerk shall keep the journal of its proceedings, and authenticate all ordinances and resolutions and record them in full in a book kept for that purpose. The clerk shall perform such other duties as may be required by statute, by this charter or by the council. The city clerk shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 14. - Meetings. 
The council shall meet regularly at such times as prescribed by its rules, but not less frequently than once each month. Written agendas shall be distributed, in the chambers where the council regularly meets, prior to each regular meeting of the council. No action by the council shall have legal effect unless the motion for the action and the vote by which it is disposed of take place at proceedings open to the public. 
(11-11-74; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 15. - Legislative Proceedings. 
A.  In the transaction of legislative business, the council shall act by ordinance, and the following procedure shall be used: Every ordinance shall be by bill, which shall be in written or printed form, and the enacting clause shall be: "Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Columbia." No bill, except those making appropriations and those codifying or rearranging existing ordinances, shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in the title. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject matter of the appropriation. All bills shall be read by title or council bill numbers three (3) times before passage, not more than two (2) of which readings shall be at the same legislative session; and at least one week shall elapse between introduction and final passage of any bill, except in the area of an emergency bill. 
B.  An ordinance may be passed as an emergency measure on the day of the introduction of the bill, provided that it contain[s] the statement that an emergency exists and specify [specifies] distinctly the facts and reasons constituting the emergency. No ordinance granting, enlarging or affecting any franchise shall be passed as an emergency measure. The emergency procedure shall be restricted to the following: 
1.  Bills concerning the immediate preservation of public peace, property, health, safety or morals. 
2.  An appropriation for payment of principal or interest of the public debt. 
3.  An appropriation for the payment of current expenses of city government. 
4.  Calling an election or providing for the submission of a proposal to the people. 
The vote of six-sevenths of the members of the council shall be required to pass an ordinance as an emergency measure. 
C.  Every bill introduced shall be filed with the city clerk on the day of its first reading and shall remain on file in the clerk's office for public inspection until it is finally adopted or fails of passage. Prior to the final passage of any bill, other than an emergency bill, all persons interested therein shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the council, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the council may adopt. After the third reading of any bill and compliance with the other provisions herein, the council may finally pass the bill with or without amendment; except that if the council shall make an amendment which constitutes a change in substance, the bill, as amended, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for one additional week, and an opportunity afforded for a further public hearing, after which final action may be taken thereon. 
D.  An ordinance, when passed by the council, shall be signed by the presiding officer and attested by the city clerk; shall be immediately filed and thereafter preserved in the office of the city clerk; and except as otherwise provided herein, shall be subject to the referendum as provided in Article XVII of this charter. Unless otherwise specified, every ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days after its final passage. If an ordinance be submitted at a referendum election or as a result of an initiative petition, it shall become effective upon the certification of the election authority that it has received the favorable vote of a majority of those voting thereon. 
(11-11-74; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 16. - Revision of Ordinances. 
Within three years after the adoption of this charter, all ordinances of the city of a general and permanent nature shall be revised, digested, codified and promulgated, and a system of continuous numbering and revision shall be established and maintained thereafter in accordance with provisions to be prescribed by ordinance.  
Section 17. - Annual Audit. 
An independent financial audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the council. Such audit shall be made by a qualified public accountant who is experienced in municipal accounting. Such accountant shall have no personal or financial interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or of any of its officers. The results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the council may determine. 
(Passed 1-20-75, effective 4-7-75)  
Section 18. - Powers. 
Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. The council shall provide for the exercise of these powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
(11-11-74)  
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY MANAGER 
 
Section 19. - Qualifications; Term of Office. 
The city manager shall be chosen by the council on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to experience in, and knowledge of, city manager work. The manager may or may not be a resident of the city or the state at the time of selection, but shall reside within the city while serving as city manager. The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, subject to removal as herein provided, and shall devote full time to the duties of the office. The manager shall designate one of the department directors or an assistant city manager to perform the duties of the city manager in event of the manager's absence or disability; if the manager should fail to do so, the council shall make such designation. 
(4-4-49; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20528, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 20. - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance. 
(4-4-49)  
Section 21. - Powers and Duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all of the city's affairs. To that end the manager shall have power and be required to: 
1.  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided in the charter, and except as the manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint subordinates in such department or office. 
2.  Prepare and submit to the council a statement of policy recommendations for programs and priorities which, in the opinion of the city manager, will be of benefit to the city. This statement shall be submitted not less than one hundred twenty (120) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the last day for the adoption of the budget. 
3.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
4.  Prepare and submit to the council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the year. 
5.  Keep the council advised of the financial condition of the city and make recommendations concerning its future needs. 
6.  Attend all meetings of the council and its committees, except when the council may be considering the manager's removal. The manager shall have the right to take part in discussions, but shall have no power to vote. The manager shall receive notice of all special meetings. 
7.  Enforce all laws and ordinances and see that all contracts and franchises are faithfully performed. 
8.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of the manager by the council, not inconsistent with this charter. 
(Effective 4-7-75; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 
 
Section 22. - Administrative Organization. 
The council shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing a complete plan of organization and structure for the city government. The administrative code may authorize the city manager to promulgate regulations dealing with questions of organization and structure. The administrative code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this charter. Unless otherwise required by law, all boards and commissions provided for in the administrative code shall be appointed by the council. 
(11-11-74)  
Section 23. - Personnel System. 
The council shall adopt by ordinance a personnel code providing a comprehensive personnel system for city officers and employees. The personnel code shall provide that all appointments and promotions of city officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness. The personnel code may authorize the city manager or a personnel board, if one be established, to promulgate regulations dealing with personnel matters. The personnel code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this charter. 
(11-11-74)  
Section 24. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
 
Section 25. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 26. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 27. - Separate Utilities Accounts. 
The accounts of all utilities owned and operated and all activities performed by the city and dependent for their revenues upon the sale of their products or charge for their services shall be kept separate and distinct from all other accounts of the city, and shall contain proportionate charges for all services performed by other departments for such utilities and activities as well as proportionate credits for all services rendered.  
Section 28. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 29. - Purchase Procedure. 
Before the city makes any purchase or contract, or lets any contract for improvements, there shall be given ample opportunity for competitive bidding, subject to such exceptions as the council, upon recommendation of the city manager, may prescribe by ordinance or resolution.  
Section 30. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 31. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 32. - Representation of Board of Equalization. 
For the purpose of giving the City of Columbia representation on the county board of equalization when said board is sitting for the purpose of equalizing the assessment of property in the city, such officials of the city as may be provided by law, shall sit with the county board of equalization, shall have a vote on said board, and shall be paid for such services as may be provided for by law. 
(4-4-67) 
State Law reference— Board of equalization, RSMo 138.015.  
Section 33. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City of Columbia, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, shall begin on the first day of January and shall end on the last day of December of each calendar year. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered.  
Section 34. - Tentative Budget. 
The city manager, at least two (2) weeks before the council undertakes to set the tax rate for the next fiscal year, shall prepare and submit to the city a tentative budget in sufficient detail to enable said council to appraise the needs of the city for the next budget year. The council shall then set a tax rate upon all taxable property in an amount sufficient to produce the revenue needed.  
Section 35. - Final Budget and Budget Message. 
The city manager, at least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, or at such time in each year as shall be fixed by the council, shall submit to the council a final budget with an explanatory message. For the purpose of preparing this budget and explanatory message, the city manager shall secure from the head of each office, department or agency who shall supply the same, detailed estimates of revenue and expenditures of that office, department or agency. The city manager shall also secure an estimate of all capital projects pending and those which it is recommended should be undertaken (a) within the budget year, and (b) within the next five (5) succeeding years. In preparing the budget, the city manager shall review and may revise the estimates, as the manager may deem necessary. 
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the budget year. It shall include the following: 
1.  An itemized statement of estimated revenues from all sources for the year which the budget is to cover, together with a comparative statement of revenues for the last completed fiscal year and the year in progress. 
2.  An itemized statement of proposed expenditures recommended by the city manager for each office, department, or agency for the year which the budget is to cover, together with a comparative statement of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year and the year in progress. 
3.  A statement of the amount required for the payment of interest, amortization and redemption charges on the debt of the city. 
4.  Provision for contingent expense in an amount not to exceed five (5) per cent of the total operating expenditures proposed under item (2) above. 
5.  A general budget summary. 
6.  Such other information as the city manager may deem essential, or as may be required by ordinance or by law. 
The budget message shall be in full and a complete explanation of the proposed budget, including reasons for any major changes from the preceding year. Expenditures proposed in the budget for each department, office or agency shall be itemized by character, object, function, activity and fund. The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions permit to established and recognized standards of accounting. In no event shall the total amount of the proposed expenditures exceed the estimated income of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 36. - Budget a Public Record. 
The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory materials, shall be a public record in the office of the city clerk, open to public inspection. The city manager shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and the budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons.  
Section 37. - Public Hearing [on Budget.] 
At the meeting of the council at which the budget is submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget. The council shall cause to be published a notice of the time and place of the hearing at least seven (7) days before the hearing is to be held. At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard.  
Section 38. - Adoption of the Budget. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing or hearings, the council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the various items of the budget, except for specified fixed expenditures. If it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, the council shall also increase the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures. The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of not less than a majority of the entire council, not later than the last Monday of the month preceding the first month of the budget year for which the budget is intended. Should the council take no final action on or prior to that date, the budget as submitted shall be effective without council action.  
Section 39. - Effective Date [of Budget]; Certification; Copies. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the city manager and city clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk. The budget so certified shall be printed, mimeographed, or otherwise reproduced, and sufficient copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies of the city and for the use of interested citizens and civic organizations.  
Section 40. - Appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several offices, departments, or agencies for the various functions and activities specified in the budget.  
Section 41. - Expenditures Limited to Budget. 
All allowable claims against the city shall be approved for payment by the department or agency head, by the director of finance, and by the city manager. Any such official who shall approve any claim for payment for which there is not a sufficient unencumbered balance in the fund or appropriation, or which is in any way contrary to the provisions of this charter, or law, or ordinance, shall be personally liable and liable on the official's bond for the amount thereof, and may be removed from office. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 42. - Contracts. 
No contract or order purporting to impose any financial obligation on the city shall be executed, nor shall the same be valid and binding upon the city, unless it be in writing, and unless the director of finance shall first certify in writing thereon that such contract or order is within the purpose of the appropriation to which it is to be charged and that there is an unencumbered balance to the credit of such appropriation sufficient to pay therefor.  
Section 43. - Tax Rates and Tax Rolls. 
The city council shall by ordinance set the tax rates to be levied on the various classes of property as assessed by the assessor, and the levy so established shall be certified by the city clerk to the director of finance who shall compute the taxes and extend the same upon the tax rolls received from the assessor. The director of finance shall, on or before November 1 of each year, unless otherwise provided by the council, deliver the tax rolls so extended to the collector, taking receipt therefor and charging the collector with the amount of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 44. - Transfer of Unexpended Appropriations. 
The city manager, upon the recommendation of the department or agency head, may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one classification of expenditure to another within an office, department or agency, and such transfer shall be reported to the city council at the next meeting. At the request of the city manager, the council may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. No transfer shall be made of specified fixed appropriations. 
(4-4-67; Ord. No. 20529, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 45. - General Provisions. 
1.  No contract for the acquisition of any property or the construction of any improvement which is to be financed by bond shall be executed until the issuance of such bonds shall have been duly authorized. 
2.  The council, upon recommendation of the city manager, may make emergency appropriations to meet the pressing need for public expenditures for other than a regular or recurring requirement to protect the public health, safety or welfare. The total amount of all emergency appropriations made in any fiscal year shall not exceed five (5) per cent of the total operating appropriation made in the budget for that year. 
3.  The council may by ordinance authorize the director of finance to borrow money to meet the cash requirements of any fund in anticipation of the receipts from revenues for the current fiscal year. The aggregate amount of such loans shall not exceed the estimated cash receipts of said fund for the fiscal year then outstanding and uncollected. Such loans shall be repaid from revenues received during the fiscal year in which the loans are made. Such loans shall be due and payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the loans are made. An affirmative vote of at least five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) of all members of the council shall be required to pass such ordinance. Such ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and shall not be subject to the referendum. 
4.  All fees, charges and commissions for city services, and all money in the form of rentals, payments for concessions, or other charges for the use or occupancy of city property received by any officer or employee, and all interest on public deposits shall belong to the city government, shall be regularly accounted for, and shall be paid to the city treasury under such regulations as may be prescribed by the director of finance. 
5.  All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
(11-7-78; 4-2-85)  
Section 46. - Incurring Indebtedness. 
The city may incur indebtedness and issue its negotiable bonds in evidence thereof for any purpose which may be authorized hereunder, or for any purpose which may be authorized now or hereafter by the laws of the State of Missouri to any municipality.  
Section 47. - Specific Purposes [of Bonds]. 
Some of the purposes, hereby specifically authorized, for which the bonds of the city may be issued, sold, pledged or disposed of on the credit of the city, or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city, or solely upon the credit of income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or upon any two (2) or more such credits, shall be: 
1.  The acquiring of land; the purchase, construction, reconstruction, repairs and improvement upon or extension of the following: water systems, including lakes and reservoirs; public sewers, sewage disposal plants; buildings and equipment for the police and fire departments; other public buildings and equipment therefor; facilities and equipment for the collection or disposal of garbage and refuse; bridges, viaducts, subways, tunnels, railroads, street railroads, bus lines; terminals for bus, air and railroad travel and their equipment; warehouses, public market facilities, airports, and equipment therefor; street lighting systems, gas or electric utility systems, heating and power plants, telephone and telegraph systems, facilities for radio broadcasting and reception; off-street parking facilities, or any other public utility or equipment therefor; public housing, hospitals, orphan homes, industrial schools, jails, workhouses, and other charitable, correctional or penal institutions and equipment therefor; golf courses, swimming pools and other recreational facilities and their equipment; parks, parkways, streets, boulevards, grounds or any other public improvement. 
2.  The paying, refunding or renewing of any bonds issued by the city, whether general obligation bonds or revenue bonds, and the establishment of a local improvement fund to be used for the purpose of paying cash for local improvements, such fund to be replenished from time to time by the payment into it of the proceeds of special assessments made on account of such local improvements. 
The foregoing enumeration shall not be construed to limit any general provision of this charter authorizing the city to borrow money or issue and dispose of bonds, and such general provisions shall be construed according to the full force and effect of their language, as if no specific purposes had been mentioned; and the authority to issue such bonds for any purpose aforesaid is cumulative and shall not be construed to impair any authority to make any public improvements under any provision of this charter or of any law.  
Section 48. - Vote Required for Issuance of Bonds. 
No bonds shall be issued without the assent of the requisite number of qualified electors of the city voting thereon, as may be required by the Constitution or statutes of the State of Missouri, at an election held for that purpose. 
(11-11-74)  
Section 49. - Conduct of Election. 
Notice of any such election shall be given, and such election shall be held, conducted and the returns thereof made, canvassed and declared in the manner provided by ordinance and by the laws and Constitution of the State of Missouri.  
Section 50. - Debt Statement. 
Prior to the adoption of an ordinance calling or providing for the holding of an election at which any question of incurring indebtedness shall be submitted, the director of finance shall prepare, swear to, and file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk, a special debt statement which shall set forth: 
1.  The aggregate principal amount of all outstanding bonds and notes of the city. 
2.  Deductions, if any, permitted by the constitution and general laws. 
3.  The amount of existing net indebtedness. 
4.  The amount of net indebtedness after the issuance of the bonds authorized by such bond ordinance. 
5.  The assessed valuation of taxable tangible property within the city as shown by the last completed assessment for state and county purposes. 
6.  The aggregate principal amount of bonds and notes which the city may issue pursuant to law. 
This debt statement, after approval by a majority of the council, shall be published with the notice of the bond election and shall be presumed to be accurate.  
Section 51. - Sale of Bonds. 
A.  All bonds issued under this charter shall be sold in the manner provided by ordinance and by the laws and Constitution of the State of Missouri. 
B.  In those instances where the sale of bonds shall be had by public sale, sale shall be upon sealed proposals after notice published at least once in a newspaper published in Columbia, Missouri, such publication to be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale. The director of finance shall mail notices by direct mail to all parties and financial institutions who in the director's opinion may be interested in the purchase of such bonds. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 52. - Issuance of Refunding Bonds. 
The city may issue refunding bonds for the purpose of refunding, extending or unifying the whole or any part of its valid outstanding revenue bonds. The council shall determine the amount of such refunding bonds and shall provide for the payment of interest and principal of such refunding bonds in any manner and upon such terms which are not prohibited by the Constitution or laws of the State of Missouri. 
(4-2-85)  
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL 
 
Sections 53 through 64, inclusive, - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 
 
Section 65. - City Counselor; Appointment, Qualifications, Duties. 
There shall be a department of law, the director of which shall be known as the city counselor. The city counselor shall be appointed by the city manager by and with the consent of the council, and may only be removed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the council. The city counselor shall have been a duly licensed attorney of the State of Missouri for at least three (3) years immediately prior to appointment, and shall have been actively engaged in the practice of law during such three (3) years. The city counselor shall direct the management of all litigation in which the city is a party or is interested. The city counselor shall, in person, or by assistant counselors, represent the city in all legal matters and proceedings in which the city is a party or interested, advise the council or any committee or member thereof, and the city manager and heads of all departments, boards, commissions and offices concerning any legal questions affecting the city's interest. The city counselor or the city counselor's assistants, shall approve, as to form, all contracts, deeds, bonds and other documents to be signed in the name of or made to or with the city. The city counselor and the city counselor's assistants shall perform such other duties as the council may by ordinance or resolution require. The city counselor shall, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the personnel department, appoint such number of assistant city counselors as may be authorized by ordinance. One or more of said assistant city counselors as may be designated by the city counselor, shall represent the city in all cases brought before the municipal court, and do and perform such other legal duties as may be assigned by the city counselor from time to time. Said assistant city counselors shall be duly licensed attorneys of the State of Missouri. Said assistant city counselors may be removed by the city counselor with the advice and consent of the city manager. 
(4-4-67; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 66. - (Repealed 4-4-67)  
Section 67. - (Repealed 4-4-67)  
Section 68. - Special Counsel. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the council from employing special or additional legal counsel.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Section 69. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 70. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 
 
Section 71. - Public Improvements. 
The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 16745, § 1, adopted 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 72. - Special Assessments. 
The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or special tax bills evidencing such assessments shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 16745, § 1, adopted 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Sections 73—85. - Repealed by Ord. No. 16745, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001; passed by the voters April 3, 2001.  
Section 86. - Sidewalks. (Repealed 4-4-67)  
Sections 87, 88. - Repealed by Ord. No. 16745, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001; passed by the voters April 3, 2001.  
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISES 
 
Section 89. - Granting of Franchises. 
All public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted within less than thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the council, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon. No such ordinance shall become effective until it has been submitted to the electors and has been approved by a majority voting thereon. 
No ordinance shall be submitted at an election less than sixty (60) days after the grantee named therein has filed its unconditional acceptance of such franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the election, as determined by the council, shall have been paid into the city treasury by the grantee. No exclusive franchises shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than twenty (20) years. No such franchise shall be transferable, directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance after a full public hearing.  
Section 90. - Right of Regulation. 
All public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council to: 
1.  Repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply therewith. 
2.  Require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency. 
3.  Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
4.  Make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and require reports annually. 
5.  Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof. 
6.  Control and regulate the use of the city streets, alleys, bridges and public places, and the space above and beneath them. 
7.  Regulate rates, fares and charges and make readjustments thereof from time to time if the same are not regulated by the state. 
8.  Impose such other regulations from time to time as it may determine to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.  
Section 91. - Purchases; Condemnation. 
The city shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the state, provided that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits.  
Section 92. - Revocable Permits. 
Temporary permits for the operation of public utilities, or like permits for a period not to exceed two (2) years but subject to being renewed and subject to amendment, alteration or revocation at any time at the will of the council, may be granted only by ordinance on such terms and conditions as the council shall determine; provided that such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises, or extensions or amendments of franchises.  
Section 93. - Operation Beyond Franchise Period. 
Any operation of a public utility by a franchise holder, with the tacit permission of the city, beyond the period for which the franchise was granted, shall under no circumstances be construed as a renewal or extension of such franchise. Any such operation shall at most be regarded as a mere temporary permit, subject, like other permits, to amendment, alteration or revocation at any time at the will of the council.  
Section 94. - Exclusion of Cable Television System. 
Cable television systems shall not constitute public utility franchises within the meaning of this Article X, and Article X shall not apply to cable television systems. 
(Passed by voters 11-6-84)  
ARTICLE XI. - PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Sections 95 through 98, inclusive. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
ARTICLE XII. - DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND LIGHT 
 
Section 99. - Appointment and Qualifications of Director. 
The city manager shall select the director of the water and light department, who shall be trained and experienced in the operation and management of public utilities, and qualified to perform the duties required of the director by this charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20530, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 100. - Powers and Duties. 
The director of the water and light department shall serve as the operating engineer of the water and light plants and shall have charge of: 
1.  The physical properties of the water and light plants, all of the distribution systems thereof, filtration plants, reservoirs, wells, generating plants and other facilities directly connected therewith; and all plants, properties, equipment and appliances incident to or connected with the operation of the water and light department, whether within or without the city. 
2.  The designing, construction, reconstruction, addition, repair, replacement, maintenance, supervision and operation of the water and light plants, physical properties, buildings and distribution systems; and street lighting system and equipment, except as provided in item 6, Section 70 of this charter. 
3.  The mechanical and engineering work of the department. 
4.  Meter readings, a list or copy of which shall be furnished to the director of finance. 
5.  The enforcement of all rules, regulations, methods and practices prescribed by the council governing the furnishing and measurement of the water and light services, including the authority to cut off any service for nonpayment, or for nonmaintenance of equipment connected with the main supply, or noncompliance upon the part of any customer with ordinances, rules and regulations relating to the department. 
6.  The records of location, direction, depth and connections of all underground facilities and equipment of the department. 
The director of the department, shall perform such other duties not herein specifically set out as may be required by the city manager, by this Charter, by law or by ordinance. 
The director and employees of the department shall have authority in the necessary discharge of their duties to enter upon any lands, properties or premises within or without the city for the examination or survey thereof, or for the purpose of repairing, inspecting, removing or connecting the service, reading meters, or any other purpose whatsoever in connection with the water and light service. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97) 
Editor's note— Section 70, referred to in this section has been repealed.  
Section 101. - Restriction on Sale of Water and Light Property. 
The city shall not sell, lease, or in any manner dispose of the water and light plants or systems or any properties or equipment used in supplying water or light, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been approved at a special election by a two-thirds majority of those voting thereon. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any equipment which may be worn out or unless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new or improved machinery or equipment.  
Section 102. - Rates and Finances. 
The city council shall from time to time fix, establish, maintain and provide for the collection of such rates, fees or charges for water and electricity and water and electric service furnished by or through the water and electric light works of the city as will produce revenues sufficient to pay the cost of operation and the maintenance of said works in good repair and working order; to pay the principal of and interest on all revenue bonds of the city payable from the revenues of said works; to provide and maintain an adequate depreciation fund for the purpose of making renewals and replacements; to provide a fund for the extension, improvement, enlargement and betterment of said works; to pay the interest on and principal of any general obligation bonds issued by the city to extend or improve said works; and to pay into the general revenue fund of the city annually an amount substantially equivalent to that sum which would be paid in taxes if the water and electric light works were privately owned. Such revenues so produced shall be devoted to the purposes so enumerated. The provisions hereof shall be subject at all times to the performance by the city of all covenants and agreements made by it in connection with the issuance, sale or delivery of any revenue bonds of the city payable out of the revenues derived by the city from the operation of its water and electric light works, whether such revenue bonds be heretofore or hereafter issued. 
In the fixing of such rates and charges it shall be the policy of the council, so far as feasible and consistent with the above requirements, to fix and maintain the same at a level not to exceed charges made for the same services by privately owned utilities similarly situated. 
Payments from the revenues of said water and electric light works shall be made into the depreciation fund monthly in such amounts as may be required by standard engineering and accounting practices applicable to the operation of utilities by municipalities. Said depreciation fund shall be expended only for making renewals and replacements of said water and electric light works or making unusual and extraordinary repairs thereto. 
Payments into the fund established for the making of extensions, improvements, enlargements and betterments of said works shall be made monthly in such sums as may be determined by the council, subject to the provisions of the next succeeding paragraph relating to surplus, and such fund shall be expended only for the purposes specified. Said depreciation fund and the fund established for the making of extensions, improvements, enlargements and betterments shall be kept invested as provided by law, or, in the discretion of the council, in bonds, certificates or other obligations of the United States of America. 
If any surplus revenue be produced from the operation of said water and electric light works after meeting all of the requirements set forth above, there shall be paid into the fund established for the making of extensions, improvements, enlargements and betterments of said works not less than twenty (20) percent of such surplus, or an amount which, together with payments made into such fund under the above requirements, shall equal twenty (20) percent of said surplus. Provided, however, that such fund may be used for the redemption of any outstanding bonds issued by the city for the same purposes, and for the meeting of any extraordinary emergencies that may arise in the operation of said water and electric light works; and, provided further, that said payment from surplus shall not be required to be made cumulative on and in addition to the requirement in Section 7 of the Revenue Bond Ordinance of April 19, 1948, for the retention of twenty-five (25) percent of the surplus for extension, improvement and bond redemption purposes, so long as any of the revenue bonds of the city dated May 1, 1948, remain outstanding. The remainder of any surplus shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the city and budgeted like other revenues of the city for any proper municipal purpose, and expended through the regular appropriation process; or such surplus may, in the discretion of the council, be made the basis for reduction of rates in the future.  
Section 103. - Water and Light Advisory Board. 
The water and light advisory board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the council. Appointment shall be made for terms of four (4) years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. 
Members shall be qualified voters and residents of the City of Columbia for at least one year prior to their appointment. They shall be sympathetic with the principal of municipal operation of the water and light system and with the policies set forth in this article to ensure the sound and efficient management of said system. The board shall elect annually its own chairman. Members shall serve without pay, but their reasonable expenses shall be paid as provided by ordinance. 
The powers of the board shall be solely advisory. It shall be empowered to visit and to inspect the operation of the water and light system, to have access to all financial and other records pertaining to said system, and to require from any city department or officer any information available concerning the same. The board shall report at least annually its findings and recommendations to the people and to the council. 
(Ord. No. 14362 § 1, 2-6-95; passed by voters April 4, 1995)  
ARTICLE XIII. - HEALTH OFFICER; HEALTH BOARD 
 
Sections 104 through 107, inclusive. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
ARTICLE XIV. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sections 108 through 111, inclusive. - (Repealed 11-11-74)  
Section 112. - Revenues. 
For the acquisition, maintenance and development of adequate recreational facilities, and for the proper promotion of a recreational program, the city manager shall include in the manager's budget an amount estimated by the manager to be sufficient for said purposes. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 113. - Permanent Park Fund. 
There shall be a permanent park fund which shall consist of: gifts, bequests and devises specified for this purpose; rents, issues and profits derived from any property which may have been purchased or held in trust by or for the City of Columbia for recreational purposes; and the proceeds of the sale of any such property, real, personal or mixed, so purchased or held in trust. Moneys in this permanent park fund shall be appropriated, expended or encumbered only for parks and other recreational property or facilities. 
(4-4-67)  
ARTICLE XV. - THE MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Section 114. - Municipal Court; Jurisdiction and Powers. 
There shall be a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving violations of this charter or of the ordinances of the city, subject to appeal by either party to the circuit court in like manner as provided by law for appeals from magistrate court in Boone County in criminal cases. Such court may punish contempts of court by fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ten (10) days, or both; may enforce its process, orders and judgments in the same manner as a court of record; may issue search warrants as authorized by law upon application of the city counselor, city attorney or chief of police; may summon and compel the attendance of witnesses; may administer oaths; may summon and compel the attendance of jurors, when a jury is allowed; may pass upon the competency of evidence; and may render final judgment on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to such court, subject to appeal, as in other cases.  
Section 115. - Judge of Municipal Court. 
The municipal court shall be presided over by a municipal judge to be selected by the council, a majority vote of all members being required for selection. The judge shall have been a resident of the City of Columbia for at least two (2) years, and a duly licensed attorney for the State of Missouri for at least three (3) years prior to selection. The municipal judge shall be selected for a term of four (4) years and shall serve until a successor is selected and qualified. The judge may be removed from office for cause. If removal is contemplated, the judge shall be suspended by a resolution which shall set forth the reasons for suspension and proposed removal. A copy of such resolution shall be served immediately upon the municipal judge. The municipal judge shall have fifteen (15) days in which to reply thereto in writing, and, upon the judge's request, a public hearing shall occur not earlier than ten (10) days nor later than fifteen (15) days after such hearing is requested, and after full consideration, the council, by majority vote of its members, may adopt a final resolution of removal. In case of the judge's absence or inability to serve, the council may by resolution select a qualified attorney to act during such absence or disability and may provide reasonable compensation for such service. The municipal court shall be held in such place as the council by resolution may direct. 
(4-7-75; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 116. - Salary; Costs and Fines. 
The municipal judge shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance. All costs, fines and forfeitures imposed by the municipal court, or collected under the authority thereof, and all other receipts so collected, shall be regularly accounted for and paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city.  
Section 117. - Marshal. 
The chief of police and the chief's subordinates shall serve as marshal and deputy marshals of the municipal court and enforce its orders, judgments and decrees. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 118. - Proceedings. 
The forms of complaints and the conduct of all proceedings in the municipal court shall be as prescribed by law, or by ordinance not inconsistent with this charter.  
ARTICLE XVI. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Section 119. - Time of Elections. 
A regular election for the choice of elective municipal officials shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April. The council may by resolution order special elections, fix the time and provide for holding the same in conformance with state law. 
(Passed by voters, April 7, 1981; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 120. - Regulation of Elections. 
The council shall provide by ordinance all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or state laws, for the conduct of municipal elections, and the prevention of fraud in such election. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election authority designated by state law. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 121. - When Election Authority May Order Election. 
If at any time, by reason of nonacceptance, resignation, refusal to qualify, or for any other cause, there shall be no officers of the city to order an election, the election authority having jurisdiction in the City of Columbia, is empowered to order and conduct an election for city officers, declare the results thereof, and install the newly elected officials. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 122. - Nominations by Petition. 
Nominations of candidates for all elective offices shall be by petition. Petitions for ward council members shall be signed by not less than fifty (50), nor more than seventy-five (75), registered voters who are entitled to vote for the candidate so nominated. Petitions for officials elected by the entire city shall be signed by not less than one hundred (100), nor more than one hundred fifty (150), registered voters of the city. 
In order for a signature to be valid, it must be accompanied by the following information, legibly written: the name of petitioner, the address of petitioner, and the date petitioner signed the petition. 
The signatures on the nominating petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each separate paper shall bear a statement setting forth the election date, the office to be filled, and the name of the candidate on whose behalf the petition is being filed. In addition, there shall be attached to each such paper a signed statement of the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers of such paper, that each signature appended thereto was made in the circulator's presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that the circulator believes each signer to be a legal voter. Nominating petitions shall be filed with the city clerk not earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the last Tuesday in October before the election, nor later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day before the deadline set by state statute for notifying the election authority of an election. No nominating petition shall be accepted by the city clerk unless it contains the signed statement of the candidate accepting the nomination and agreeing to serve if elected. Nominating petitions shall be in substantially the following form: 
We, the undersigned registered voters of the City of Columbia, Missouri, respectfully petition and request that the name of ___________, residing at ___________, be placed upon the ballot as a candidate for the office of ___________ to be voted for at the election to be held on ___________, 20___ and we, individually, state that we are qualified to vote for this candidate: 
Signature       Printed Name       Street and Number       Date of Signing 
(spaces for signatures and required data) 
STATEMENT OF CIRCULATOR 
The undersigned is the circulator of the foregoing paper containing ___________ signatures. Each signature appended thereto was made in my presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. I believe each signer is a registered voter qualified to vote for this candidate. 
	_____
Signature of Circulator 
	_____
Address 
 
ACCEPTANCE OF NOMINATION 
I hereby accept the nomination for the office of ___________ and agree to serve if elected. 
	_____
Signature of Candidate 
 
Date and hour of filing _____ 
This petition is filed by _____ 
Whose address is _____ 
Received by _____
Signature of City Clerk 
Within ten (10) days after the filing of a nominating petition, the city clerk shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it is found to be sufficient. If a petition is found insufficient, the city clerk shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying wherein the petition is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions a new or supplemental petition may be filed for the same candidate. The petition of each candidate nominated shall be preserved by the city clerk until the expiration of the term of office for which the candidate has been nominated. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 123. - Preparation of Ballots. 
The names of candidates for elective offices shall be printed on the ballot in order of the time their nominating petitions, sufficiently signed and attested, were filed with the city clerk. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 124. - Repealed by Ord. No. 16744, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001; passed by the voters April 3, 2001.  
Section 125. - Returns. 
The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for each office shall be elected and shall be inducted into office at the first meeting of the council following the certification of the election authority in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 16744, § 1, 1-16-01, passed by voters 4-3-01)  
Section 126. - Repealed by Ord. No. 16744, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001; passed by the voters April 3, 2001.  
ARTICLE XVII. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Annotation— See 42 Am. Jur. 2d, Initiative and Referendum, Section 9 p. 658: "Where the required procedure for a particular ordinance involves steps such as notice and hearing, in addition to normal legislative deliberation, such an ordinance is not subject to initiative and referendum, International Telemeter Corp. v. City of Columbia. 
 
Section 127. - Initiative. 
The voters shall have power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty (20) per cent of the number of votes cast for council member-at-large at the last regular municipal election, provided, that there be not less than four hundred (400) signatures. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 128. - Referendum. 
The voters shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council, or submitted by the council to the voters , excepting emergency ordinances as provided for in Section 15 of this charter, ordinances for the levying of taxes, or for the issuance of special tax bills, as provided in this charter, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative petition and passed by the council shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty (20) days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to referendum, a petition signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) per cent of the number of votes cast for council member-at-large at the last municipal election may be filed with the city clerk, requesting that such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to the voters; provided, however, that the number of signatures in such case be not less than five hundred (500). 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 129. - Petitions. 
All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Every petition paper shall contain the full text of the measure proposed or referred, but the signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper. In order for a signature to be valid, it must be accompanied by the following information, legibly written: the name of petitioner, the address of petitioner, and the date petitioner signed the petition. The circulator of each such paper shall make oath before an officer competent to administer oaths that the circulator believes each signature appended to the petition to be the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, that the circulator believes each such signer to be a legal voter, and that all signatures were affixed in the presence of the circulator. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 130. - Filing and Certification of Petitions. 
Within thirty (30) days after a petition is filed, the city clerk shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of registered voters. After completing examination of the petition, the city clerk shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If the clerk shall certify that the petition is insufficient, the clerk shall set forth in the certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the person filing the petition of the insufficiency. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 131. - Amended Petitions. 
An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within fourteen (14) days after the notification of insufficiency by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers executed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city clerk shall, within thirty (30) days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition; if the petition is still insufficient, the clerk shall file a certificate to that effect in the clerk's office and notify the person filing the petition of the clerk's findings, and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. A finding of insufficiency in a petition shall not prevent the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 132. - Effect of an Initiative Petition. 
When an initiative petition has been certified as sufficient, the council shall proceed at once to consider the proposed ordinance, taking final action thereon not later than thirty (30) days after certification. 
If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance in the form proposed by the initiative petition, such ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to the voters of the city at the next election provided for by state law which is consistent with applicable notice provisions and available for municipal elections purposes. The enacting clause of such ordinance shall be: "Be it ordained by the people of the City of Columbia." 
(Passed by election, April 7, 1981; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 133. - Effect of a Referendum Petition. 
When a referendum petition has been certified as sufficient, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not become effective, or, if it shall have gone into effect, further action thereunder shall be suspended until the ordinance referred has been approved by the voters as hereinafter provided. The council shall proceed forthwith to reconsider the referred ordinance, and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be taken within thirty (30) days after certification and shall be upon the question: "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
If the council shall fail to repeal an ordinance specified in any referendum petition, such repeal ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to the voters of the city at the next election provided for by state law which is consistent with applicable notice provisions and available for municipal elections purposes. 
(Passed 11-4-80 election; Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 134. - Voting. 
Ordinances submitted to the voters in accordance with the initiative referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared by the city counselor. The ballot title shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. The ballot used in voting upon any ordinance, if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title the following: "For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance." Immediately at the left of each proposition there shall be a square in which by making a cross (X) the voter may vote for or against the ordinance. Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper used for voting on ordinances shall be for that purpose only. 
(Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 135. - Effect of Vote. 
If a majority of the voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance or referred ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city, and shall, unless otherwise specified, become effective as indicated in Section 15 of this charter. No such ordinance shall be amended or repealed for six (6) months, except by unanimous vote of the council. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail. No election under the initiative or referendum procedure shall be set aside because of any defect in the petitions. 
(Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 136. - Recall Petition. 
Any officer elected by vote of the people may be removed by the voters qualified to vote for a successor to such incumbent. The procedure to effect the removal of such incumbent shall be as follows: a petition demanding the removal of such officer shall be filed with the city clerk; such petition shall be signed by voters entitled to participate in such petition equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes cast for such office in the last election; provided, that there be at least two hundred (200) signatures in the case of officials elected by wards and five hundred (500) signatures in the case of officials elected at large. This petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for removal. Such petition shall be executed, verified, filed, and may be amended in the manner provided for initiative and referendum petitions. 
(Ord. No. 20531, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 137. - Recall Election. 
When a sufficient recall petition has been filed, the city clerk shall submit the same to the council without delay, and the council shall call an election on said recall at the next election provided for by state law which is consistent with applicable notice provisions and available for municipal elections purposes. 
(Passed 11-4-80 election)  
Section 138. - Recall Ballot. 
The ballots shall be in the following form: 
Shall       (Name and Title)       be removed from office? 
( )YES 
( )NO 
Voters in favor of the recall place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "YES." 
Voters opposed to the recall place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "NO."  
Section 139. - Effect of Election. 
If a majority of those voting in such recall election shall vote in favor of the recall, then a vacancy shall exist, regardless of any defect in the recall petition. Such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 9 of this charter. If a majority of those voting in such election shall vote against the recall, the official shall continue in office. An official who has been recalled shall be ineligible to serve in any city office at any time during the remainder of the term for which the official was originally elected. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 140. - Limitation on Recall. 
No officer shall be subject to recall within six (6) months after induction into office, nor during the last six (6) months of the officer's term. If an officer is retained in office by any recall election, the officer shall not be subject to recall within a period of six (6) months thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 141. - Conduct of Initiative, Referendum and Recall Elections. 
Notice of initiative, referendum and recall elections shall be given and publicized, and such elections shall be conducted, the returns canvassed, and the results thereof declared in all respects as are other city elections.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 142. - Judicial Notice of the Charter. 
This charter is declared to be a public act, and all courts shall take judicial notice thereof.  
Section 143. - Proof of Ordinance. 
Any ordinance may be proved by a copy thereof certified by the city clerk under the seal of the city; or, when printed and published by authority of the city, shall be received in evidence in all courts or other places without further proof of authenticity.  
Section 144. - Pending Actions and Proceedings. 
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this charter shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this charter or by anything herein contained.  
Section 145. - Continuance of Contracts, Public Improvements and Taxes. 
All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at the time this charter takes effect may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws. All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all fines and penalties imposed, and all other obligations owing to the city which are uncollected at the time this charter becomes effective, shall continue in full force and effect and shall be collected as if no change had been made.  
Section 146. - Transfer of Records and Property. 
All records, property and equipment of any office, department or agency or part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office, department or agency by this charter, shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are assigned.  
Section 147. - Salaries. 
The council shall, by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter relating to the department of personnel, prescribe maximum and minimum salaries or other compensation for all officers, employees, or classes of employees of the city. The city manager may determine the compensation to be paid to each officer or employee within the limits so established. In no case shall the salary or compensation of any officer or employee be based upon or measured by fees. 
(4-4-67)  
Section 148. - Oath of Office. 
Before entering upon the duties of office, every officer shall file with the city clerk a certificate of election or appointment, and shall take and subscribe before, and file with the city clerk, an oath or affirmation that the officer possesses all the qualifications for the elective or appointed office, that the officer is not subject to any of the disqualifications set forth in this charter, that the officer will support the Constitution and laws of the United States and of the State of Missouri, and the charter and ordinances of the City of Columbia, and that the officer will faithfully discharge the duties of the office. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 149. - Official Bonds. 
The city manager, city clerk, city collector, director of finance, and all other officers and employees receiving, disbursing or responsible for city funds, and such other officers and employees as the council by ordinance may designate, shall, within such time after election or appointment as may be fixed by ordinance, and before entering upon the discharge of their duties, give bond to the city in such sums and with such sureties as shall be prescribed by ordinance, and subject to approval by the council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of their duties and for the prompt accounting for and paying over to the city of all moneys belonging to the city that may come into their hands. The office or employment of any person elected or appointed to any office or employment shall be forfeited if the person fails to give bond as herein required. The city shall pay the premiums on all such bonds. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the bond of the city clerk shall be filed with the mayor, and the bonds of all other officers and employees shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 150. - Notice of Suits. 
No action shall be maintained against the city for or on account of any injury growing out of alleged negligence of the city unless notice shall first have been given in writing to the city manager within ninety (90) days of the occurrence for which said damage is claimed, stating the place, time, character and circumstances of the injury, and that the person so injured will claim damages therefor from the city.  
Section 151. - Judicial Bonds. 
The city shall not be required to give bond in any judicial proceeding or appeal.  
Section 152. - Rates of Taxation. 
The rates of taxation levied by the council shall be within the limits prescribed by state law applicable to cities adopting constitutional charters.  
Section 153. - Security of Deposits. 
The council shall require all funds of the city in any city depository to be adequately secured by a deposit of obligations of the United States government, or by the deposit of securities of the kind prescribed by state law for the security of funds deposited by the state treasurer, in an amount satisfactory to the council. 
(Ord. No. 20532, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Section 154. - Remitting Taxes Prohibited. 
No general or special tax or assessment, or interest or penalty thereon, shall be remitted or abated, or the right to enforce payment thereof released, except in correction of errors.  
Section 155. - Officers, Employees, Qualification. 
No person shall be entitled to hold any office or employment who is in arrears for any city taxes.  
Section 156. - Officers and Employees Interested in Contracts. 
No officer or employee of the city shall have any interest in any contract or sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or services, where said interest is in violation of the laws or Constitution of the State of Missouri or ordinance of the City of Columbia. Any violation of this section shall render the contract or sale void. The office or employment of any officer or employee violating this section shall be forfeited. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 157. - Power to Administer Oaths. 
Any council member or the city clerk may administer oaths or affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 158. - Condemnation Proceedings. 
All proceedings for the condemnation of property or in the exercise of the right of eminent domain shall be in accordance with the laws of the state now or hereafter applicable to cities of the third class, or with such laws as may be provided for constitutional charter cities.  
Section 159. - Departmental Interchange. 
In accordance with procedure established by the city manager and subject to the city manager's approval, it shall be the duty of the various department directors to furnish to any other department such service, labor, equipment, or materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such other department. The charge for such service, labor, equipment, or materials shall be made to the department so furnished at actual cost or reasonable depreciated value. 
(Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 160. - Effect of Unconstitutional Provisions. 
If any provision of this charter be held to be unconstitutional or void, this shall not affect the validity, force or effect of any other provision.  
Section 161. - Contracts and Ordinances Contrary to Charter. 
All contracts, agreements, and other obligations entered into, and all ordinances and resolutions passed after the adoption of this charter and contrary to the provisions thereof shall be void.  
Section 162. - Amending the Charter. 
Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the electors by a commission in the manner provided by law and the constitution for framing and submitting a complete charter. Amendments may also be proposed by the council or by petition of not less than ten (10) per cent of the registered qualified electors of the city, filed with the city clerk, setting forth the proposed amendment. The Council shall at once provide by ordinance that any amendment so proposed shall be submitted to the electors at the next general election held in the city after its passage and consistent with state election laws, or at their discretion at a special election prior to the next general election on a date established in conformance with state law at a special election held as provided by law and the Constitution for a charter. Any amendment approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon shall become a part of the charter at the time and under the conditions fixed in the amendment; sections or articles may be submitted separately or in the alternative and determined as provided by law and the Constitution for a complete charter. 
(Passed by election on April 7, 1981)  
Section 163. - Repealed by Ord. No. 16744, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001; passed by the voters April 3, 2001.  
Section 164. - Campaign Financing. 
A.  Every candidate for municipal election shall comply with all applicable laws and provisions of the Constitution of the State of Missouri and ordinances of the City of Columbia relating to campaign practices and the financing and conduct of campaigns for elective office. 
B.  The city council may, in appropriate cases, on notice of violations of any such provision of the Constitution, laws, or ordinance, and in addition to other available remedies, order the office of any candidate who was elected to be forfeited, and may enter an order making any candidate, regardless of whether the candidate was elected, ineligible to seek an elective municipal office for two and one-half (2½) years from the date of the election in which the violation occurred. Should a forfeiture occur under this section, a vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 9. 
(11-7-78; Ord. No. 15113, § 1, 1-16-97)  
Section 165. - Adoption of Earnings Tax. 
No earnings tax may be levied or imposed without the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting thereon. 
(4-7-75)  
Section 166. - Licensing, Taxation and Regulation of Occupations and Businesses. 
The council shall have power by ordinance to license, tax and regulate all businesses, occupations, professions, vocations, activities, or things whatsoever set forth and enumerated by the statutes of this state now or hereafter applicable to constitutional charter cities, special charter cities, cities of the first, second, third or fourth class, or of any population group, and which such cities are now or may hereafter be permitted by law to license, tax and regulate. 
Any ordinance imposing a license tax may divide and classify any subject of taxation, and may impose a different tax upon each class, but the tax shall be uniform for each class. A separate license tax may be imposed for each place of business conducted or maintained by the same person, firm or corporation. 
All licenses shall be issued for such periods as may be provided by ordinance. 
(4-7-75)  
Section 167. - Use of eminent domain for economic development and blight 
The city shall not exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire property for economic development, specific state, federal, or local economic development initiatives, or for programs related to economic development such as jobs programs, poverty alleviation, or area, community or neighborhood revitalization, with the intent that the property will ultimately be transferred to another person or entity to be used for private purposes. 
The designation of property as "blighted" for purposes of qualifying for any state or federal economic development program shall not be used as a step toward the use of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 21518, § 1, 4-2-13)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original charter, §§ 1 through 166, is set out as adopted on November 11, 1974. The following table shows the disposition of amendments adopted subsequent thereto. 
Amendment 
Date 	Section  
this Charter 
 4-4-49 	19, 20 
11- 6-62 	79 
 4- 4-67 	32 
	44 
	63—67 
	77 
	86 
	113 
	147 
 3- 7-72 	4 
11-11-74 	Charter(note) 
 1-20-75 	6 
	17 
 4- 7-75 	21 
	73 
	115 
	165 
	166 
11- 7-78 	45 
	51 
	120, 121 
	123 
	156 
	164 
11- 4-80 	133 
	137 
 4- 7-81 	5 
	119 
	132 
	162 
 4-12-82 	1 
11- 6-84 	94 
 4- 2-85 	45(3), 52 
 4- 7-87 	1.1 
 
Ordinance 
Number 	Date 	Section 	Section  
this Charter 
11994 	 9-6-88 	4 	1.2 
12497 	 2-5-90 	4 	1.3 
12819 	12-10-90 	4 	1.4 
12854 	 1-22-91 	4 	1.5 
13123 	10- 7-91 	4 	1.6 
13412 	 8-17-92 	1 	1 
		      Rpld 	1.1—1.6 
14362 	 2- 6-95 	1 	103 
15113 	 1-16-97 	1 	5—7 
			10—13 
			15C. 
			19 
			21 
			35 
			41 
			43 
			51 
			65 
			99, 100 
			112 
			115 
			117 
			122 
			127—131 
			139, 140 
			148, 149 
			156, 157 
			159 
			164 
16744 	 1-16-01 	1 	8, 
			14, 15, 
			119—122, 
			125 
		      Rpld 	124, 126, 
			163 
16745 	 1-16-01 	1       Rpld 	71—85, 
			87, 88 
		      Added 	71, 72 
20528 
 4- 6-10 	1 	19 
20529 
 4- 6-10 	1 	44 
20530 
 4- 6-10 	1 	99 
20531 
 4- 6-10 	1 	122 
			123 
			127—136 
20532 
 4- 6-10 	1 	153 
20846 
 4- 5-11 	1 	7 
21518 
 4- 2-13 	1       Added 	167 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1964, § 1.010)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Charter. The words "the charter" shall be deemed to mean and refer to the Home Rule Charter for the City of Columbia, Missouri, adopted by the people at a special election held on November 11, 1974. 
City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Columbia, in the State of Missouri. 
Code. The words "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Columbia, Missouri. 
Code of Ordinances. The words "Code of Ordinances" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of Columbia, Missouri. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday, that shall be excluded. 
Council, City. The words "the council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of Columbia, Missouri. 
County. The words "the county" shall mean the County of Boone. 
Day. "Day" is any period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
Daytime, nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring or authorizing the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision specifically designate otherwise. 
Gender. When any subject matter, party or "person" is described or referred to by words importing the masculine, females as well as males, and associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. 
In the city. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
Joint authority. Words importing joint authority to three (3) or more persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases, in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Columbia, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Central Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner, " applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Process. "Process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and tangible and intangible personal property. 
Public way. The words "public way" shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
Real property. The terms "real property" or "premises" or "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be nonextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean the portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Missouri. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include every other of them. 
Tangible personal property. Tangible personal property shall include goods, chattels and all personal property except intangible personal property. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant, " applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. A week consists of seven (7) consecutive days. 
Writing, written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing, lithographing or other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year" shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be literally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. 
(Code 1964, § 1.040) 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, RSMo § 1.0020 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the "Revised Ordinances of 1964" and ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1964, § 1.020)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances—On rights, acts, etc. 
(a)  The repeal of any ordinance or part of any ordinance shall not affect any act done or right accrued or established in any proceeding, action, suit or prosecution had or commenced prior to the time when such repeal shall take effect, but every such act, right or proceeding shall remain and continue as valid and effectual as if such repeal has not taken place. 
(b)  No offense committed, and no fine, forfeiture or penalty incurred previous to the time when the repeal of any ordinance shall take effect, shall be affected, released or in any way discharged by such repeal, but the trial, conviction and punishment of all such offenses and the recovery of all such fines, forfeitures and penalties shall be had in all respects as if such repeal had not taken place. 
(c)  No action, prosecution, suit or proceeding pending at the time the repeal of any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall take effect shall be affected by such repeal. 
(d)  Each such action, prosecution, suit or proceeding as set out in the preceding paragraph shall be continued and prosecuted to a final determination, or judgment or execution, as if such repeal had not taken place. 
(Code 1964, §§ 2.490—2.520)  
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1964, § 1.030)  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter, " "this article, " "this division, " etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by confinement not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Every day any violation of any law or ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In the event a violation under chapter 14 of this Code meets the definition of a "minor traffic violation," the court shall not assess a fine and court costs totaling in excess of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00). 
(1)  "Minor traffic violation" is defined as a traffic ordinance violation that does not involve accident or injury, that does not involve the operation of a commercial motor vehicle, and for which no points are assessed by the department of revenue or the department of revenue is authorized to assess one (1) to four (4) points to a person's driving record upon conviction. 
(2)  "Minor traffic violation" shall include amended charges for any minor traffic violation. Violations for exceeding the speed limit by more than nineteen miles per hour (19 mph) or violations occurring within a construction or school zone are excluded from this definition. At no time may the court sentence a person to confinement for a minor traffic violation unless the violation involves alcohol or controlled substances, endangering the health or welfare of others, or eluding or giving false information to a law enforcement officer. Any confinement ordered shall be subject to the limitations of paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 1.050; Ord. No. 23371 , § 1, 11-6-17) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; civil defense, Ch. 7; guards and security patrol officers, § 13-46 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; municipal court, Ch. 15; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 21; parades, § 24-101 et seq.  
Sec. 1-9. - When same offense punishable under different ordinances, etc. 
In all cases wherein the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created, by different provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city, or by different clauses or sections of the same ordinance, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery or penalty shall be had or enforced against the same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty or recovery being enforced or had.  
Sec. 1-10. - Parties to an offense. 
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be unlawful or an infraction, offense or a misdemeanor, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such unlawful act or offense or misdemeanor, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision hereof shall likewise be guilty.  
Sec. 1-11. - City limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Beginning at the center of Section 33, Township 49 North, Range 13 West; 
thence easterly along the north line of the southeast quarter of said Section 33 and a northwesterly line of a survey recorded in Book 3728 at Page 132 of the Boone County Records to the southwest corner of the east half of the northeast quarter of said Section 33; 
thence with the west line of said east half and a west line of said survey N.1°07'10?E., 1,400.65 feet to the north bank of Rocky Fork Creek; thence with Rocky Fork Creek and the lines of said survey as a meandering line with bearings and distances to locate said creek as to date of survey only, in an easterly direction, to the east line of said Section 33; thence with said east line, S.1°10' W., 556.58 feet to the northwest corner of Tract #2 of the survey recorded in Book 400 at Page 358; thence with the north line of said survey East, 478.3 feet to the center of Bear Creek; thence in a southerly direction, as shown by a meandering line with bearings and distances as shown on plats to locate said creek as of date of survey only, to a point in the center of Bear Creek where said creek makes a big bend eastward; thence South 1°48' West, 537.02 feet to the north line of the south half of Section 34; thence easterly along the north lines of the south halves of Sections 34 and 35 to the center of said Section 35; thence N.0°14'00?E., along the quarter section line to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 35 and the northwest corner of the tract described in the general warranty deed in Book 3210 at Page 109; thence continuing along said quarter section line N.0°14'00?E., 406.0 feet; thence S.88°34'50?E., 287.62 feet; N.0°42'15?W., 137.00 feet; N.89°10'10?W., 285.34 feet to said quarter section line; thence continuing along said survey line along said quarter line N.0°14'00?E., 776.15 feet to the northwest corner of said survey; thence along the north line of said survey S.85°28'40?E., 2,536.85 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 1 on the west line of Section 36, Township 49 North, Range 13 West; 
thence leaving said survey lines N.0°14'05?W., 663.47 feet to the northeast corner of said Section 35 and the southeast corner of Section 26; thence along the east line of said Section 26 N.0°09'10?W., 555.00 feet to the northeast corner of Tract 6 of a survey as shown in Book 1028 at Page 112; thence along the north line of said survey N.85°21'15?W., 810.06 feet to the northerly corner of Tract 4 of said survey; thence leaving said north line N.10°13'10?E., 766.70 feet to the north line of the south half (½) of the southeast quarter (¼) of said Section 26; thence along said north line S.85°33'10?E., 771 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of the south half (½) of the southeast quarter of said Section 26; thence along the east line of said Section 26 North 1,346.9 feet, more or less, to the west quarter corner of said Section 25; thence along the quarter section line, said line also being the north line of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 2521 at Page 106, S.88°44'30?E., 758.6 feet to the southwest corner of Tract A of the land described in the warranty deed in Book 464 at page 126; thence along the west lines of said Tract and Tract B, N.7°15'E., 1,050.0 feet; thence N.6°39'55?E., 6.27 feet to the south line of Lot 403 of Forest Ridge Plat 4 recorded in Plat Book 40 at page 47; thence along the south line of said Lot, N.88°40'30?W., 190.72 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 401 of said Plat; thence along the west line of said Plat N.1°21'30?E., 100.00 feet; thence leaving said line N.87°36'00?W., 100.00 feet to the east right-of-way line of Montgomery Drive; thence continuing N.87°36'00?W., 25.00 feet to the centerline of said Montgomery Drive; thence along said centerline N.2°24'00?E., 50.00 feet; thence S.87°36'00?E., 25.00 feet to said east right-of-way line; thence continuing S.87°36'00?E., 100.00 feet to the west line of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Plat N.1°21'30?E., 319.98 feet; S.88°40'10?E., 481.57 feet; thence along the west line of said Plat 4, N.2°06'50?E., 684.50 feet to the southwest corner of Forest Ridge Plat 3 recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 47; thence along the west line of said Plat N.2°07'00?E., 481.27 feet to the north line of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West; 
thence along the section line, S.89°18'45?E., 80.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot C1 of Phoenix View Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 70; thence N.0°41'15?E., along said line and the prolongation thereof, 155.80 feet to the centerline of Clearview Drive; thence along said centerline, S.89°36'05?E., 159.51 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 175.00 feet, a distance of 182.46 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.60°31'45?E., 174.31 feet); thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 175.00 feet, a distance of 28.96 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.35°248'05?E., 28.92 feet); thence leaving said centerline, S.49°51'31?E., 25.00 feet to the most northerly corner of Lot 1 of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Lot 1 S.31°40'00?E., 123.22 feet; N.56°32'00?E., 60.0 feet; S.89°29'30?E., 508.89 feet; S.29°21'40?E., 211.71 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 1 on said section line; thence leaving said lines along said section line and the north line of said Forest Ridge Plat 2 S.89°18'45?E., 217.89 feet to the north quarter corner of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West as shown by MLS Document #600-31591; thence continuing along said section line and the north line of Cross Creek Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 64 S.89°27'25?E., 894.33 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence leaving said section line and along the lines of said Plat S.0°36'20?E., 124.98 feet; S.89°21'20?W., 50.12 feet; S.0°35'40?E., 174.88 feet; S.89°26'15?W., 530.15 feet; S.0°32'20?E., 334.92 feet; N.89°27'30?E., 234.74 feet; S.17°17'30?W., 377.61 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 158 of Shalimar Gardens Block V recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 112; thence along the lines of said Plat S.67°40'35?E., 169.34 feet; along a non-tangent curve to the left having a radius of 350.0 feet a distance of 29.97 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.19°52'10?E., 29.96 feet); N.17°25'00?E., 31.73 feet; S.72°35'00?E., 86.99 feet; S.25°28'00?W., 17.90 feet; S.2°32'00?E., 100.00 feet; S.62°32'00?E., 75.86 feet; thence leaving said lines and along the lines of a tract of land recorded in a warranty deed in Book 638 at Page 914 S.0°32'00?E., 35.42 feet; thence N.89°28'00?E., 75.00 feet; thence N.0°32'00?W., 10.00 feet to the south line of said Plat; thence along said line and the south line of Shalimar Gardens Block I recorded in Plat Book 11 at Page 126, N.89°28'00?E., 392.80 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 21 of said Block I; thence along the west line of said Lot 21 S.0°32'30?E., 140.00 feet; thence S.89°37'00?W., 919.95 feet; to the northwest corner of Tract A of the survey recorded in Book 2238 at Page 368; thence along the west line of said survey S.0°11'55?W., 1,364.57 feet to the east-west quarter section line of said Section 25; thence with said line N.89°17'00?W., 320.82 feet; thence with the north-south quarter section line N.0°19'55?E., 1,104.62 feet to the northeast corner of Tract B of an unrecorded survey by F. E. Grundler prepared March 31, 1966 on a line of Forest Ridge Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 60; thence along the lines of said Plat 1 N.89°42'55?W., 160.00 feet; S.0°13'35?W., 544.50 feet; S.14°38'20?W., 441.15 feet; S.0°14'20?W., 155.51 feet to the quarter section line of Section 25; thence along said quarter section line, S.88°36'35?E., 270.38 feet to the center of said Section 25; thence along the north-south quarter section line S.0°18'30?E., 1,347.40 feet to the southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 977 at Page 236; thence along the south line of said survey and the survey recorded in Book 418 at Page 758 S.87°37'30?E., 2,559.95 feet to the west right-of-way line of Missouri Highway 763; thence along said line, S.0°03'25?W., 1,195 feet, more or less to a point 200 feet North of the south line of said Section 25; thence easterly along a line parallel with and 200 feet North of the south lines of said Section 25 and Section 30, Township 49 North, Range 12 West to the easterly line of a non-exclusive road easement described by a document in Book 506 at Page 579 at a distance of 412.5 feet from the west line of the tract shown by the survey recorded in Book 388 at page 577, said line also being the west line of Belmont Park, Plat One recorded in Plat Book 29 at Page 90; thence with the line of said Plat One N.1°05'40?E., 632.50 feet; S.88°35'20?E., 413.26 feet; N.1°07'20?E., 310.95 feet to the northwesterly corner of said Plat One; thence along the lines of Belmont Park, Plat Two recorded in Plat Book 30 at Page 67 N.0°39'30?E., 663.03 feet; N.89°58'50?E., 200.00 feet; N.0°39'30?E., 956.70 feet to the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 30; thence N.89°19'25?W., along said north line, to the northeast corner of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 1158 at page 416; thence along the east line of said Tract 1 and Commerce Bank Plat 1 (Plat Book 39 at Page 59) S.0°00'00?W., 517.23 feet; S.89°58'W., 400.70 feet to the southwest corner of said survey and said plat; thence S.89°59'20?W., 40.00 feet to the range line between Ranges 12 and 13 West; thence along said Range line N.0°00'25? E., 522.50 feet to the west quarter corner of said Section 30; thence continuing along said range line to the west corner to Sections 19 and 30, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; 
thence S.89°04'05?E., along the south line of said Section 19 a distance of 40 feet, more or less, to the east right-of-way line of Missouri Route 763; thence continuing along said south line S.89°04'05?E., 150.00 feet to the southeast corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 659 at page 309; thence leaving said section line and with the lines of said tract, N.1°24'25?E., 80.00 feet; thence N.89°04'05?W., 150.00 feet to the east right-of-way line of said Route 763; thence continuing N.89°04'05?W., 40 feet, more or less to said Range line; thence along said Range line, N.1°24'25?E., 2,228.23 feet, more or less; thence leaving said range line, S.88°41'20?E., 40 feet, more or less, to the east right-of-way line of said Route 763; thence leaving said right-of-way line and along the lines of the survey in Book 2990 at page 519, N.89°55'30?E., 466.24 feet; N.0°44'20?E., 25.04 feet; S.89°45'25?E., 163.20 feet; N.0°09'05?W., 107.64 feet; S.89°26'30?E., 98.50 feet; N.0°10'35?E., 290.37 feet to the south right-of-way line of Prathersville Road; thence leaving said lines and continuing N.1°30'50?E., to the centerline of Prathersville Road; thence along said centerline in a easterly direction, 100.00 feet; thence leaving said centerline S.1°30'50?W. to a corner of said survey; thence along the line thereof, S.0°10'35?W., 290.41 feet; S.89°27'10?E., 150.01 feet; S.0°13'35?W., 19.97 feet; S.89°27'20?E., 1,562.27 feet to the west line of the tract shown by the survey in Book 339 at page 181, being also the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 1251 at page 256; thence along the lines of said tract N.1°10'35?W., 28.22 feet; thence S.89°27'20?E., 40.00 feet; thence S.0°46'15?E., 29.32 feet; thence continuing along the lines of said survey in Book 2990 at Page 19, S.89°27'20?E., 136.35 feet to the northeast corner of said survey on the west line of Crescent Meadows Mobile Home Subdivision Plat No. 1 as recorded in Plat Book 9 at page 21; S.1°12'05?E, 2,378.71 feet to the southeast corner of said survey on the line between said Sections 19 and 30; thence along said section line, S.89°04'05?E., 600.29 feet to the quarter corner common to said sections on the west line of the survey recorded in Book 1196 at Page 466; thence along the quarter line of said Section 19 and the west line of said survey N.0°10'54?E., 2,717.11 feet to the center of said Section 19; thence continuing along said line N.0°05'W., 25.0 feet to the southeast corner of Tract 1 of a survey as recorded in Book 564 at Page 895 on the north right-of-way line of Prathersville Road; thence along said line N.88°07'W., 210.5 feet to the southwest corner of Tract 3 of said survey on the east line of Tower Industrial Park as recorded in Plat Book 33 at Page 87; thence along said line N.0°07'W., 25.34 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 6B of Tower Industrial Park Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 35 at Page 18; thence along the south line of said Plat, said line also being the north right-of-way line of Prathersville Road, N.88°07'25?W., 479.47 feet to the southwesterly corner of said Lot 6 A; thence continuing N.88°07'25?W., 126.00 feet to the southeasterly corner of Lot 1 of said Tower Industrial Park; thence continuing N.88°07'25?W., 398.72 feet along the south line of said Lot 1 and said north right-of-way line to the southwest corner of said Lot 1; thence along the west line of said Tower Industrial Park N.0°07'40?W., 1,809.98 feet to the northwest corner of said Tower Industrial Park; thence along the northeasterly lines of said Tower Industrial Park, said lines also being the southwesterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 63 S.52°03'20?E., 198.85 feet; S.55°54'15?E., 690.02 feet; S.63°15'15?E., 111.02 feet; S.50°20'50?E., 502.02 feet; S.45°00'00?E., 3.77 feet to the northeast corner of said Tower Industrial Park on said quarter section line and the west line of the survey recorded in Book 994 at Page 427; thence along said lines N.0°05'W., 1,669.30 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section 19 and the northwest corner of said survey; thence along the lines of said survey S.89°18'45?E., 1,303.95 feet; S.0°12'15?W., 2,566.35 feet to the centerline of U.S. Highway 63 at station 871+11.2; thence southeasterly along said centerline on a 2 degree curve to the right, 48.1 feet to station 871+59.3; thence radial to said centerline, N.57°46'E., 619.3 feet to the west corner of Lot 2 of Scottish Rite Subdivision Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 36 at page 23; thence along the lines of said subdivision N.32°49'30?E., 215.39 feet; S.89°28'00?E., 284.45 feet; S.1°27'00?W., 570.77 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 1 of said subdivision on the north right-of-way line of Prathersville Road; thence S.1°53'W., 57.14 feet to the quarter section line; thence along said quarter section line, S.88°07'E., 177.4 feet to a point opposite Prathersville Road centerline station 0+00; thence S.1°53'W., 69.55 feet to a point 60 feet South of said centerline station; thence westerly to a point 65 feet South of and opposite station 2+65; thence southwesterly to a point 85 feet south of and opposite station 5+30; thence westerly to a point 320 feet easterly of and opposite U.S. Highway 63 centerline station 881+00; thence southeasterly along the easterly right-of-way line of said U.S. Highway 63 to a point 140 feet easterly from and opposite centerline station 920+00; thence continuing along said easterly right-of-way line to the westerly right-of-way line of Oakland Gravel Road; thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way line to a point westerly from and opposite Oakland Gravel Road centerline station 9+00; thence east to the east line of said Section 30; thence south along said section line to the quarter section corner at the northwest corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 366 at page 43; thence along the north line of said survey and the quarter section line S.89°45'00?E., 2,655.70 feet to the northeast corner of Tract Two (2) of the survey in Book 2657 at page 115 and the southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 1181 at Page 541 at the center of Section 29, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; 
thence northerly along the west line of said survey and the quarter section line of said Section 29 N.0°26'50?W., 2,667.20 feet to the south quarter corner of Section 20, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; thence westerly along the section line to the southwest corner of the east half of the southwest quarter of said Section; 
thence northerly to the northwest corner of said east half; thence N.88°53'30?E. to the southeast corner of Lot 73 of Gregory Heights Addition No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 9 at page 7 and a southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 3049 at Page 93; thence along the lines of said survey N.1°06'30?W., 328.47 feet; S.89°11'10?W., 114.63 feet; N.0°17'E., 957.20 feet to the northwest corner of said survey near the center of Oakland Gravel Road; thence along said road and the north lines of said survey S.86°20'15?E., 505.19 feet; S.66°17'10?E., 231.65 feet; thence S.85°47'10?E., 367.50 feet; N.21°40'50?E., 55.00 feet; thence leaving said road line continuing along the lines of said survey S.82°03'20?E., 133.92 feet; S.1°27'55?E., 773.80 feet; N.88°15'40?E., 766.49 feet to the west corner of the survey recorded in Book 3177 at Page 149; thence along the lines of said survey N.88°15'40?E., 336.00 feet; N.1°39'45?W., 211.78 feet; N.86°41'45?E., 263.16 feet to the west line of the survey recorded in Book 2980 at page 49; thence along the lines of said survey, N.0°40'10?W., 792.37 feet; S.89°54'50?W., 457.90 feet; N.0°16'50?E., 394.05 feet; S.89°45'15?W., 868.05 feet; N.0°29'50?E., 206.50 feet; N.89°34'05?E., 2,682.95 feet to the northeasterly corner of said survey on the west line of Section 21; 
thence along said west line N.0°41'30?E., 644.35 feet to the northwest corner of said section; 
thence N.88°18'W., 33.65 feet; thence N.0°08'15?E., 2,676.1 feet to the north line of the southeast quarter of Section 17; thence along said north line S.88°40'55?E., 33.65 feet to the west quarter corner of Section 16; thence along the quarter section line of said Section 16 and the north lines of North Hampton Woods Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 45 and North Hampton Village Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 30 at Page 12, S.89°49'25?E., 1,751.92 feet to the right-of-way line of Oakland Church Road; thence along the lines of said North Hampton Village Plat 1 S.0°48'15?W., 56.45 feet; S.89°11'45?E., 400.00 feet to the west right-of-way line of Missouri Route ?B?; thence along said right-of-way line and continuing along said Plat lines S. 36°52'15?E., 61.06 feet; S.17°23'15?W., 240.00 feet; S.42°47'45?W., 221.42 feet; S.17°23'15?W., 117.96 feet; S.17°52'55?W., 87.19 feet; S.0°52'50?E., 104.15 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat; thence continuing along said right-of-way line S.0°52'50?E., 113.51 feet; thence continuing along said right-of-way line along a non-tangent curve to the left having a radius of 2,989.79 feet a distance of 961.02 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.2°32'30?E., 956.89 feet) to the northeast corner of the tract described in the deed in Book 760 at page 814; thence along the lines of said tract and the tract described in Book 361 at page 149, N.89°43'30?W., 506.02 feet; thence S.0°36'50?W., 791.25 feet to the north line of said Section 21; thence with said north line S.89°43'30?E., 526.1 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section 21; thence with the north line of the northeast quarter of said section, S.89°18'E., 952.75 feet to the west right-of-way line of Old State Route B (now known as North Browns Station Road); thence in a northeasterly direction, along said west right-of-way line, to the point of intersection of said west right-of-way line with the westerly extension of the south line of a tract of land recorded in Book 37 at page 603 (formerly known as Stephens Station); thence in an easterly direction along said westerly extension to a point 68 feet westerly from, measured at right angles, the centerline of the Columbia Terminal Railroad (formerly the Boone County and Jefferson City Railroad); thence northeasterly parallel with said centerline to the north line of the southeast quarter of said Section 16; thence easterly with said north line to the northeast corner of said tract described in Book 37 at page 603; thence with the east line of said tract in a southwesterly direction to the south right-of-way line of Heller Road; thence proceeding in an easterly direction along said south right-of-way line to the northwest corner of the tract as described by the survey in Book 2788 at Page 41; thence along the north line of said survey, said north line also being the ¼ section line as shown by said survey, S.89°56'35?E., 973.90 feet to the northeast corner of the northwest ¼ of the southwest ¼ of Section 15, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; thence continuing along said north line S.89°56'35?E., 1,356.95 feet to the center of said Section 15; 
thence continuing along said line N.89°59'50?E., 519.23 feet to the northwest corner of the survey as recorded in Book 3445 at Page 80; thence along the lines of said survey S.0°00'10?E., 345.00 feet; S.42°49'00?E., 310.00 feet; S.51°23'30?E., 164.50 feet; N.89°59'50?E., 734.30 feet; N.0°00'10?W., 550.00 feet; N.51°47'00?W., 89.00 feet; N.0°00'10?W., 70.00 feet to the north line of said survey in Book 2788 at Page 41; thence along said north line and said ¼ section line N.89°59'50?E., 1,110.00 feet to the northeast corner of said survey at the east ¼ corner of said Section 15; thence along the east line of said survey and the east line of said Section 15 S.0°43'55?W., 901.55 feet; thence leaving said section line and continuing along the lines of said survey along a curve to the right having a radius of 350.00 feet a distance of 58.33 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.21°47'30?W., 58.26 feet); S.26°34'00?W., 791.45 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 225.00 feet a distance of 223.83 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.1°55'55?E., 214.71 feet); S.30°25'50?E., 46.65 feet; S.41°09'00?W., 165.60 feet; S.8°02'00?W., 144.8 feet to the north corner of the tract as described in the survey in Book 541 at Page 77; thence along the lines of said survey, S.49°01'E., 715.90 feet, S.6°01'E., 44.3 feet, N.89°29'E., 20.50 feet, to the northeast corner of Section 22, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; thence South along the east line of said Section to the southeast corner thereof; thence South along the east line of Section 27, Township 49 North, Range 12 West to the centerline of Hinkson Creek Road, also known as Wyatt Lane; thence in a westerly direction along said centerline to the north-south quarter section line of said Section 27; thence along said centerline N.89°02'10?W., 69.38 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,043.09 feet, a distance of 256.09 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.83°55'50?W., 255.45 feet); thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 500.22 feet, a distance of 179.49 feet (the chord of said curve having a bearing and distance of S.66°38'30?W., 178.09 feet); thence S.56°23'20?W., 109.95 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 692.91 feet, a distance of 177.17 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.63°42'50?W., 176.78 feet); thence S.71°02'20?W., 97.45 feet to the center of the bridge over Hinkson Creek; thence leaving said centerline and along the center of said Hinkson Creek N.15°16'40?W., to the north right-of-way line of Hinkson Creek Road (County Road #299); thence in a westerly direction along said north right-of-way line to the east line of Section 28, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; 
thence continuing along the north and west right-of-way lines of Hinkson Creek Road to the east line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section; thence southerly along said east line to the north line of Section 33, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; thence along said line in a westerly direction to the east line of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 33; thence southerly along said line to the northwest corner of Lot 18 of Wellington Estates, Plat 4 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at page 16; thence along the lines of said Lot, N.89°18'25?E., 537.73 feet; S.0°45'00?W., 294.70 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 12 of Wellington Estates Block 2 as recorded in Plat Book 15 at page 97; thence N.89°23'E., 349.8 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence S.89°30'E., 25.00 feet to the centerline of Wellington Drive; thence along said centerline S.0°30'W., 507.1 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.89°30'W., 25.00 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 14 of Wellington Estates Block 3 as recorded in Plat Book 20 at page 7; thence continuing N.89°30'W., 351.92 feet to the southwest corner of said lot; thence S.0°45'00?W., 200.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 15 of said Plat 3; thence S.89°30'00?E., 352.80 feet to the west line of Wellington Drive; thence continuing S.89°30'00?E., 25.00 feet to the centerline of said Wellington Drive; thence along said centerline S.0°30'00?W., 59.45 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 148.15 feet, a distance of 125.41 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.24°45'00?W., 121.70 feet); along a curve to the left having a radius of 148.15 feet, a distance of 125.41 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.24°45'00?W., 121.70 feet); S.0°30'00?W., 21.82 feet to a point 200 feet North of the north right-of-way line of Mexico Gravel Road; thence leaving said centerline easterly and parallel with said right-of-way line to the west line of Section 34 at a point N.1°10'E., 200.00 feet from the quarter section corner on the west line of the tract of land described in warranty deed Book 711 at Page 758; thence along said lines N.1°10'E., 562.05 feet; thence leaving said section line and along the lines of said tract S.88°45'30?E., 407.75 feet; S.1°49'W., 521.00 feet to a point 200 feet North of said north right-of-way line of Mexico Gravel Road; thence leaving said lines easterly along a line 200 feet North of said north right-of-way line to the west line of Wyatt Lane Acres Plat 6 as recorded in Plat Book 33 at Page 33; thence along said west line N.1°04'30?E., 235.02 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence along the north line of said Plat, S.88°24'00?E., 499.90 feet; thence along the west line of Lot 36 of said Plat and the west line of Wyatt Lane Acres Plat 7 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 54 N.1°37'00?E., 705.02 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat 7; thence along the north line of said Plat, S.88°45'30?E., 931.33 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat on the west line of Wyatt Lane Acres Plat 2, recorded in Plat Book 22 Page 47; thence along the west line of said Plat 2, S.1°15'W., 182.43 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 3 of said Plat 2, thence along the north line of said lot S.88°41'E., 427.0 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence continuing S.88°41'E., 56.45 feet to the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along said quarter line, N.1°40'E. to the southwest corner of Tract #2 of the survey in Book 392 at page 581; thence continuing along said line N.1°40'E., 670.9 feet to the northwest corner of Tract #1 of said survey; thence N.89°30'E., 466.0 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract #1 on the west line of Lot 2 of Deer Ridge Subdivision Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 34 at Page 96; thence N.0°00'05?W., 538.30 feet to the south line of Section 27, Township 49 North, Range 12 West; 
thence with the section line S.89°42'55?W., 466.0 feet to the south quarter corner of said Section; thence with the quarter section line N.1°40'20?W., 218.00 feet to the southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 982, Page 890; thence with the lines of said survey, S.89°52'20?E., 284.00 feet; N.1°26'40?E., 325.30 feet; S.89°49'40?E., 210.95 feet; N.1°40'20?W., 417.25 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence along the north line of said Plat and the north line of Deer Ridge, Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 91 N.89°24'45?E., 526.87 feet to the northwest corner of Deer Ridge, Plat No. 3 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 91; thence along the line of said Plat N.89°30'35?E., 270.76 feet; S.0°36'50?E., 183.26 feet; S.81°54'45?E., 42.86 feet; S.0°19'05?W., 209.75 feet; S.81°50'55?E., 848.40 feet; thence with the lines of the survey recorded in Book 360 at Page 269 North, 209.7 feet; thence S.82°00'E., 417.4 feet; thence South, 209.7 feet to the southeast corner of said survey; thence leaving the lines of said survey, southerly to the northeast corner of Lot 3 of the survey recorded in Book 388, Page 916 at a point 368.8 feet North of the southeast corner of said Section 27; thence N.81°50'55?W., 215.1 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 3; thence S.7°44'W., 315.3 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 3; thence West, 353.4 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 1 of Rocking Chair Ranch Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 13 at Page 30; thence along the west line of said Plat S.9°44'E., 321.31 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot No. 1; thence along the centerline of Thompson Road N.60°38'E., 640.60 feet to the northeast corner of Maryland Heights Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 60; thence along the lines of said Plat S.5°04'00?E., 1,668.05 feet; S.86°20'30?W., 570.25 feet to the southeast corner of Garden City Plat 9 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at Page 79; thence along the south line of said Plat and the south line of Garden City Plat 8 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at Page 15 S.86°19'40?W., 627.50 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 1 of Lewis-Smarr Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 11 at page 106; thence along the east line of said lot, S.4°02'E., 970.35 feet to the southeast corner of said lot; thence S.3°37'E., 35.00 feet to the centerline of State Route PP; thence along said centerline, S.86°23'W., 135.0 feet; thence leaving said centerline S.3°37'E., 35.00 feet to the south right-of-way line of State Route PP; thence West along said right-of-way line to the east line of the west half of Section 34, Township 49 North, Range 12 West at the northeast corner of Lake Shire Estates, Plat No. 1 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 37; thence along said east line S.1°58'10?E., 2,658.17 feet to the south quarter corner of said section; thence along the section line S.89°33'30?E., 92.45 feet to the north quarter corner of Section 3, Township 48 North, Range 12 West at the northwest corner of Greystone Subdivision Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 13; thence along the north line of said section and the north line of said Plat S.89°33'30?E., 1,323.20 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence along the east line of said Plat S.0°23'E., 767.81 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat on the north line of Evergreen Acres Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book36 at Page 39; thence S.89°33'30?E. along said north line a distance of 862.00 feet to the southwest corner of Open Heart Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 34 at Page 24; thence along the lines of said Plat N.0°23'00?W., 400.0 feet; S.89°33'30?E., 450.00 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat on the east line of said Section 3 at a point S.0°23'00?E., 367.8 feet from the northeast corner of said Section; thence along said east line S.0°23'00?E., 1,012.80 feet to the northeast corner of a tract shown by a survey in Book 505 at page 133; thence along the lines of said survey S.0°23'E., 473.0 feet to the southeast corner of said survey; thence S.87°23'30?W., 1,306.15 feet; N.87°58'W., 1,385.2 feet to the quarter section line; thence along said quarter section line S.0°33'00?'W., 833.10 feet to the center of said Section 3; thence along said quarter section line, the east line of Thessalia Subdivision Plat 7 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 2, and the extension thereof, S.0°09'15?E., 837.05 feet to the north corner of Valley Creek Plat 3 as recorded in Plat Book 29 at Page 13; thence continuing along said quarter line and the east lines of said Plat S.0°08'E., 481.90 feet; S.1°18'E., 686.40 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat; thence continuing along said quarter line and the east line of Valley Creek Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 28 at Page 85 S.1°18'E., 631.70 feet to the south quarter corner of said Section 3; thence along the quarter section line of Section 10 in a southerly direction to the northwest corner of Logan Acres Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 11 at page 302; thence S.88°45'E. along the north line of said subdivision, 893.65 feet to the northeast corner of said subdivision on the westerly right-of-way line of St. Charles Road; thence northeasterly along said right-of-way line to the END of said right-of-way at a point 30 feet right of Station 8+75; thence perpendicular to said right-of-way line a distance of 30 feet to centerline Station 8+75; thence along the centerline of St. Charles Road N.30°02'55?E., 172.28 feet to the north line of Section 10, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along said section line N.89°52'35?E., 740.27 feet to the northeast corner of Lake of the Woods Center as recorded in Plat Book 33 at page 92; thence continuing N.89°52'35?E., 329.93 feet to the northwest corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 882 at page 205; 
thence S.1°45'W., 220.0 feet to the southwest corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 974 at Page 423; thence N.89°08'E., 270.0 feet to the southeast corner of said survey on the east line of said Section 10; thence along said east line S.1°45'W., 779.3 feet to the north right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 70 and the southwest corner of Lot 24 of Fairway Meadows, Block 4, Replat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 10 at Page 120; thence along said right-of-way line and the south lines of said Plat, Fairway Meadows Block No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 10 at Page 21 and Fairway Meadows Block No. 1 as recorded in Plat Book 10 at Page 2 in an easterly direction to the southeast corner of Lot 9 of said Block No. 1 and the southwest corner of ABC Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 44 at Page 1 on the quarter section line of Section 11, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence N.0°31'45?W. along said quarter section line, 938.7 feet to the northwest corner of said ABC Subdivision at the quarter section corner; thence along the section line N.88°06'45?E., 2,682.64 feet to the northeast corner of said subdivision at the northeast corner of said Section 11; thence along the section line and the east line of said subdivision S.0°00'E., 935.05 feet to the southeast corner of said subdivision on the north right-of-way line of said Interstate Highway 70; 
thence continuing along said section line to the south right-of-way line of Old Route 40 (also known as I-70 Drive Southeast; thence westerly along said right-of-way line to the northeast corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 453 at page 557 on the east line of the northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence along said east line S.0°15'E., 1,371.35 feet to the center of said Section; thence easterly to the east quarter corner thereof; thence along the section line and the west line of Sunrise Estates Subdivision Block II as recorded in Plat Book 10 at Page 195, Sunrise Estates Subdivision Block XI as recorded in Plat Book 25 at Page 28, Sunrise Subdivision Block IV Amended as recorded in Plat Book 12 at Page 70 and Sunrise Estates Subdivision Block VII as recorded in Plat Book 15 at Page 21 S.0°24'W., 2,351.45 feet to the southwest corner of said Block VII and the northwest corner of the tract as shown in a survey in Book 388 at Page 574; thence continuing along said section line along the east line of said survey South, 315.3 feet to the southeast corner of said Section in Richland Road; thence westerly to the south quarter corner of said Section; thence northerly along the quarter section line to the southeast corner of said tract shown by the survey in Book 453 at page 557; thence along the south line thereof S.88°47'W., 2,686.4 feet to the southwest corner of said tract on the east line of Eastport Village Plat 5 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 102; thence along said line and the east line of Eastport Village Plat 6 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 79 and Lake of the Woods South Plat 4 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 17 S.0°59'15?W., 1,408.71 feet to the southeast corner of said Lake of the Woods Plat 4; thence along the lines of said Plat S.44°12'30?W., 517.47 feet; S.77°29'05?W., 295.42 feet to the northwest corner of the tract shown by the survey as recorded in Book 383 at Page 959; thence along the lines of said survey S.5°41'E., 110.48 feet; S.55°34'E., 84.53 feet; South, 20 feet to the south line of said Section 10; thence westerly along said south line to the southwest corner of the east half of the southeast quarter of said Section 10 and the southeast corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 414 at page 38; thence along the lines of said tract, N.0°26'E., 197.59 feet; S.66°38'W., 227.18 feet; S.71°02'W., 140.28 feet; S.40°25'W., 82.29 feet to the south line of said Section 10; thence along said south line and along the north line of Tract 3B of a survey as recorded in Book 2785 at Page 46 N.89°49'15?E., 291.10 feet; thence leaving said south line and following the lines of said survey S.0°40'00?W., 400.00 feet; S.22°54'00?W., 397.00 feet; S.40°10'15?W., 1,702.23 feet to the north quarter (¼) section line; thence along said line S.1°12'10?W., 609.68 feet to the center of Section 15, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along the south line of said survey S.89°13'45?W., 1,989.12 feet to the southwest corner of said survey; thence along the south line of a survey as recorded in Book 2629 at Page 100 S.89°14'00?W., 663.00 feet to the West quarter (¼) corner of said Section 15; thence continuing along the lines of said survey S.89°38'20?W., 1,945.40 feet; N.0°44'55?E., 868.14 feet; thence leaving said lines S.85°39'35?E., 102.48 feet; thence N.68°02'55?E., 545.36 feet; thence S.79°05'20?E., 282.67 feet; thence N.66°40'40?E., 750.61 feet; thence S.81°02'25?E., 615.98 feet; thence N.71°59'15?E., 257.05 feet; thence S.82°16'35?E., 185.36 feet to the southwest corner of Tract 1 of a survey as recorded in Book 1207 at Page 660; thence along the south lines of said Tract 1 and the survey as recorded in Book 2785 at Page 46 N.88°28'30?E., 1,636.47 feet; N.0°40'00?E., 740.70 feet; N.89°43'25?W., 507.08 feet; N.0°40'00?E., 643.34 feet to the north line of said Section 15; 
thence along said line S.88°28'30?W., 1,800.70 feet to the common corner of Sections 9, 10, 15 and 16, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence S.89°26'15?W., 2,658.35 along the south line of Section 9 to the quarter corner common to said Section 9 and Section 16; thence continuing in a westerly direction along said section line to a point N.88°43'20?E., 1,089.60 feet from the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section at corner number five (5) of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 2705 at page 14 and shown by the survey in Book 448 at page 16; thence along the east line of said tract S.1°18'E., 546.1 feet to the southeast corner thereof; thence S.88°18'W., 320.0 feet to the southwest corner of said tract on the east line of Wellington Manor, Plat No. 3 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at page 50; thence along the lines of said Plat S.0°02'10?W., 444.23 feet; S.88°37'10?W., 400.00 feet; S.0°02'10?W., 326.70 feet to the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 16; thence along said quarter quarter line and the south line of said Plat S.88°37'10?W., 368.78 feet to the southwest corner of said quarter quarter at the southwest corner of said Plat; thence along the west line of said Plat and the west line of Wellington Manor, Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 34 at Page 21 N.0°00'00?E., 1,318.41 feet to the northwest corner of said quarter quarter; thence westerly, along said south line of Section 9 and the south line of The Terebinths Subdivision Plat III as recorded in Plat Book 32 at Page 28 S.88°15'00?W., 1,336.70 feet to the northeast corner of Section 17, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence S.1°02'00?W., along the section line, 1,304.78 feet to the northwest corner of American Legion Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 34 at Page 75; thence along the lines of said subdivision N.88°46'40?E., 203.80 feet; N.62°12'40?E., 111.80 feet; N.88°46'40?E., 322.10 feet; S.77°11'05'E., 206.16 feet; S.0°34'20?W., 1,136.38 feet to the north right-of-way line of State Route WW; thence along said right-of-way line along a curve to the right having a radius of 2,191.83 feet a distance of 6.29 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.89°02'55'W., 6.29 feet); N.87°14'55?W., 289.00 feet; N.65°26 05'W., 252.77 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,492.39 feet a distance of 323.26 feet to said east line of Section 17 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.71°21'35?W., 322.63 feet); thence along said east line S.1°02'00?W., 407.90 feet to the quarter section corner common to Sections 16 and 17; thence South along the section line, 167.61 feet; thence N.89°59'35?E., 728.62 feet; 
thence S.60°00'25?E., 60.00 feet to the north line of the tract shown by the survey in Book 608 at page 370; thence along the lines of said tract N.89°59'35?E., 809.89 feet; S.31°43'10?E., 76.95 feet; S.73°22'15?W., 293.70 feet; S.0°44'05?W., 98.21 feet; N.89°45'W., 649.43 feet; N.0°02'55?W., 244.70 feet to the northwest corner of said tract; thence leaving said tract S.89°59'35?W., 698.63 feet to the section line; thence southerly along the east lines of said Section 17 and Section 20, Township 48 North, Range 12 West to the northwest corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 2206 at page 567 where the public road intersects the section line and at a point approximately 1,715 feet North of the quarter section corner common to Section 20 and 21; thence along the lines of said warranty deed East, 85 feet, more or less; South parallel with the section line 110 feet; west parallel with the quarter section line, 85 feet to the section line; thence southerly along the west line of said Section 21 to the center of the South Fork of Grindstone Creek; thence easterly and upstream along said creek to the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 21; thence along said east line and the west line of the survey as recorded in Book 2871 at Page 132 N.0°451'55?E., 2,503.09 feet to the southwest corner of the tract of land as described in a survey in Book 3225 at Page 114; thence continuing along said quarter section line and the west line of said survey N.2°01'15?E., 800.00 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section 21; thence along the section line and the north line of said survey S.88°56'25?E., 1,328.75 feet to the southwest corner of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along the quarter-quarter line and the line of said survey N.0°46'10?E., 225.46 feet to the northwest corner of said survey at the southwest corner of Southfork of the Grindstone Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 41 at Page 78; thence continuing along said quarter-quarter line and the west line of said Plat N.0°46'10?E., 729.07 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Plat S.63°09'05?E., 508.21 feet; S.27°05'25?W., 20.00 feet to the south right-of-way line of State Route WW; thence along said line S.62°40'05?E., 19.90 feet; thence leaving said line and along the line of said Plat along a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet a distance of 38.57 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.25°51'00?E., 35.96 feet) to the west right-of-way line of Elk Park Drive; thence along said line S.10°58'10?W., 222.55 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 285.00 feet a distance of 11.72 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.9°47'25?W., 11.72 feet); thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet a distance of 43.02 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.49°41'25?W., 39.43 feet); thence along the south line of said Plat N.89°13'50?W., 210.51 feet to the northeast corner of said survey in Book 3225 at Page 114; thence along the lines of said survey S.0°51'40?W., 255.26 feet; S.28°43'40?W., 232.83 feet; S.45°52'55?W., 147.12 feet; N.78°43'50?W., 109.87 feet; S.14°35'05?W., 150.68 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 175.00 feet a distance of 36.27 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.8°38'50?W., 36.21 feet); S.2°42'35?W., 370.89 feet; N.89°32'10?W., 33.02 feet along the south line of said survey; thence leaving said south line S.2°42'40?W., 132.91 feet; thence S.79°11'20?E., 164.04 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 100.00 feet a distance of 176.24 feet, (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.50°19'20?E., 154.30 feet) to the boundary of Concord Estates, Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 12 at page 94; thence along said boundary, S.89°46'E., 115.03 feet; N.72°51'E., 92.18 feet; S.71°13'E., 270.00 feet; N.43°54'E., 93.00 feet; N.16°07'E., 470.00 feet; N.28°46'E., 413.56 feet to the south line of Southfork of the Grindstone Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 40 at Page 43; thence along said line S.61°16'20?E., 335.84 feet to the east line of Section 21; thence along said east line S.1°46'25?W., 1,153.44 feet to the southwest corner of a survey in Book 224 at page 459; thence along the lines of said survey S.89°28'55?E., 550.00 feet N.0°30'55?E., 1417.98 feet to the south right-of-way line of State Route WW; thence N.25°53'45?E., 30.00 feet to the centerline of said state route; thence along said centerline S.64°06'15?E., 272.74 feet to P.C. Station 154+97.3; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 718.66 feet a distance of 263.96 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.53°34'55?E., 262.48 feet) to P.T. Equation Station 157+61.5 back equals 157+64.7 ahead; thence S.43°03'35?E., 174.13 feet to P.I. Station 159+39.2; thence S.43°57'10?E., 1,850.8 feet, more or less to the southwest corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 273 at page 427; thence along the west line of said tract, N.0°09'10?W., 133.80 feet to the north right-of-way line of said State Route WW; thence along said right-of-way line, S.50°27'55?E., 34.06 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 2,340.0 feet a distance of 229.83 feet to the east line of said tract, (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.53°18'55?E., 229.76 feet); thence leaving said right-of-way line along the lines of the survey as recorded in Book 2591 at Page 24 N.0°09'10?W., 1,753.90 feet (to the north quarter corner of Section 22); N.0°27'00?E., 2,686.84 feet (to the center of Section 15); N.89°05'25?E., 2,639.68 feet (to the quarter corner common to Sections 14 and 15); N.89°50'05?E., 2,692.05 feet (to the center of said Section 14); S.1°01'35?W., 2,643.26 feet (to the quarter corner common to Sections 14 and 23); S.0°37'30?E., 2,625.58 feet to the southeast corner of said survey; thence continuing S.0°37'30?E., 30.00 feet to the centerline of said State Route WW; thence along said centerline S.89°16'10?W., 138.00 feet to P.I. Station 234+81.5; thence S.88°47'55?W., 2,803.51 feet to P.I. Station 205+76.6; thence S.89°34'55?W., 1,020.80 feet to P.T. Equation Station 195+51.2 back equals 195+55.8 ahead; thence along an 18 degree curve to the right a distance of 169.3 feet to P.C. Station 193+90.8 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.44°37'W., 165.34 feet); thence N.59°53'W., 1225.5 feet to P.T. Equation Station 181+65.1 back equals 181+66.3 ahead; thence 78.37 feet on an 11 degree curve to the right (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.55°31'10?W., 78.30 feet); thence leaving said centerline and radial thereto, S.38°50'40?W., 30.00 feet to the southerly right-of-way line to the northeast corner of the survey as recorded in Book 2605 at Page 21; thence along the lines of said survey; S.19°00'50?W., 75.00 feet; S.0°17'45?W., 190.00 feet; S.9°56'40?E., 45.00 feet; S.0°07'40?W., 340.00 feet; S.89°42'15?E., 31.00 feet to the quarter section line; thence along said line and continuing along the lines of said survey S.0°17'45?W., 1,300.67 feet; S.88°26'40?W., 3,259.19 feet to the east line of The Woodlands, Plat 4B as recorded in Plat Book 32 at Page 94; thence along the lines of said Plat 4A N.0°56'30?W., 1,296.95 feet; N.87°59'15?W., 109.15 feet; S.62°03'30?W., 261.65 feet; S.56°33'30?W., 973.50 feet; S.63°48'30?W., 382.80 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 79 of The Woodlands Plat 4A as recorded in Plat Book 30 at Page 47; thence along the lines of said Plat 4A; S.84°03'30?W., 349.80 feet; N.57°26'30?W., 266.65 feet to the west line of the southeast quarter of said Section 21; thence along said quarter section line and the west line of said Plat S.0°56'30?E., 1,997.80 feet to the quarter section corner between said Section 21 and Section 28 at the southwest corner of said Plat; thence along the quarter section line of said Section 28 and the west lines of The Woodlands Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 25 at Page 37 and Big Timber Subdivision Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 6 S.1°44'30?E., 2,338.90 feet to the center of said Section; thence easterly along the quarter section line and the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 27 to the center of said Section; thence southerly along the quarter section line to the south quarter corner of said Section; thence westerly along the section line to the northwest corner of the church and lodge grounds; thence South along the west line of said church and lodge grounds 288.0 feet; thence West, 47.8 feet to the centerline of the county road; thence with said centerline of S.5° W., 372.2 feet; thence S.19° E., 726.0 feet to the north and south subdivision line of said Section 34; thence South along said subdivision line to the center of said Section; thence continuing in a southerly direction along the quarter section line varying therefrom to include one acre in the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 34 lying southwest of tract a) as described in a trustees deed in Book 2575 at Page 111 and east of Rolling Hills Road to the south quarter corner of said Section; thence South 1,270 feet; thence West, 26 feet to the northeast corner of the tract described in the deed in Book 290 at page 482; thence along the lines of said tract N.88°26'W., 200 feet; S.1°46'W. to the southwest corner of said tract; thence continuing S.1°46'W., to the centerline of the public road; thence westerly along said centerline to the northeast corner of the land described in the deed of personal representative in Book 759 at page 899 being easterly 610 feet from the northeasterly right-of-way line of "Missouri State Route 63" as located on 23 February 1931; thence in a southerly direction along the east line of said tract described in Book 759 at page 899 a distance of 511 feet to said northeasterly right-of-way line; thence southwesterly at right angles to the centerline of said "State Route 63" a distance of 30 feet to said centerline; thence in a northwesterly direction along said centerline a distance of 409 feet; thence in a northeasterly direction at right angles to said centerline a distance of 30 feet to the southwest corner of said tract described in Book 759 at page 899; thence in a northerly direction to the northwest corner of said tract in the center of said public road (now abandoned); thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of said public road 337 feet to the northwest corner of the tract described in the deed in Book 188 at page 184; thence continuing in a westerly direction to the centerline of said "State Route 63" as located on 23 February 1931; thence continuing along said centerline in a westerly and northwesterly direction to the west line of said Section 3 at a point South, 745.8 feet from the northwest corner of said section; thence continuing along said centerline in a northwesterly direction 1,333.2 feet to the southwest corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 229 at page 467; thence leaving said centerline and along the west line of said tract described in Book 229 at page 467 in a northerly direction 1,894.2 feet to the southeast corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 238 at page 459; thence along the lines of said tract West, 1,475.1 feet; N.21°30'W., 231.0 feet; S.64°W., 594.0 feet to the center of the Columbia and Jefferson City Gravel Road (also known as Ashland Gravel Road); thence along said road S.35°16'E., 665.1 to the northeast corner of Gans Creek Subdivision Block 1 as recorded in Plat Book 12 at Page 90; thence leaving the centerline of aforesaid Columbia and Jefferson City Gravel Road and with the lines of said subdivision and the centerline of Gans Road, S.24°36'W., 438.12 feet; S.46°37'W., 776.63 feet; S.58°22'W., 233.24 feet; S.41°27'W., 202.38 feet; S.53°21'00?W., 31.19 feet; thence with the centerline of Gans Creek Road (now abandoned) S.53°46'30?W., 316.72 feet to the south line of Section 33; at the northeast corner of Gans Creek Recreation Area as recorded in Plat Book 43 at Page 7; thence along the lines of said Plat S.53°52'10?W., 39.04 feet; thence S.46°31'25?W., 572.50 feet; thence S.34°43'55?W., 156.02 feet; S.55°02'35?W., 954.02 feet; N.89°32'25?W., 18.48 feet to the east line of Section 5, Township 47 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along said section line and continuing along the east line of said Plat S.1°34'40?W., 1,464.15 feet to the east quarter corner of said Section; thence continuing along said Section line and the east line of said Plat S.1°03'45?W., 1,987.05 feet; thence leaving said Section line and along the line of said Plat N.89°46'00?W., 1,318.83 feet to the north-south quarter-quarter section line; thence along said quarter-quarter line and the line of said Plat S.0°53'20?W., 662.51 feet to the south line of said section; thence along said section line and the line of said Plat N.89°27'55?W., 1,317.14 feet to the common quarter corner of said Section and Section 8; thence along the north-south quarter section line and the west line of said Plat N.0°43'25?E. 2,636.46 feet to the center of said Section 5; thence continuing along said lines N.0°52'50?E., 2,632.65 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section; thence along the section line N.88°53'05?W., 2,653.92 feet to the southwest corner of Section 32, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, as shown in land corner document number 600-45061; thence with the west line of said Section 32 and the west line of the survey as recorded in Book 2537 at Page 9 N.1°43'15?E., 42.29 feet to the north right-of-way line Gans Road, thence continuing with said lines, N.1°43'15?E., 1,320.30 feet to the southwest corner of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 1260, Page 579; thence leaving said section line and with the lines of said survey, S.89°54'40?E., 1,322.77 feet; N.1°23'20?E., 396.00 feet; S.89°54'40?E., 1,330.68 feet to the quarter section line of said Section; thence with said quarter section line N.1°36'10?E., 2,436.09 feet; thence leaving said quarter section line continuing along the lines of said survey S.88°05'25?E., 383.04 feet; N.39°12'15?E., 1,032.82 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 63; thence leaving the lines of said survey and continuing N.39°12'15?E., 175.0 feet to the centerline of the Old Columbia and Jefferson City Gravel Road; thence along the centerline of said gravel road, N.51°02'W., 137.7 feet; thence N.42°35'W., 11.2 feet to the south line of Section 29; thence along said south line S.89°25'W., 1011.4 feet to the north quarter corner of Section 32, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; 
thence along the quarter section line S.0°03'10?E., 682.76 feet to the northeasterly corner of a survey as recorded in Book 1149 at Page 45; S.88°21'00?W., 1,095.00 feet to a line being 25 feet East of and parallel with the centerline of an existing roadway; thence S.88°21'00'W., 67.16 feet to the east line of the survey as recorded in Book 1274 at Page 697 (Woodhaven Learning Center Administrative Survey); thence along the line of said survey; along a curve to the right having a radius of 267.00 feet a distance of 239.54 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.33°51'00?W., 231.59 feet); along a curve to the right having a radius of 467.00 feet a distance of 52.17 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.64°59'30?W., 52.14 feet); S.21°48'30?E., 63.00 feet; S.69°32'30?W., 24.97 feet, N.19°06'30?W., 68.00 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 462.00 feet a distance of 173.40 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.81°38'40?W., 172.38 feet); along a curve to the right having a radius of 600.00 feet a distance of 198.44 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.78°35'10?W., 197.54 feet); N.69°06'20?W., 40.00 feet; S.20°21'00?W., 75.00 feet; N.78°38'30?W., 194.00 feet; N.88°38'50?W., 98.89 feet; N.1°21'20?W., 45.00 to the southeast corner of Sheltered Workshop Subdivision Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at page 75; thence S.88°40'00?W., 343.60 feet to the southwest corner of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Plat N.1°20'00?W., 132.17 feet; S.88°40'00?W., 213.19 feet to the southwest corner of said Plat and the east line of Section 31 as shown on the survey in Book 940 at page 381; thence along the line of said survey S.0°53'57?E., 132.17 feet; thence leaving said line N.88°38'40?E., 5.00 feet; thence parallel with said east line of Section 31, S.0°46'40? W., 426.32 feet to the north line of BGTM Subdivision, Plat No. 1 as recorded in plat Book 38 at Page 118; thence along the lines of said Plat S.89°13'20?E., 295.51 feet; S.44°59'30?E., 124.29 feet; S.0°06'00?E., 211.30 feet; S.89°13'20?E., 194.31 feet; S.0°06'00?E., 213.66 feet; S.89°54'00?W., 590.44 feet to the east line of said Section; thence along the west line of said Plat and the east line of said Section, N.0°46'40?E., 771.83 feet to the northeast corner of Tract 2 of the survey as recorded in Book 940 at page 381; thence along the lines of said Tract 2 S.89°57'30?W., 726.15 feet; S.1°06'30?W., 300.00 feet to the south line of said survey on the quarter-quarter section line; thence along said lines S.89°57'30?W., 594.55 feet to the southwest corner of said survey at the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section at the northeast corner of Forest Park South Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 40 at Page 21; thence along the east line of said Plat S.0°25'30?W., 1,336.72 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat; thence along the south line of said Plat S.88°52'30?W., 3 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of Tract 16 of the survey in Book 620 at page 396; thence along the east line of said tract and Tract 15 of said survey, S.0°29'40?W., 954.4 feet to the southeast corner of said Tract 15; thence along the south line of said tract, S.89°08'40?W., 1,083.25 feet to the southwest corner thereof in the center of Rock Quarry Road; thence along said road and the west lines of said tracts, N.10°11'30?E., 774.15 feet; thence N.18°00'30?E., 291.3 feet to the northwest corner of said Tract 16; thence along the quarter section line, S.88°52'40?W., 440.25 feet to the center of said Section; 
thence continuing along said quarter line to the west quarter corner of said Section on the east line of State Farm Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 24 at Page 46; 
thence along the east line of Section 36, Township 48 North, Range 13 West and the east line of said Plat S.1°21'W., 1,886.30 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Plat N.88°12'W., 795.9 feet; N.1°21'E. 623.95 feet; N.88°09'W., 1,439.9 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of State Route 163; thence continuing N.88°09'W., 160.0 feet to centerline Station 259+72.7; thence continuing N.88°09'W., 180 feet to the west line of the southwest quarter of said Section and the east line of Boone County Survey No.7211; thence southerly with said east line 193 feet to the southeast corner of Lot G of said survey and the northeast corner of Providence Court Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 57; thence along the lines of said Plat, S.3°32'25?E., 445.69 feet; N.88°31'50?W., 924.38 feet; S.3°31'50?E., 161.73 feet; N.88°25'40?W., 706.62 feet to the northeast corner of Bethel Manor as recorded in Plat Book 28 at Page 12; thence S.0°15'05?W., 382.97 feet to the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 36 at the northeast corner of Bethel Manor Plat 3 as recorded in Plat Book 30 at Page 87; thence with the east line of said Plat, S.0°15'25?W., 442.77 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat on the north line of Tract Number Seven (7) of the survey recorded in Book 297 at page 243; thence along said north line and the north line of Tract Number Six (6) of said survey N.79°12' E., 284.0 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 6; thence along the east line of said tract S.4°08'05?W., 271.61 feet to the southeast corner thereof; thence along the south line of said survey S.78°53'W., 336.0 feet to the southwest corner of said survey; thence N.4°02'E., 273.4 feet to the northwest corner of said tract on the south line of said Bethel Manor Plat 3; thence along said south line, S.79°23'W., 228.05 feet, more or less, to the southwest corner of said Plat; thence along the west line of said Plat N.0°15'25?E., 519.15 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat on the south line of the southeast quarter of Section 36 and the south line of said Bethel Manor Plat 3; thence with said south lines N.84°51'00?W., 722.61 feet to the southeast corner of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence with the south line of said Section, the south lines of Cedar Lake South as recorded in Plat Book 19 at Page 53, Cedar Lake South Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 20 at Page 71, Cedar Lake South Plat 4 as recorded in Plat Book 25 at Page 23, Cedar Lake South Plat 3 as recorded in Plat Book 21 at Page 54 and Cedar Lake Block 1 as recorded in Plat Book 11 at Page 185 N.84°57'33?W., 2,651.55 feet to the south quarter corner of said Section 35; thence S.1°38'00?E., 336.12 feet to the northeasterly corner of The Highlands Plat 10-C as recorded in Plat Book 24 at Page 10; thence along the lines of said Plat S.25°48'00?E., 277.91 feet; S.1°55'00?E., 172.67 feet; S.2°11'00?W., 300.24 feet; S.7°08'30?E., 291.88 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat at the northeast corner of The Highlands Plat 10-A as recorded in Plat Book 23 at Page 36; thence along the east line of said Plat S.5°05'00?W., 140.00 feet to the northwest corner of a tract of land shown by the survey recorded in Book 269 at page 20; thence along the north line of said tract, the north line of Rocky Creek Estates Plat 2 (Plat Book 40 at Page 99) and the north line of Rocky Creek Estates Subdivision (Plat Book 30 Page 28) N.78°49'00?E 689.4 feet, more or less, to the southwest corner of Lot 11 of Old Plank Road Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 8 at Page 37; thence N.31°32'E., 352.70 feet to the northwest corner of said lot; thence N.7°21'E., 40.00 feet to the center of a cul-de-sac; thence N.43°35'W., 7.69 feet to the centerline of Hickam Drive; thence along said centerline N.46°25'E., 431.76 feet; thence N.87°53'E., 114.42 feet to the centerline of Hickam Court; thence along last said centerline, S.4°25'W., 389.64 feet to the north line of Lot 9 of said subdivision; thence along said north line, S.81°05'E., 242.00 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence N.5°38'E., 58.64 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 20; thence S.84°17'E., 149.67 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence S.85°01'E., 20.0 feet to the centerline of Hickam Drive; thence along said centerline, N.3°57'E., 103.5 feet, more or less, to a point opposite the northwest corner of Lot 19; thence easterly 20 feet to said northwest corner of Lot 19; thence S.88°27'E., 147.50 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence S.1°30'W., 262.15 feet to the southeast corner of said lot in the centerline of Old Plank Road; thence along said centerline S.72°42'W., 77.42 feet; thence S.58°45'W., 77 feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of Tract Four (4) of the land described in the warranty deed in Book 1242 at page 193 and the northeast corner of Brookside Townhomes Plat 1 as recorded in Book 3332 at Page 25; thence along the east line of said Plat S.1°04'00?E., 338.48 feet to the northwest corner of Walnut Brook Plat 4 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 68 (now known as Walnut Brook Condominiums as recorded in Book 2902 at Page 85; thence along the lines of said Plat N.78°37'35?E., 539.36 feet; N.0°05'00?W., 177.60 feet; S.89°06'15?E., 111.26 feet; S.0°25'50?E., 4.00 feet; S.89°06'15?E., 121.98 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence S.89°06'15?E., 30.0 feet to the east line of said Section 2 and the west line of Bethel Falls Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 40 at Page 5; thence along said west line N.0°23'35?W., 289.6 feet to the center of Old Plank Road; thence along the centerline of said road and the north line of said Plat N.79°28'05?E., 706.90 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence along the east line of said Plat S.4°38'20?W., 1,025.41 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat on the north line of Tract #7 of the survey in Book 312 at page 607; thence S.88°25'E., 264.0 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract #7 and the northwest corner of Tract #1 of said survey; thence S.88°25'E., 781.9 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract #1 on the northwesterly right-of-way line of State Route K; thence S.53°43'E., 30.0 feet to the centerline of said Route K; thence along said centerline, S.36°17'W., 600 feet; thence N.53°43'W., 30.0 feet to the southeast corner of Tract #4 of said survey; thence N.85°55'W., 626.7 feet to the southwest corner of said Tract #4 and the northeast corner of Tract #11 of said survey; thence along the easterly lines of said Tract #11 and Tract #12 S.23°25'W., 239.5 feet to the southeast corner of said Tract #12; thence along the south line of said Tract #12 N.83°20'W., 581.6 feet to the southwest corner of said Tract #12; thence North, 634.6 feet to the northwest corner of said Tract #7 and the southwest corner of said Bethel Falls Plat 1; thence N.0°37'W., 422.9 feet to the southeast corner of said Walnut Brook Plat 4; thence along the lines of said plat, S.65°44'05?W., 235.75 feet; S.0°21'00?W., 140.00 feet; S.69°13'25?W., 611.09 feet to the northwest corner of Walnut Brook Subdivision, Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 11 at page 127; thence along the northeasterly line of Lot 16 of said Plat No. 2, S.49°51'E., 251.15 feet to the east corner of said lot; thence S.56°31'E., 25.0 feet to the centerline of Bethel Lane; thence along said centerline along a curve to the left having a radius of 100.0 feet, a distance of 61.3 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.15°39'W., 60.3 feet); thence continuing along said centerline S.1°04'E., 452.6 to the centerline of Brookside Lane; thence along said centerline S.88°26'W., 40.03 feet; thence leaving said centerline S.1°34'E., 25.00 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 51; thence continuing S.1°34'E., 158.57 feet to the southeast corner of said lot; thence S.85°35'W., 157.91 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 52; thence S.1°04'E., 460.00 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 53 of said Walnut Brook, Plat 2; thence S.89°00'W., 1,905 feet to the center of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; 
thence continuing S.89°00'W., 734.7 feet along the east west quarter section line to the centerline of Old Plank Road; thence with said centerline the following S.38°07'15?W., 281.50 feet; S.38°36'25?W., 161.50 feet; S.28°36'40?W., 138.40 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.61°23'20?W., 28.96 feet to the northeast corner of the tract of land described in the warranty deed in Book 285 at page 34; thence with the lines of said tract, N.81°26'40?W., 198.00 feet; S.14°43'00?W., 130.00 feet; S.10°05'15?E., 198.00 feet to the south corner of said tract; thence leaving the lines of said tract S.74°36'35?E., 32.76 feet to said centerline of Old Plank Road; thence with said centerline, S.15°23'25?W., 44.45 feet to the north corner of Tract #2 of the survey recorded in Book 339 at page 619; thence along the lines of said survey S.52°58'E., 255 feet; thence S.4°07'W., 22 feet; thence N.78°35'W., 241.6 feet to said centerline of Old Plank Road; thence leaving said survey and along said centerline S.15°23'25'W., 100.00 feet; S.19°28'30?W., 453.91 feet; to the corner of a survey recorded in Book 279 at page 378; thence along said survey N.89°08'E., 540 feet; thence N.3°50'W., 428 feet to a fence line; thence along said fence line N.86°30'E., 101 feet to the centerline of a creek; thence along said centerline S.17°23'E., 64.5 feet; S.25°49'W., 121.6 feet; S.79°16'E., 165 feet; S.31°40'W., 375 feet; S.17°35'W., 357.3 feet; S.27°30'W., 316 feet; S.19°15'W., 573.3 feet to the south line of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; 
thence leaving said centerline along said south line N.89°49'30?E. to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; thence S.0°00'50?W., along the quarter quarter section line, 513.90 feet to the southwest corner of Tract #1 of the survey in Book 328 at page 236 on the north line of Victoria South Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 34 at Page 78; thence along the south line of said survey N.89°46'E., 265.4 feet to the southwest corner of Tract #3 of said survey; thence along the lines of said Tract #3, N.2°16'E., 200.0 feet; N.89°46'E., 500.0 feet and S.2°16'W., 200.0 feet to the southeast corner of said tract; thence leaving said lines S.19°04'00?E., to the north line extended west of Tract 11 of the survey recorded in Book 379 at page 722; thence along said extension and said north line, N.89°46'E., 490.5 feet to the northeast corner of said tract on the quarter section line; thence northerly along said quarter line and the west line of Tract 2 of the survey in Book 396 at page 687, a distance of 600.0 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section 11; thence N.85°35'E., along the north line of said Tract 2, a distance of 1,365.9 feet to the northeast corner thereof; thence continuing along said tract boundary S.4°20'W., 311.0 feet; thence S.23°22'E., 188.2 feet to the north right-of-way line of said State Route "K"; thence S.43°25'E., to the south right-of-way line of said State Route "K" on the north line of a tract of land described in a trustees deed in Book 2388 at Page 71; thence along said line N.53°32'E., 31.0 feet; thence continuing along said line N.51°47'E., 182.00 feet to the north corner of said tract; thence along the east line of said tract, said east line also being the west line of Hill Creek Road, S.5°44'W., 420.00 feet to the southeast corner of said tract at the northeast corner of a tract as shown by a survey in Book 379 at Page 335; thence continuing S.5°44'W., along the east line of said tract 120.00 feet to the northeast corner of a tract as shown by a survey in Book 374 at Page 718; thence along the lines of said tract S.5°44'W., 120.00 feet; thence N.84°16'W., 200.00 feet; thence N.5°44'E., 120.00 feet to the southeast corner of a tract as shown by a survey in Book 388 at Page 436; thence along the south line of said tract N.84°16'W., 30.00 feet to the southwest corner of said tract on the south line of said tract in said Book 2388 at Page 71, said line also being the northerly line of Tract 1 of a survey as shown in Book 1097 at Page 917; thence along said south line S.77°10'50?W., 119.2 feet to the southwest corner of said tract in Book 2388 at Page 71, said corner being on the easterly extension of the easterly line of Lot 4 of K-View Acres as shown by a survey in Book 318 at Page 478; thence along the southwesterly line of said tract in Book 2388 at Page 71 N.26°18'W., 242.0 feet to the northwest corner of said tract on the south right-of-way line of said State Route "K"; thence N.32°56'W. to the north right-of-way line of said State Route "K"; thence along said right-of-way line S.57°04'W., 483.3 feet; thence S.63°34'W., 427.0 feet; thence S.70°05'W., 84.3 feet to the southeast corner of Tract 1 of said survey in Book 396 at Page 687; thence along the lines of said Tract 1, N.26°04'W., 230.7 feet; thence N.79°39'W., 150.0 feet to said quarter section line at the northwest corner of said Tract 1; thence along the west line of said Tract 1, S.1°54'E., 332.3 feet to the southeast corner of Tract B of the survey in Book 345 at page 212 on the north right-of-way line of State Route "K"; thence continuing S.1°54'E., to the south right-of-way line of said Route "K"; thence along said right-of-way line and the north line of Lot 4 of K-View Acres as recorded in Plat Book 7 at page 4, N.79°35'E., 116 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence S.1°54'E., 362.0 feet to the southeast corner of said lot; thence S.64°14'W., 240.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 3 of said K-View Acres; thence N.1°54'W., 383.0 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 3 on said south right-of-way line; thence continuing N.1° 54'W., to the north right-of-way line of said Route "K"; thence S.87°40'W., 113.4 feet, more or less; thence N.84°35'W., 192.3 feet to the southwest corner of said Tract B of said survey in Book 345 at page 212; thence continuing N.84°35'W., 60 feet, more or less, to the southeast corner of Tract Two of the survey in Book 356 at page 518; thence S.89°27'W., 199.4 feet to the southwest corner of Tract One of said survey, also being the southeast corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 676 at Page 309; thence S.89°27'W., along the south lines of said tract and the tracts described in the deeds in Book 1346 at page 742 and in Book 291 at page 639, a distance of 660 feet to the north right-of-way line of State Route "K"; thence along said right-of-way line along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,115.80 feet a distance of 249.74 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.74°10'55?W., 249.20 feet); thence leaving said right-of-way line, N.20°56'50?E., 80.00 feet; thence N.11°19'50?E., 38.40 feet; thence N.2°38'00?E., 180.00 feet; thence N.80°16'00?W., 175.00 feet to the west line of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 279 at page 382; thence N.1°28'00?E. along said west line 883.05 feet to the north line of said Section 11; thence along said north line S.89°46'W., 335 feet to the centerline of Old Plank Road at a point N.89°46'E., 630 feet from the northwest corner of said section; thence along said centerline N.37°55'E., 267 feet to the northeast corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 786 at page 422 and the southeast corner of the tract described in the warranty deed in Book 462 at page 880; thence along the line between said tracts S.89°46'W., 796 feet to the west line of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; 
thence along said section line, N.0°16'45?W., 1,110.48 feet to the southeast corner of Highland Ridge Plat 3 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at Page 82 and the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 3; thence along the quarter-quarter line and the south line of said Plat N.89°54'50?W., 1,311.04 feet to the southwest corner of said Plat and the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter; thence along the west line of said Plat and the quarter-quarter line, N.0°04'20?W., 769.15 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence along the north line of said Plat N.89°56'35?E., 648.25 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence along the east line of Tract 1 of the survey as recorded in Book 1158 at Page 166 N.0°16'45?W., 548.15 feet to the north line of the southeast quarter of said Section 3; thence South 89°56'35? West, 1,953.46 feet to the center of said Section at the northeast corner of Tract 1 of the survey as recorded in Book 3393 at Page 64; thence along the north line of said Tract N.85°38'55?W., 234.88 feet to the northwest corner of said tract; thence leaving said east-west quarter section line and along the lines of said Tract 1 S.1°28'25?W., 937.24 feet; S.88°40'00?E., 237.62 feet to the northeast corner of the survey in Book 916 at page 680; thence S.0°32'20?W., 235.08 feet to the northeast corner of The Cascades, Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 36 at Page 82; thence along the east line of said Plat S.1°18'20?W., 1,350.91 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat at the northeast corner of The Cascades, Plat No. 3 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 86; thence along the east line of said Plat S.1°18'20?W., 105.41 feet to the quarter corner common to said Section 3 and Section 10; thence continuing along said east line S.1°10'30?W., 1,426.59 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat at the northeast corner of The Cascades, Plat No. 4 as recorded in Plat Book 40 at Page 9; thence along the east line of said Plat S.1°10'30?W., 548.29 feet to the north right-of-way line of Missouri Route K; thence continuing along said quarter line 77.46 feet to the south right-of-way line at the northeast corner of Williamson Place Plat 4 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 128; thence continuing along said quarter line S.0°06'55?E., 1,060.00 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat; thence along the lines of said Plat, Williamson Place Plat 3 as recorded in plat Book 39 at Page 127, Williamson Place Plat 1 as recorded in plat Book 39 at Page 84 and Williamson Place Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 115 the following bearings and distances: S.72°59'00?W., 295.98 feet; S.51°42'30?W., 189.91 feet; N.76°48'00?W., 779.88 feet; S.29°35'55?W., 270.98 feet; S.79°03'20?W., 222.77 feet; N.46°22'10?W., 220.40 feet; N.10°14'25?W., 260.94 feet; N.76°47'45?W., 199.93 feet; N.10°15'35?W., 353.21 feet to said south right-of-way line; thence N.15°29'20?W., 30.00 feet to the centerline of said Route K; thence along said centerline S.74°30'40?W., 69.32 feet; thence continuing along said centerline along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,432.39 feet a distance of 455.12 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.83°36'35?W., 453.21 feet); thence continuing along said centerline N.87°18'30?W., 56.85 feet to the east line of Section 9, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; thence leaving said centerline along said section line; 
thence along said section line and the west line of the survey as recorded in Book 2404 at Page 56 S.0°59'30?W., 2,620.77 feet to the southeast corner of said section; thence along the section line and the south line of the survey as recorded in Book 2985 at Page 175 N.88°43'25?W., 2,206.04 feet; thence leaving said section line and continuing along the lines of said survey N.0°20'10?W., 849.58 feet; N.88°43'45?W., 367.30 feet to the west line of the southeast quarter of said section; thence along said quarter section line and a line of the survey as recorded in Book 2446 at Page 41 N.0°20'35?W., 460.06 feet to the southeast corner of Boone's Pointe as recorded in Plat Book 39 at Page 67; thence along the south line of said Plat N.89°13'10?W., 2,610.68 feet to the southwest corner of said Plat in the centerline of R.A. Nursery Road and on the west line of the Section 9, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; 
thence along said section line, the west line of Grassland Hills Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 33 at Page 90 and the west line of Deerfield Ridge Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 42 at Page 36 N.0°13'40?W., 1,355.85 feet to the west quarter corner of said section; thence continuing along the section line and the west line of said Deerfield Ridge N.0°29'10?E., 1,841.37 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence leaving said section line along the lines of said Plat S.89°30'50?E., 622.00 feet; S.53°19'45?W., 144.28 feet; S.13°31'35?E., 69.55 feet; S.29°05'20?E., 138.61 feet; S.54°00'25?E., 54.04 feet; N.86°18'45?E., 111.63 feet; S.51°36'35?E., 254.23 feet; S.79°00'10?E., 84.21 feet; S.19°37'30?E., 89.82 feet; S.15°23'30?W., 304.46 feet; N.85°57'20?E., 105.51 feet; N.39°22'35?E., 236.84 feet; N.87°49'50?E., 102.42 feet; S.33°51'05?E., 79.53 feet; S.80°57'50?E., 119.20 feet; S.10°34'15?E., 54.60 feet; S.53°45'40?E., 107.28 feet; S.6°44'30?W., 105.81 feet; S.27°20'55?W., 1,183.04 feet; S.31°44'10?W., 543.10 feet to the north right-of-way line of State Route K as described in the Road and Utility Easement in Book 2726 at page 67 at a point 150.00 feet perpendicular to and northerly of centerline station 405+95.00; thence S.8°40'10?W., 40.00 feet to said centerline station; thence along said centerline S.81°19'50?E., 95.70 feet to P.T. Station 404+99.3; along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,145.92 feet, a distance of 560.00 feet to P.C. Station 399+39.30 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.84°40'10?E., 554.45 feet); N.70°40'10?E., 640.00 feet to P.T. Station 392+99.30; 
along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,909.86 feet, a distance of 400.00 feet to P.C. Station 388+99.30, (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.76°40'10?E., 399.27 feet); N.82°40'10?E., 1,033.10 feet to P.T. Station 378+66.2; along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,909.86 feet, a distance of 333.33 feet to P.C. Station 375+32.9 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.77°40'10?E., 332.91 feet); N.72°40'10?E., 113.37 feet to P.T. Station 374+14.9; along a curve to the right having a radius of 953.80 feet, a distance of 133.76 feet to the north line of the southeast quarter of said Section 9 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.76°41'15?E., 133.65 feet); thence along said quarter line S.89°18'15?E., 1,279.38 feet to the east quarter corner of said Section; thence along the section line, the west lines of The Cascades Plat No. 5 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 114, The Cascades Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at Page 38 and The Cascades Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 36 at Page 82 N.0°14'30?E., 2,648.24 feet to the northwest corner of Section 10; thence along the east-west section line S.88°36'30?E., 211.20 feet to the southwest corner of Mahan Estates, Plat No. 1 as recorded in Plat Book 31 at page 48 (now part of said The Cascades Plat 1); thence leaving said line and along the lines of said plat, N.0°14'00?W., 101.40 feet; N.83°44'50?E., 244.80 feet; N.76°19'50?E., 210.40 feet; N.66°08'40?E., 62.08 feet; N.58°45'30?E., 46.90 feet thence N.2°01'20?W., 16.14 feet to a corner of the tract shown by the survey in Book 1308 at page 412; thence along the west line of said tract, North 1,008.50 feet to the northwest corner of said tract; thence N.89°43'30?W., 765.39 feet to the west line of section 3, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; thence along said line; N.0°29'50?E., 1,377.0 feet to the east quarter corner of said Section 4; thence continuing along the section line and the east line of the survey recorded in Book 687 at Page 934, N.0°06'00?W., 2,492.62 feet to the southeast corner of Mill Creek Manor, Plat No. 2 (Plat Book 38 at Page 116); thence along the south line of said Plat No. 2 and the south line of Mill Creek Manor, Plat No. 1 (Plat Book 38 at Page 51), S.89°32'05?W., 2,851.19 feet to the east right-of-way line of State Route KK; thence continuing S.89°32'05?W., 34.61 feet Route KK; thence along the center of said road the following, S.29°27'35?W., 838.15 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 2,865.26 feet a distance of 250.04 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.31°57'35?W., 249.96 feet); S.34°27'35?W., 1,471.20 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 573.03 feet a distance of 550.07 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.61°57'35?W., 529.20 feet); S.89°27'35?W., 450.97 feet to the west line of Section 4; thence along said section line N.0°16'50?W., 10.5 feet to the west quarter corner of said Section 4; thence with the section line N.0°16'45?W., 550.00 feet; thence S.89°43'15?W., 90.00 feet; thence N.53°29'25?W., 199.71 feet; thence S.89°43'15?W., 441.05 feet; thence S.42°10'35?W., 120.00 feet; thence N.47°48'25?W., 170.02 feet; thence S.4°10'40?W., 136.68 feet; thence S.16°28'30?W., 348.29 feet; thence S.7°56'55'W., 187.41 feet; thence S.0°34'40?E., 46.00 feet to the south line of the northeast quarter of said Section 5; thence with said quarter section line, S.89°25'20?W., 2,348.93 feet; thence N.23°48'20?E., 304.58 feet; thence N.60°44'40?W., 148.80 feet; thence S.34°48'20?W., 431.06 feet to the quarter section line; thence along said line S.89°25'20?W., 30.45 feet; thence leaving said line S.14°49'00?W., 23.33 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 4 of Turner Ridge Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 15 at Page 8 on the south right-of-way line of said Route KK; thence continuing S.14°49'W., 800.0 feet to the southeast corner of said lot; thence along the south line of said lot N.85°14'30?W., 218.3 feet to the southwest corner of said lot; thence along the west line of said lot, said west line also being the east right-of-way line of said Route KK, along a non-tangent curve to the left having a radius of 984.93 feet a distance of 292.25 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.16°17'30?E., 291.15 feet) to a point thirty (30) feet right of centerline P.T. station 24+90.6 of said Route KK; thence continuing along said west line N.7°47'30?E., 174.65 feet to a point thirty (30) feet right of centerline P.C. Station 26+66.1 of said Route KK; thence leaving said west line N.82°12'30?W., 60.00 feet to the southeast corner of Tract One (1) of the survey in Book 636 at page 465; thence N.89°38'40?W., 693.93 feet to the southwest corner of said tract; thence N.2°49'40?W., 303.51 feet to the northwest corner of said tract on the quarter section line; thence along the south line of the survey recorded in Book 2910 at Page 22 S.89°25'20?W., 600.00 feet to the west quarter corner of said Section 5; 
thence N.0°08'20?E., along the section line and the west line of said survey, 3,449.39 feet to the northwest corner of said survey; thence along the north line of said survey N.89°42'50?E., 1,351.05 feet; thence N.0°10'30?E., 1,434.46 feet to the north sixteenth corner on the north line of said Section 5; thence along said section line S.84°55'20?E., 114.95 feet to the southwest corner of Bradbury Estates (Plat Book 40 at Page 92); thence along the lines of said Plat N.31°30'00?E., 415.00 feet; N.26°12'55?E., 626.25 feet; S.85°26'40?E., 676.26 feet; S.0°24'20?E., 956.50 feet to the south quarter corner of Section 32, Township 48 North, Range 13 West on the north line of Thornbrook Plat No. 12 (Plat Book 38 at Page 43); 
thence along said line and the south line of said Section 32 S.85°11'50?E., 58.23 feet to the north quarter corner of said Section 5; thence continuing with the section line and the lines of said Thornbrook Plat No. 12, Thornbrook Plat No.11 (Plat Book 38 at Page 1), Thornbrook Plat No. 6 (Plat Book 35 at Page 2) and Thornbrook Plat No. 14 (Plat Book 40 at Page 59) S.85°11'45?E., 2,350.24 to the northeast corner of said Plat No. 14; thence leaving said section line along the lines of said Plat No. 14 S.0°57'20?E., 453.75 feet; S.89°01'00?W., 30.00 feet; S.0°57'20?E., 62.00 feet; S.89°01'00?W., 170.00 feet; S.0°59'50?E., 200.00 feet; N.89°01'00?E., 199.86 feet to the southeast corner of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 1073 at Page 51; thence along the east line of said Tract 1 N.0°28'25?E., 42.60 feet; thence along the north line of Thornbrook, Plat No. 4 (Plat Book 34 at Page 7 N.89°00'50?E., 275.44 feet to the east line of said Section; thence along said section line S.0°16'50?E., 826.60 feet; thence leaving said section line the following N.89°43'55?E., 290.00 feet; N.44°43'55?E., 325.00 feet; S.86°16'05?E., 205.0 feet; S.81°46'05?E., 783.0 feet; S.61°46'05?E., 370.0 feet; S.84°46'05?E., 365.0 feet; S.27°16'05?E., 225.0 feet; S.74°46'05?E., 154.65 feet to the center of said State Route KK; thence along the center of said road the following, along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,145.73 feet a distance of 253.10 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.13°17'20?E., 252.59 feet); N.6°57'35?E., 257.60 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,909.74 feet a distance of 299.98 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.11°27'35?E., 299.67 feet); N.15°57'35?E., 576.80 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,909.97 feet a distance of 189.12 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.13°07'25?E., 189.05 feet) to the north line of Section 4, Township 47 North, Range 13 West; 
thence continuing along said centerline along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,309.97 feet a distance of 186.93 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.7°45'05?E., 186.47 feet); N.5°57'20?E., 742.30 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius 572.95 feet a distance of 190.99 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.15°30'20?E., 190.11 feet); N.25°03'20?E., 81.40 feet to the end of said State Route KK at Station 132+42.0; thence N.22°14'30?E., along the centerline of Old Mill Creek Road a distance of 146.45 feet to the north line of the south half (½) of the southeast quarter (¼) of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; thence along said section line and the north line of Magnolia Falls (Plat Book 41 at Page 64) S.82°48'50?E., 2,222.41 feet to the northeast corner of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence along the east line of said section and said Plat S.1°29'05?W., 1,334.78 feet to the southeast corner of said Section 33; thence along the township line S.83°32'00?E., 409.97 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 1 of Cunningham Quality Estates as recorded in Plat Book 40 at Page 34; thence along the west line of said Lot 1 N.1°25'40?E., 472.15 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 1; thence along the north line of said Lot 1 S.83°45'00?E., 465.35 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence along the east line of said Lot 1 S.1°25'20?W., 473.90 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 1 on the south line of Section 34, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; thence along said south section line and the south line of said Plat S.83°32'00?E., 465.54 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat at the southeast corner of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 34; thence along the east line of said west half N.1°25'00?E., 3,117.91 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 7 of Mill Creek Terrace Plat Number 3 as recorded in Plat Book 32 at page 61; thence leaving said west line and along the south line of said Lot 7 and Lot 6 of said Plat Number 3, N.85°31'15?W., 626.45 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 6; thence along the west line of said Lot 6, N.0°00'30?E., 418.07 feet to the northwest corner of said lot; thence N.2°04'50?E., 25.00 feet to the centerline of Mill Creek Terrace; thence along said centerline, S.87°55'10?E., 173.93 feet; thence N.2°04'50?E., 20.00 feet to the center of a cul-de-sac having a radius of 45.00 feet; thence N.26°08'E., 45.00 feet to the west corner of Lot 2 of Mill Creek Terrace as recorded in Plat Book 21 at page 43; thence along the lines of said lot, N.26°15'E., 199.96 feet; North, 197.65 feet to the northwest corner thereof on the south line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 34; thence along said south line and the south line of The Pines (Plat Book 28 at Page 38), N.85°17'15?W., 996.11 feet to the southwest corner of said quarter-quarter; thence with the west line of said quarter-quarter S.5°34'45?E., 605 feet, more or less, to the easterly prolongation of the south line of Lot 12 of Country Farms Plat 3 as recorded in Plat Book 43 at page 39; thence along said prolongation and said south line, S.84°25'25?W., 732.83 feet to the southeast corner of Country Farms, Plat 12 as recorded in Plat Book 37 at page 2; thence along the south line of said Plat 12, N.84°29'00?W., 718.55 to the southwest corner of said plat; thence S.85°19'35?W., 25.00 feet to the centerline of Harvest Road; thence along said centerline, N.4°40'25?W., 653.64 feet to the centerline of Old Field Road; thence along the centerline of said Old Field Road, N.89°34'20?W., 393.7 feet; thence leaving said centerline, N.0°25'40?E., 25.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 8A of the Replat of Lot 8 of Country Farms as recorded in Plat Book 24 at page 69; thence along the lines of said Lot 8A, N.5°34'11?W., 625.71 feet; N.89°52'14?E., 419.20 feet and S.5°33'32?E., 626.93 feet to the southeast corner thereof; thence S.0°25'40?W., 25.00 feet to said centerline of Old Field Road; thence along said centerline S.89°34'20?E., 605.59 feet; S.82°41'00?E., 92.71 feet; thence leaving said centerline, N.7°19'00?E., 25.00 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 10 of said Country Farms as recorded in Plat Book 11 at page 262; thence N.5°34'43?W., along the west lines of said Lot 10 and Lot 1 of said plat, 1,265.46 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 1; thence N.0°08'W., 30.00 feet to the north line of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence along said north line, N.89°52'E., 728.2 feet to the northwest corner of said Section 34; thence with the north line of said section in an easterly direction to the southwest corner of Walker's Ridge (Plat Book 28 at Page 18); thence with the lines of said Plat, N.0°00'40?W., 704.69 feet; S.89°59'50?E., 593.98 feet to the northeast corner of said Plat; thence with the west line of the east half of the west half of Section 27, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, the east line of Country Woods Subdivision Plat No. 1 (Plat Book 11 at Page 247) and the east line of Country Woods Subdivision Plat No. 2 (Plat Book 21 at Page 16), N.0°17'W., 3,252.60 feet to the center of Hinkson Creek and the northeasterly corner of said Country Woods Subdivision, Plat No. 2; thence with said center of Hinkson Creek and the northeasterly boundary of said Plat No. 2, N.52°12'W., 358.20 feet to the east corner of Lot 52 of said Plat; thence along the southeasterly line of said lot, S.41°37'W., 629.95 feet to the south corner of said lot; thence continuing S.41°37'W., 25.00 feet to the centerline of Old Ridge Road; thence along said centerline, N.48°23'W., 190.0 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.41°37'E., 25.00 feet to the west corner of said lot; thence continuing N.41°37'E., 574.5 feet to the north corner of said lot in the center of said Hinkson Creek; thence along said center of Hinkson Creek and the lines of said subdivision S.82°19'30?W., 255.30 feet; S.64°36'30?W., 184.0 feet; N.44°30'W., 620.5 feet; N.34°02'30?W., 270.6 feet to the north corner of Lot 58 of said Plat on the south line of the MKT Parkway, formerly the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad; thence with said south line, and the lines of said Plat, on a curve to the left having a radius of 1,382.39 feet, a distance of 426.66 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.54°08'30?W., 424.97 feet); S.45°18'W., 390.75 feet to the west corner of Lot 60 of said Plat; thence continuing S.45°18'W., 60.25 feet to the north corner of Country Meadows Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 24 at Page 26; thence along the northwesterly line of said Plat S.45°18'W., 662.70 feet to the northwesterly corner of said subdivision on the east line of the of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 28, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence in a southerly direction along the quarter-quarter lines and the lines of said Country Meadows Subdivision, Hunters Ridge Subdivision (Plat Book 25 at Page 2) and Spring Creek Plat 1 (Plat Book 34 at Page 9) S.0°23°W., 3,560.15 feet to the south line lot said Section 28; 
thence N.83°16'20?W. along the south line of said section, 804 feet to the northerly prolongation of the east line of Tract #4 of Country Farms as per Plat Book 11 at page 262; 
thence along said east line S.5°35'E., 655 feet to the southeast corner of said tract and the northeast corner of the Replat of Lot 7, Country Farms Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 37 at page 53; thence along the east line of said plat, S.5°32'55?E., 624.86 feet to the southeast corner of said plat; thence S.0°03'35?W., 25.00 feet to the centerline of Old Field Road; thence along said centerline, N.89°56'25?W., 657.43 feet; thence continuing along a curve to the left having a radius of 100.0 feet, a distance of 89.30 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.68°39'W., 86.36 feet); thence leaving said centerline N.47°14'45?W., 25.0 feet to the right-of-way line of Vineyard Way; thence continuing N.47°14'45?W., 59.38 feet to the east corner of the Replat of part of Lot 6 and Lot 15 of Country Farms Subdivision (Plat Book 33 at Page 27); thence along the north line of said Plat, S.88°01'00?W., 609.97 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat east line of Copperstone Plat 4 (Plat Book 42 at Page 11; thence along said east line and the east lines of said Copperstone Plat 4, Copperstone Plat 2 (Plat Book 40 Page 116) and Copperstone Plat 1 (Plat Book 40 Page 115), S.0°0.'45?W., 2,705.44 feet, to the southeast corner of said Plat 1; thence along the south line of said Plat 1 N.84°20'45?W., 1,762.39 feet to the southwest corner of said Plat on the west line of said Section 33; thence along said section line and the west line of said Plat, the west line of said Copperstone Plat 2 and the west line of the survey recorded in Book 2860 at Page 59, N.0°06'25?E., 3,979.83 feet to the northwest corner of said section; thence easterly along the north line of said section to the centerline of Vawter School Road; thence along said centerline along a curve to the right in a northwesterly and northerly direction to the intersection with Scott's Boulevard; thence along the centerline of said Scott's Boulevard in a northwesterly and northerly direction to the north line of said MKT Parkway as shown on the survey recorded in Book 474 at page 521 at the southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 3011 at Page 99 (also known as "Final Plan Coastal Electric"); thence along said north line and the lines of said survey S.84°37'50?E., 93.80 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,382.40 feet a distance of 600.33 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.82°55'45?E., 595.62 feet); N.70°30'E., 266.90 feet to the east corner of said survey at the southeast corner of Lot 16 of Ashby West PRD, Final Plan Block A as recorded in Plat Book 15 at page 40; thence with the lines of said Lot 16, N.82°54'01?W., 123.45 feet; N.7°05'59?E., 158.48 feet to the centerline of Bethany Drive; thence along said centerline N.82°54'01?W., 46.87 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.7°05'59?E., 25.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 10 of said Plat; thence continuing N.7°05'59?E., 133.48 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 10; thence N.82°54'01?W., 80.0 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 8 of said Plat; thence along the east line of said lot and the prolongation thereof S.7°05'59?W., 158.48 feet to said centerline of Bethany Drive; thence along said centerline N.82°54'01?W., 80.0 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.7°05'59?E., 25.0 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 8; thence continuing N.7°05'59?E., 133.48 feet to the northwest corner of said lot; thence N.82°54'01?W., 80.0 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 6D of the Replat of Lot 6 of said Ashby West, Block "A" as recorded in Plat Book 16 at page 50; thence along the east line of said Lot 6D and the prolongation thereof S.7°05'59?W., 158.48 feet to said centerline of Bethany Drive; thence along said centerline S.82°54'01?E., 11.84 feet; thence leaving said centerline S.7°05'59?W., 25.00 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 13b of Ashby West II, PRD, as recorded in Plat Book 24 at page 39; thence continuing S.7°05'59?W., 133.48 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 13b; thence N.82°54'01?W., 80.0 feet to the southwest corner of said lot; thence N.7°05'59?E., 133.48 feet to the northwest corner of said lot; thence continuing N.7°05'59?E., 25.0 feet to said centerline of Bethany Drive; thence along said centerline N.82°54'01?W., 251.84 feet; thence leaving said centerline N.7°05'59?E., 25.0 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 3 of said Ashby West Block "A" PRD; thence continuing N.7°05'59?E., 133.48 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 3; thence N.82°54'01?W., 80.0 feet to the northeast corner of Lot One (1) of said Ashby West, Block "A"; thence along the east line of said lot, S.7°05'59?W., 133.48 feet to the southeast corner of said lot; thence continuing S.7°05'59?W., 25.0 feet to said centerline of Bethany Drive; thence along said centerline N.82°54'01?W., 82.77 feet; thence N.87°59'01?W., 49.30 feet to the centerline of Scotts Boulevard; thence along said centerline N.2°00'59?E., 163.49 feet to the northwest corner of said Ashby West Block A PRD at the southwest corner of Tom and Jeff's Most Excellent Adventure Plat 1 (Plat Book 38 at Page 95); thence N.0°43'50?E., with the west line of said Plat, a distance of 280.12 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence with the west line of Katy Lake Estates Plat 3 (Plat Book 28 at Page 74) N.0°26'30?W., 336.18 feet; thence N.12°29'00?E., 4.39 feet; thence N.0°08'20?E., 310.10 feet; N.0°30'00?E., 197.94 feet; N.0°37'00?W., 284.71 feet to the northwest corner of said Plat; thence continuing along said centerline and the west lines of Katy Lake Estates Plat 2-C (Plat Book 29 at Page 3), Katy Lake Estates Plat 2-B (Plant Book 28 at Page 96), Katy Lake Estates Plat 2-D (Plat Book 30 at Page 98) and the survey recorded in Book 501 at Page 388 N.0°37'00?W., 1,907.92 feet to the south line of Woods Edge Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 31 at Page 79; thence along said south line S.89°48'35?W., 201.97 feet; thence N.55°43'00?W., 453.91 feet; thence N.84°31'55?W., 176.80 feet to the northwest corner of Pinebrook Estates (Plat Book 15 at Page 18); thence along the lines of said Plat; S.26°47'W., 139.0 feet; S.18°59'W., 400.02 feet; S.21°04'W., 104.09 feet to the northwest corner of Brookview Meadows Plat No. 1 (Plat Book 15 at Page 17); thence along the lines of said Plat S.21°04'W., 325.0 feet; S.50°52'W., 142.07 feet at the northeast corner of Country Hill-Plat No. 2 (Plat Book 17 at Page 34); thence with the lines of said Plat and Country Hill - Plat No. 1 (Plat Book 11 at Page 33) N.89°25'W., 40.0 feet; S.0°26'W., 746.57 feet; S.11°15'E., 181.13 feet; N.84°45'W., 46.78 feet; S.5°15'W., 543.00 feet (more or less); thence leaving the lines of said subdivision and along the easterly line of the tract shown as "LAGOON" on the survey recorded in Book 392 at page 450, N.7°35'50?E., 235 feet (more or less) to point (5) of said survey; thence N.85°15'W., 89.00 feet to point (4) of said survey; thence S.29°45'W., 525.00 feet to point (3) of said survey; thence S.41°30'E., 259.00 feet to point (2) of said survey; thence N.71°00'E., 93.00 feet to point (1) of said survey, being on the west line of Bellview Acres Block #2 recorded in Plat Book 10 at page 141; thence with the west line of said Bellview Acres, S.5°18'E., 128 feet more or less to the Southwest corner of Lot 35 of said Bellview Acres, also being the centerline of Hinkson Creek; thence leaving the lines of said Bellview Acres and with the centerline of Hinkson Creek as shown on a survey recorded in Plat Book 7 at page 59 N.82°30'W., 280 feet; N.30°W., 200 feet; N.12°10'E., 584 feet; N.47°55'W., 180.5 feet; N.60°35'W., 281 feet; S.86°40'W., 292.5 feet; S.44°W., 150.5 feet to the intersection of the centerlines of Hinkson Creek and Merideth Branch, being a point on the east line of a survey recorded in Book 388 at page 731; thence with the lines of said survey, being the centerline of Hinkson Creek S.10°15'W., 439.4 feet; S.18°38'W., 281.7 feet; S.41°08'W., 204.10 feet; thence S.58°56'W., 57.5 feet to the quarter section line of Section 29, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence leaving the centerline of Hinkson Creek and with the quarter Section line South, 141.8 feet to the southeast corner of said survey; thence leaving the lines of said survey and continuing with the quarter section line South, 50.11 feet to the centerline of the abandoned MKT railroad right-of-way; thence with said centerline, N.86°13'W., 227.01 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 2,864.79 a distance of 991.67 feet, (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.76°18'W., 986.72 feet); N.66°23'W., 126.45 feet to the quarter quarter line of the southwest quarter of Section 29 Township 48 North, Range 13 West; thence leaving the centerline of said railroad right-of-way and with said quarter-quarter line N.0°12'E., 59.42 feet to a point 55.00 feet northerly from said centerline; thence parallel with and 55.00 feet from said centerline, N.66°04'20?W., 791.36 feet as shown on survey recorded in Book 813 at page 49; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,025.38 feet a distance of 1,150.72 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.81°46'40?W., 1,091.29 feet); thence S.49°37'40?W., 3,844.82 feet to the center of Perche Creek; thence with said center N.57°43'00?W., 175.01 feet; N.41°56'30?W., 352.90 feet; N.38°10'50?W., 389.33 feet; N.31°26'00?W., 228.41 feet; N.18°05'50?W., 54.76 feet to the line between said Sections 30 and 31 at a point N.89°03'40?W., 1,494.86 feet from the quarter section corner between said Sections 30 and 31; continuing N.18°05'50?W., 207.33 feet; N.5°55'40?W., 272.29 feet; N.10°02'10?W., 278.81 feet; N.0°44'10?W., 199.69 feet; N.3°30'20?W., 234.39 feet; N.1°41'00?E., 174.23 feet; N.7°50'10?E., 168.52 feet; N.20°57'40?E., 125.59 feet; N.51°54'30?E., 123.35 feet; N.62°56'10?E., 137.22 feet; N.80°52'40?E., 324.27 feet; S.85°03'40?E., 110.71 feet; S.54°56'00?E., 80.05 feet; S.25°13'50?E., 58.13 feet; S.3°06'20?W., 94.40 feet; S.46°22'20?W., 92.64 feet; S.26°03'00?W., 167.65 feet; S.8°44'00?W., 95.81 feet; S.13°01'50?E., 225.27 feet; S.33°38'10?E., 178.75 feet; S.40°52'10?E., 423.52 feet; S.49°51'40?E., 112.50 feet; S.78°00'10?E., 198.50 feet; thence S.62°58'20?E., 78.49 feet; thence N.84°43'10?E., 115.45 feet; N.55°38'10?E., 150.72 feet to the quarter section line between the southeast and the southwest quarters of said Section 30 at a point N.1°35'00?E., 595.24 feet from the south quarter corner of said section; thence continuing along said center of Perche Creek N.24°29'40?W., 398.55 feet; N.10°12'20?E., 143.85 feet; N.24°37'40? E., 346.18 feet; N.40°09'00?E., 29.08 feet to the quarter section line between the southeast and the southwest quarters of said Section 30 at a point N.1°35'00?E., 1,436.73 feet from the south quarter corner of said section; thence continuing along said center of Perche Creek N.40°09'00?E., 118.79 feet; thence N.68°08'40?E., 384.08 feet; N.82°33'00?E., 318.10 feet; thence S.88°06'00?E., 578 feet more or less to the north-south quarter-quarter section line in the southeast quarter of said Section 30; thence leaving said center of Perche Creek and with the quarter-quarter section line N.0°01'W., 3,613 feet more or less to the north line of said section 30; thence with said north section line N.89°43'E., 1,326 feet, more or less, to the corner common to Sections 19, 20, 29 and 30; thence along the north line of said Section 29 S.86°23'00?E., 324.65 feet; thence leaving said section line N.7°55'00?E., 842.85 feet; thence N.0°46'00?E., 479.40 feet to the quarter-quarter section line; thence with said quarter-quarter section line, S.85°34'00?E. 1,466.70 feet to the southeast corner of Judah Plat 1 (Plat Book 37 at Page 59); thence along the lines of said Plat along a non-tangent curve to the right having a radius of 957.82 feet a distance of 142.10 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.81°55'40?W., 141.97 feet);along a non-tangent curve to the right having a radius of 527.32 feet a distance of 141.58 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.64°31'40?W., 141.15 feet); N.56°50'10?W., 169.95 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 655.78 feet a distance of 13.65 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.56°14'25?W., 13.65 feet) to the south corner of Stonecrest, Plat No. 6A (Plat Book 38 at Page 4); thence along the lines of said Plat, along a curve to the right having a radius of 655.78 feet a distance of 91.18 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.51°52'10?W., 91.11 feet); N.47°53'10?W., 131.06 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 248.92 feet a distance of 189.31 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of N.69°40'20?W., 184.78 feet); S.88°32'30?W., 176.75 feet to a point on the southeasterly line of Westcliff Plat 1 (Plat Book 38 at Page 88); thence along the lines of said Plat S.88°44'50?W., 6.88 feet; along a curve to the left having a radius of 358.89 feet a distance of 155.03 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.76°22'25?W., 153.82 feet); S.66°26'55?W., 154.04 feet; along a curve to the right having a radius of 388.79 feet a distance of 177.97 feet (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.79°33'50?W., 176.42 feet); N.12°28'10?W., 13.56 feet; N.50°28'10?W., 300.41 feet; N.18°58'10?W., 188.53 feet; N.15°34'35?E., 275.50 feet; N.8°36'40?W., 341.91 feet; N.40°48'20?W., 412.97 feet; N.65°09'55?W., 357.69 feet; N.31°43'15?W., 214.76 feet; N.1°34'35?E., 271.76 feet; N.30°46'35?E., 183.86 feet; N.45°29'10?E., 712.32 feet to the southwest corner of the survey recorded in Book 739 at Page 18; thence along the lines of said survey N.35°01'15?E., 162.48 feet; N.22°54'45?E., 314.35 feet; N.29°06'40?E., 79.20 feet; N.5°11'05?E., 103.52 feet; N.3°18'40?W., 124.85 feet; N.25°11'05?W., 117.96 feet; N.14°20'10?W., 206.42 feet; N.3°58'10?W., 165.30 feet; N.13°08'45?W., 136.84 feet to the northwesterly corner of said survey and on the south line of Graystone Plat 2 (Plat Book 42 at Page 25); thence along the north line of said survey, the south line of said Plat and the south line of Graystone Plat 1-Corrected (Plat Book 42 at Page 5) S.84°27'00?E., 1,056.12 feet to the southeast corner of said Plat 1-Corrected; thence northerly along said creek centerline to the north line of said Section 20; thence along the west lines of the survey recorded in Book 739 at Page 18, Quail Creek West Plat 3 (Plat Book 40 at Page 15), Quail Creek West Plat 2 (Plat Book 40 at Page 14) and Quail Creek West Plat 5 (Plat Book 40 at Page 17) N.0°24'50?W., 2,621.27 feet to the quarter section line; thence S.84°38'35?E., 935.12 feet to the southwest corner of Stoneridge Estates Plat 3 (Plat Book 33 at Page 35); thence along the lines of said Plat N.0°08'10?W., 659.65 feet; N.84°41'20'W., 262.08 feet; N.0°08'10?W., 578.47 to the south corner of Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A (Plat Book 33 at Page 65; thence along the lines of said Plat and the extension thereof N.32°57'45'W., 130.72 feet; S.61°51'50?W., 656.30 feet to the foot of the bluff; thence N.45°30'W., 87.78 feet; thence N.84°30'W., 99.00 feet to the mouth of a branch at the center of Perche Creek; thence up the main channel of said creek N.29°00'E., 293.04 feet; N.3°00'W., 363.00 feet; N.44°00'W., 330.00 feet; N.36°00'W., 231.00 feet; N.17°00'E., 264.00 feet; N.55°00'E., 363.00 feet (to the section line between Sections 17 and 8); N.57°00'E., 159.06 feet; N.48°00'E., 792.00 feet; N.34°00'E., 264.00 feet; N.13°30'E., 396.00 feet; N.2°40'30?W., 208.03 feet to a southerly corner of the survey recorded in Book 2587 at Page 22; thence continuing along the main channel of said creek and the lines of said survey N.24°13'20?W.,58.60 feet; S.88°00'10?W., 90.70 feet; S.34°51'30?W., 178.90 feet; S.27°41'50?E., 94.20 feet; S.17°17'10?W., 130.00 feet; S.60°24'00?W., 138.00 feet; S.87°42'10?W., 109.00 feet; N.79°41'50?W., 152.00 feet; N.54°27'40?W., 536.00 feet; N.37°42'50?W., 181.00 feet; N.25°42'40?W., 249.00 feet; N.11°18'20?E., 114.00 feet; N.21°42'30?E., 134.00 feet; N.39°41'40?E., 404.00 feet; N.34°28'00?E., 227.00 feet; N.17°51'20?E., 154.00 feet; N.14°20'10?W., 104.00 feet; N.47°24'10?W., 88.00 feet; N.15°31'40?W., 91.00 feet; N.0°44'00?W., 105.00 feet; N.27°15'40?E., 87.00 feet; N.45°27'20?E., 364.00 feet to the confluence with the old channel of Perche Creek in the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 8; thence continuing upstream along said Perche Creek N.45°05'E., 142.50 feet; N.0°00'E., 491.90 feet; N.7°35'E., 545.00 feet; N.23°00'E., 409.00 feet; thence leaving said Perche Creek S.70°15'E., 251.00 feet to a point on the south right-of-way line of Old Highway #40; thence along the centerline of an abandoned gravel road S.33°28'E., 170.50 feet; S.45°47'E., 800.00 feet to Point B of Tract 2 of Boone County Survey #7602 a set iron pipe on the centerline of the former Rocheport and Columbia Road at the north corner of said survey recorded in Book 2587 at Page 22; thence along said centerline and the lines of said survey, S.45°31'20?E., 258.51 feet (to the southwesterly right-of-way line of said Route ZZ); S.45°31'20?E., 167.24 feet (to Route ZZ P.T. centerline Station 17+17.1); S.45°31'20?E., 935.92 feet (to P.C. centerline Station 26+53.02); along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,909.7 feet a distance of 199.38 feet to P.T. centerline Station 28+52.40 (the chord of said curve having bearing and distance of S.42°31'50?W., 199.29 feet); S.39°32'20?E., 333.3 feet (to centerline Station 31+85.7); thence leaving said centerline N.50°28'E., 35.0 feet to the west corner of the survey in Book 3263 at page 179; thence along the lines of said survey, N.58°59'45?E., 847.68 feet; N.1°32'15?E., 221.55 feet; N.11°54'25?W., 817.00 feet; N.67°59'05?E., 223.00 feet; S.51°17'45?E., 300.53 feet to the east line of said Section 9; thence along said Section line N.0°50'10?W. to the northwest corner of said Section 9; thence easterly along the north line of Section 9 to the west line of the east half of Section 4, Township 48 North, Range 13 West; 
thence northerly along the west line of said east half of Section 4 to the north line of said Section at the northwest corner of Boone County Survey No. 3121 as shown on the survey recorded in Book 2757 at page 83; thence N.83°14'00?W., 1,061.70 feet to the east line of Tract ?C? of the survey in Book 1082 at page 262; thence N.1°44'30?E., 956.34 feet to the northeast corner of said survey; thence continuing along the lines of said survey in Book 2757 at page 83, N.1°27'40?E., 356.84 feet; S.83°18'45?E., 401.69 feet to the northwest corner of Tall Trees Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 11 at page 144; thence continuing along the lines of said survey and said subdivision, S.1°07'45?W., 449.92 feet; S.83°11'30?E., 600.12 feet; N.77°32'30?E., 322.14 feet to the east line of the southwest quarter of Section 33, Township 49 North, Range 13 West; thence along said quarter section line, N.1°35'45?E., 1663.84 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING at the center of said Section 33; 
or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body, politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of "City of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 21090, § 1, 9-19-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21090, §§ 1, 2, passed September 19, 2011, repealed the former §§ 1-11—1-11.218, and enacted a new § 1-11 as set out herein. The former sections pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for history.  
Sec. 1-11.1. - November, 2011 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract located in the north west quarter of the north west quarter of Section 11, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County Missouri. Said tract being described by a general corporation warranty deed in Book 3584 Page 221 of the Boone County records, except that part described as lot one (1) of Farrar Subdivision as shown by the plat recorded in Plat Book 26, Page 52, said tract also being a part of Tract 1 of the survey shown in Book 314 Page 112 all of the Boone County records being more particularly described as follows: 
Starting at the north west corner of said Section 11 thence with the north line of the tracts shown by the survey in Book 383 Page 152 of the Boone County records N 89°49'30? E 628,75 feet to the north west corner of the tract described by said deed in Book 3584 Page 221, also being the north west corner of Tract 1 as shown by said survey in Book 314 Page 112 the Point of Beginning; 
Thence from the point of beginning with the lines of the tract described by said deed in Book 3584 Page 221 and the lines of said Tract 1 N 86°34'00? E, 334.90 feet; thence S 01°39'45? E, 788.95 feet to the north corner of Farrar Subdivision as shown in Plat Book 26 Page 52 of the Boone County records; thence leaving the lines of said Tract 1 and with the lines of said Farrar Subdivision S 62°22'50? W, 129.48 feet; thence S 49°19'00? W, 72.43 feet; thence S 62°26'30? W, 75.90 feet; thence S 05°43'00? W, 36.00 feet; thence S 40°22'55? W, 46.80 feet to the north right-of-way line of State Route K; thence leaving the lines of said Farrar Subdivision and with said north right-of-way line N 66°25'00? W, 148.95 feet; thence S 23°35'00? W, 15.00 feet; thence N 66°25'00? W, 126.60 feet; to the south west corner of said Tract 1; thence with the lines of said Tract 1 N 12°54'00? W, 661.15 feet; thence N 54°02'30? E, 316.50 feet; thence N 48°53'00? E, 84.50 feet to the Point of Beginning and contains 11.72 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21139, § 4, 11-21-11)  
Sec. 1-11.2. - November, 2011 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 32, Township 48 North, Range 48 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being Tracts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the survey recorded in Book 881, Page 902 and being a portion of Parcel One as described in the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 3744, Page 124 and containing 157.59 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21140, § 4, 11-21-11)  
Sec. 1-11.3. - February, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
The northeast quarter of Section Two (Sec. 2), Township 47 North (T.47N.) Range 13 West (R.13W.) of the Fifth Principle Meridian (5th P.M.) in Boone County, Missouri, being a portion of the lands of Unity Center of Columbia Per Deed Book 3571 Page 75 as shown by the survey recorded in Deed Book 3527 Page 154 of the records of Boone County, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a ½? rebar with an orange plastic cap stamped "CSH 1991" on the north line of said Section 2, T.47N., R.13W., being the northwest corner of Lot 13 of Old Plank Road Subdivision per Plat Book 8 at Page 37, being also N84°57'33?W, along the north line of said Section 2, a distance of 1394.62 feet from the northeast corner of said Section 2 and being also in the south line of Buckeye Drive; 
Thence along the west line of said Lot 13 of Old Plank Road Subdivision S05°18'04?E ~ 448.95 feet to a 5/8 ? rebar in concrete at the north corner of the intersection of Bethel Drive and Hickam Drive; 
Thence along the north line of Bethel Drive, being also the north line of Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 2 per Plat Book 10 at Page 81 the following two (2) courses and distances: 
(1)  Along a curve to the left with a radius of 382.27 feet, a length of 348.37 feet and a chord bearing N72°48'26?W ~ 336.44 feet to a ½? rebar with an orange plastic cap stamped "CSH 1991"; 
(2)  S81°05'08?W ~ 59.33 feet to a ¾? pipe in concrete; 
Thence along the easterly line of Bethel Drive N01°30'13?W ~ 1.12 feet to a ½? rebar with orange plastic cap stamped "CSH 1991"; 
Thence through the lands of the grantor, N03°34'23?E ~ 384.16 feet to the north line of said Section 2 and said Unity Survey; 
Thence along the north line of said Section 2, being also the north line of said Unity Survey and also the south line of Cedar Lake South Plat 4 per Plat Book 25 at Page 23, S84°57'33?E ~ 315.85 feet to the point of beginning. 
The above described parcel contains 130,680 square feet or 3.000 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 21221, § 4, 2-6-12)  
Sec. 1-11.4. - March, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
An irregular shaped parcel of land being two (2) tracts of land described in a warranty deed in Book 3333 at Page 155 and a warranty deed in Book 3333 Page 156, both of the Boone County Records; situate in the east half (½) of the east half (½) of the south half (½) of the southeast quarter (¼) of the northwest quarter (¼) of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri; said parcel being described as follows: 
BEGINNING at the center of said section; thence along the east-west quarter (¼) section line N.88°38'W., 270.5 feet to the southeast corner of Forest Ridge Plat 1 as recorded in Plat Book 38 at Page 60 of said Records; thence along the east and south lines of said Plat N.0°11'E., 155.5 feet; N.14°41'25?E., 440.9 feet; N.0°11'E., 544.5 feet; S.89°49'E., 160.0 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 242 of said Plat on the north-south quarter section line; thence along said line S.0°11'W., 1,132.3 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Ord. No. 21251, § 4, 3-5-12)  
Sec. 1-11.5. - April, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Tract One 
A tract located in the northeast quarter of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri being more particularly described as follows: 
Tract One (1) of Country Farms Subdivision Plat 3 as shown by the plat recorded in Plat Book 40, Page 71, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
Tract Two 
A tract located in the northeast quarter of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri being more particularly described as follows: 
Tract two (2) of Country Farms Subdivision Plat 3 as shown by the plat recorded in Plat Book 40, Page 71, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21292, § 4, 4-16-12)  
Sec. 1-11.6. - June, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Being all of Tract 2 and part of Tract 3 of the survey recorded in Book 696, Page 913, and part of Tract C of the warranty deed recorded in Book 1908, Page 411 and being further described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of said Tract 2; thence along the north line of said Tract 2, S86°35'00E, 250.00 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 2, said point also being on the west line of said Tract C; thence along said west line, N03°25'00?E, 402.49 feet to a point on the south line of the tract of land described by warranty deed recorded in Book 737, Page 674; thence along said south line, S86°35'00?E, 50.00 feet to a point on the east line of said Tract C, said point also being on the west line of Belmont Park Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 29, Page 90; thence along said lines, S03°25'00?W, 630.58 feet to the city limit line; thence along said line, N88°13'00?W, 300.13 feet to a point on the west line of said Tract 3; thence along said line N03°25'00?E, 236.65 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 21327, § 4, 6-4-12)  
Sec. 1-11.7. - July, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land containing fifteen (15) acres, more or less, located in the west half (W ½) of the south west quarter (SW ¼) of Section 34, Township 48 North, Range 13 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri being the tract described by the deed in Book 3227 Page 8 and the tract described by the deed in Book 3227 Page 5 all of the Boone County Records, and being described as follows: All of the land located in the west half (W ½) of the southwest quarter (SW ¼) of said Section 34 lying south of Mill Creek Estates Subdivision as shown by the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 16 Page 13, Records of Boone County, Missouri and lying north of Century Oak Estates as shown by the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 24 Page 40, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21352, § 4, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 1-11.8. - July, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
PARCEL NO. 1: A tract or land in the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri and being further described as follows: BEGINNING at the Northeast corner of an 8.00 acre tract shown by Survey recorded in Book 418, Page 758, Boone County Records, said point being on the west line of Highway 763 North (Old 63 North); thence along said west line of said highway N°03'25?E, 103 feet to the center of an existing driveway; thence N87°34'38?W, 446 feet; thence S2°25'22?W, 102.91 feet to the north line of said Survey (418/758); thence along said north line S87°34'38?E, 450.25 feet to the point of beginning and containing 1.06 acres, more or less. 
PARCEL NO. 2: A tract of land in the South Half (S ½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri as shown by Survey recorded in Book 418, Page 758, Boone County Records, being 8 acres, more or less. 
Except the following: 
A tract of land lying in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter and Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter, of Section 25, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, in the County of Boone, State of Missouri, more particularly described as follows: 
All the grantor's land within a strip of land lying on the left or west side of and adjoining the hereinafter described centerline of Route 763, being 40 feet wide from Route 763 Centerline Station 120+05 to Station 122+34; thence widening on a direct line to 41.5 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 123+03; thence being 41.5 feet wide from Route 763 Centerline Station 123+03 to Station 124+91.31; thence widening on a curve to the left, having a length of 64.06 feet and a radius of 68 feet, to 69.51 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 125+46.81. 
Also, all the grantor's land within a tract of land lying on the left or west side of and adjoining the hereinafter described centerline of Route 763, described as follows: beginning at a point 160 feet left or west of Route 763 Centerline Station 125+46.32; thence in an easterly direction on a direct line to a point 69.51 feet left or west of Route 763 Centerline Station 125+46.81; thence in a northwesterly direction on a direct line to a point 13228 feet left or west of Route 763 Centerline Station 126+10.31; thence in a westerly direction on a direct line to a point 160 feet left or west of Route 763 Centerline Station 126+10.32; thence in a southerly direction on a direct line to the point of beginning. 
The above tracts contain 5,110.45 sq. ft., more or less. 
Also, all the grantor's land within a strip of land for a permanent utility and facility easement lying on the left or west side of and abutting the left or west right of way line of Route 763, being 56.50 feet wide from Route 763 Centerline Station 121+00 to Station 124+91.31; thence widening on a curve to the left, having a length of 45.32 feet and a radius of 53 feet, to 74.73 feet at Station 125+31.31; thence widening on a direct line to 160 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 125+31.32; thence being 160 feet wide from Route 763 Centerline Station 125+31.32 to Station 125+46.32, containing 7297.02 sq. ft., more or less. 
Also, all the grantor's land within a temporary construction easement lying on the left or west side of and abutting the above described permanent utility and facility easement, being 61 feet wide at Route 763 Centerline Station 120+67; thence widening on a direct line to 62 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 122+00; thence widening on a direct line to 66 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 123+00; thence narrowing on a direct line to 64 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 124+00; thence widening to 65 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 125+00; thence widening on a direct line to 92 feet at Route 763 Centerline Station 125+31.31, containing 3,327.88 sq. ft., more or less. 
The centerline of Route 763 is described as following: Commencing at a Certified Land Corner 1¼? iron pipe found at the southeast corner of Section 36, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, as recorded with DNR document 600-21319; thence South 57°38'05? West, a distance of 757.83 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 48+00; thence North 2°28'37? East a distance of 2112.50 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 69+12.50 (= Blue Ridge Road East Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 2°28'37? East a distance of 3.43 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 69+15.93 (= Blue Ridge Road West Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 2°28'37? East a distance of 1018.80 feet to Route 763 Equation Station 79+34.73 BK = P.C. Station 79+36.70 AH; thence on a curve to the right, having a radius of 1,908.63 feet, a distance of 572.20 feet to Route 763 P.T. Station 85+08.90; thence North 19°39'14? East, a distance of 649.50 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 91+58.40 (= Kennesaw Ridge Road Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 19°39'14? East, a distance of 4.23 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 91+62.63 (= Rain Forest Parkway Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 19°39'14? East, a distance of 456.24 feet to Equation Station 96+18.87 BK = P.C. Station 96+20.41 AH; thence on a curve to the left, having a radius of 1,909.28 feet and a length of 608.30 feet, a distance of 295.49 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 99+15.90 (= Dinwiddie Circle Centerline Station 0+00); thence continuing along said curve to the left, having a radius of 1,909.28 feet and a length of 608.30 feet, a distance of 4.17 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 99+20.07 (= American Parkway Centerline Station 0+00); thence continuing along said curve to the left, having a radius of 1,909.28 feet and a length of 608.30 feet, a distance of 308.64 feet to Equation Station P.T. Station 102+28.71 = Station 101+98.41 AH; thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 541.08 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 107+39.49 (= Smiley Lane East Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 2.6 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 107+42.09 (= Smiley Lane West Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 1836.22 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 125+78.31 (= Boone Industrial Boulevard Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 984.96 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 13563.27 (= Brown School Road West Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 4 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 135+67.27 (= Brown School Road East Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 1989.15 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 155+56.42 (= Auburn Hills Circle Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 5.20 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 155+61.62 (= Shalimar Drive Centerline Station 0+00); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 1131.61 feet to Route 763 Centerline Station 166+9323 (= Harvester Road Centerline Station 0+00); thence North l°-23'58? East, a distance of 1733.42 feet to Equation Station 184+26.65 BK = Station 855+47.83 AH (descending stations); thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 747.83 feet to Station 848+00 Route 763 = Station 5+00 Route W; thence North 1°23'58? East, a distance of 1,410.51 feet to POT Station 833+89.49. 
(Ord. No. 21369, § 4, 7-16-12)  
Sec. 1-11.9. - December, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri, being further described as follows: 
All of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 3393, Page 64, of the records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21520, § 4, 12-3-12)  
Sec. 1-11.10. - December, 2012 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being part of the land described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 763, Page 608 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 31, said point also being the southwest corner of Bearfield Meadows, recorded in Plat Book 35, Page 1 and with the lines of said Bearfield Meadows, S 89°34'30?E, 1320.29 feet to the east line of said Section 31; thence leaving the lines of said Bearfield Meadows and with said east line of Section 31, S 1°34'00?W, 697.87 feet to the northeast corner of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 3931, Page 167; thence leaving the east line of said Section 31 and with the north line of said survey, N 89°34'15?W, 1321.29 feet to the east line of Forest Park South, Plat 1, recorded in Plat Book 40, Page 21; thence leaving the north line of said survey and with the east line of said Forest Park South, Plat 1, N 1°38'55?E, 697.80 feet to the point of beginning and containing 21.15 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21521, § 4, 12-3-12)  
Sec. 1-11.11. - February, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri, being the north part of Tract 1 of the survey recorded in Book 1207, Page 660 and being part of Parcel A of the warranty deed recorded in Book 2371, Page 70 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the northwest corner of said Section 15-48-12; thence with the north section line, N89°17'30?E, 671.73 feet to the northwest corner of said Tract 1 and the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning, continuing N89°17'30?E, 400.00 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 1; thence leaving said section line and with the east line of Tract 1, S1°29'00?W, 104.00 feet; thence leaving said east line, S18°31'30?W, 181.85 feet; thence S10°49'00?W, 240.00 feet; thence S40°18'00?W, 80.00 feet; thence S27°15'00?W, 58.00 feet; thence S68°10'00?W, 70.00 feet; thence S84°43'00?W, 110.00 feet; thence N76°10'00?W, 60.00 feet to the west line of said Tract 1; thence with said west line, N1°29'00?E, 641.80 feet to the point of beginning and containing 5.00 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21606, § 4, 2-18-13)  
Sec. 1-11.12. - February, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract located in the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 49 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri being Lot 1 of Brinkman Subdivision as shown in Plat Book 28, Page 79 of the Boone County records and contains 2.55 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21608, § 4, 2-18-13)  
Sec. 1-11.13. - May, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the west half of Section 3, Township 47 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri, being part of the tract described by the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 3478, Page 28 and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 3 lying north and east of U.S. Highway 63 right-of-way and all that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 3 lying north and east of U.S. Highway 63 right-of-way and south of Old Millers Road and containing 25.2 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21667, § 4, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 1-11.14. - May, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land being part of the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being part of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 4082, Page 67 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron stake on the northwest side of Old Providence Road (now Old Plank Road), approximately 450 feet south of the north quarter section line; thence southwest 350 feet on the northwest side of said road to a steel stake; thence northwest 198 feet to a steel pipe; thence approximately north 130 feet to a steel pipe; thence southeast 198 feet to the point of beginning; said tract of land is located south of, and adjacent to Lot 1440 of the Highlands Plat 14-A, a subdivision located in the City of Columbia, Boone County, Missouri, as shown by the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 26, Page 10, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21682, § 4, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 1-11.15. - June, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A single tract of land located in Section 28, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri being further described as follows: 
All of Lot 20 of Country Meadows Subdivision as shown on the Plat recorded in Plat Book 24, Page 26 of the Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21704, § 4, 6-3-13)  
Sec. 1-11.16. - July, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
RDM Development, Ltd. Tract: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri and being described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 1241, Page 444 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Woods Mill Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 31, Page 60 and with the south line thereof, N89°49'00?E, 50.00 feet to the northwest corner of the tract of land described by the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 963, Page 287; thence leaving said south line and with said west line, S0°34'00?W, 454.47 feet to the south line of said section 3; thence with said south line, N89°40'00?W, 50.00 feet to the east line of plat of Lakewood Estates recorded in Book 12, Page 5; thence leaving the south line of said section and with said east line, N0°34'00?E, 454.02 feet to the point of beginning and containing 0.52 acres. 
Robyn Armer Tract: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri and being described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 963, Page 287 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the southeast corner of said Section 3 and with the south line thereof, West, 670 feet to the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning and continuing with the south line of said Section, 307 feet; thence leaving said south line, north parallel with the east line of said Section (3) three, 440 feet; thence east parallel with the south line of said Section, 307 feet; thence south parallel with the east line of said section, 440 feet to the point of beginning and containing 3.1 acres more or less. 
The intent of this description is to be an excerpt of the deed description. This description is not from an actual property boundary survey. 
Jo Ann Allen Trust Tract: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri and being described by the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 3868, Page 55 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the southeast corner of said Section 3 and with the south line thereof, west, 470 feet to the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning and continuing with the south line of said section, 200 feet; thence leaving said south line, north parallel with the east line of said Section (3) three, 440 feet; thence east parallel with the south line of said section, 200 feet; thence south parallel with the east line of said section, 440 feet to the point of beginning and containing 2.0 acres more or less. 
The intent of this description is to be an excerpt and clarification of the deed description. This description is not from an actual property boundary survey. 
Brian Painter Tract: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri and being described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3303, Page 36 and being more particularly described as follows: 
The west two hundred (200) feet of the 4.74 acre tract shown and described by the survey recorded in Book 289, Page 124, except that part used for county road purposes along the south line thereof and containing 2 acres more or less. 
The intent of this description is to be an excerpt and clarification of the deed description. This description is not from an actual property boundary survey. 
(Ord. No. 21744, § 4, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 1-11.17. - August, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Lot Seventeen (17) of Fairway Meadows Block One (1) as shown by plat of said subdivision recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 2, records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21767, § 4, 8-19-13)  
Sec. 1-11.18. - August, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land thirty (30) acres, more or less, being all that part of the East Half (E½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-nine (29), Township Forty-eight (48) North, Range Thirteen (13) West, that lies south of the Missouri Midland Railroad, otherwise known as the McBaine-Columbia Spur of the MKT Railroad, and north and east of the center of Hinkson Creek, all in Boone County, Missouri, including that part subdivided from, and now known as Lot 1 of Turner Station Subdivision, as recorded in Plat Book 11, Page 128, of the Boone County Records. 
ALSO: A strip of land in the East Half (E½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Section Twenty-nine (29), being part of the abandoned railroad right-of-way which lies south of the centerline of the Missouri Midland Railroad, otherwise known as the McBaine-Columbia Spur of the MKT Railroad, and north of, and adjacent to, the above described thirty (30) acres. 
ALSO: A portion of the abandoned railroad right-of-way known as the Columbia Branch of the MKT Railroad right-of-way as the same lies south of Lot 33 of Bellview Acres, Block No. 2 as shown by the Plat recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 141, of the Records of Boone County, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 33 of Bellview Acres, Block 2 as shown by the Plat recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 141; Thence South along the same course as the East line of said Lot 33 to its intersection with the centerline of the abandoned McBaine-Columbia Spur of the MK&T Railroad as shown by Tract B of the survey recorded in Book 986, Page 776 of said County Records; Thence West along said centerline to the point of beginning for Tract A as shown by said survey; Thence North along the line shown by said survey as being the center of Hinkson Creek to the Southwest corner of said Lot 33; Thence East along the South line of said Lot 33 82.68 feet to the beginning. 
ALSO: A strip of land in the East Half (E½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Section Twenty-nine (29) being part of the abandoned railroad right-of-way which lies north of the centerline of the Missouri Midland Railroad, otherwise known as the McBaine-Columbia Spur of the MKT Railroad, and south of, and adjacent to, Bellview Acres, Block No. 1, Replat No. 1, as recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 176 of said County Records, lying East of Tract A of the survey recorded in Book 986, Page 776 of said County Records, and West of the Westerly right-of-way of Scott Boulevard. 
This description is intended to combine the descriptions recorded in Book 903, Page 627, Book 903, Page 628, and Book 1002, Page 21 and the vacated area north of the Missouri Midland Railroad, otherwise known as the McBaine-Columbia Spur of the MKT Railroad. 
(Ord. No. 21768, § 4, 8-19-13)  
Sec. 1-11.19. - September, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri and being all of the land shown in the surveys recorded in Book 2920, Page 90, and Book 3080, Page 187 and described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 4045, Page 119 and containing 35.84 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21788, § 4, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 1-11.20. - October, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the north half of Section 6, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, and being Tract 1 as shown by the survey in Book 1041 Page 351 and being the tract described by the deed in Book 4034 Page 11 both of the Boone County Records; except for that part conveyed to Boone County, Missouri by an instrument recorded in Book 1133 Page 206 of the Boone County Records, said tract containing 5.11 acres. 
(Ord. No. 21831, § 4, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 1-11.21. - December, 2013 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the north half of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 49 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri, being the south part of the survey in Book 318 Page 382 of the Boone County Records, also being the tract described by the deed in Book 4063 Page 128 of the Boone County Records, said tract being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of the said survey; thence S 87°52' E, 295 feet to the south east corner of said survey; thence north and parallel to the west line of said north half of the south half of the north east quarter a distance of 137 feet to a point; thence in a westerly direction 295 feet, more or less to a point on the west line of said survey; thence south along the west line of said survey 134 feet to the beginning and containing 0.92 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 21925, § 4, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 1-11.22. - January, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Starting at the southwest corner of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; thence N.89°35'E, along the section line, 1,562.6 feet to the east line of a survey recorded in Book 374 at Page 831, the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
From the POINT OF BEGINNING N.0°10'W., 2,699.5 feet to the northeast corner thereof and described as being the ¼ section line; thence N.89°40'E., along the ¼ section line, 1,096.8 feet to a stone at the center of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; thence S.89°23'E., along the ¼ section line, 2,018.4 feet to the east line of Boone County Surveys #2571 and 2572; thence S.0°42'W., along the line of said surveys, 650.0 feet to the middle of St. Charles Road; thence following the middle of said road, S.63°42'W., 150.0 feet; S.47°12'W., 150.0 feet; S.41°58'W., 2,266.9 feet; S.50°42'W., 175.0 feet; S.71°42'W., 125.0 feet to the east line projected of Fairway Meadows Subdivision; thence S.0°18'E., along said line, 22.0 feet to the northeast corner of Fairway Meadows Subdivision and being the south line of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; thence S.89°35'W., along said line, 1,084.6 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Ord. No. 21951, § 4, 1-21-14)  
Section 1-11.23. - January, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A portion of land located in the northeast fractional quarter of Section 5, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri. Lying north of State Highway "K" and west of Scott Boulevard, being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the east quarter corner of said Section 5; 
Thence S89°25'20?W along the east-west quarter section line, a distance of 1,035.00 feet; 
Thence N00°34'40?W, a distance of 46.00 feet; 
Thence N07°57'00?E, a distance of 187.41 feet; 
Thence N16°28'30?E, a distance of 348.29 feet; 
Thence N04°10'40?E, a distance of 136.68 feet; 
Thence S47°48'25?E, a distance of 170.00 feet; 
Thence N42°10'35?E, a distance of 120.00 feet; 
Thence N89°43'15?E, a distance of 441.05 feet; 
Thence S53°29'25?E, a distance of 199.71 feet; 
Thence N89°43'15?E, a distance of 90.00 feet; 
Thence S00°16'45?E, a distance of 550.00 feet to the point of beginning. 
The above described tract of land contains 14.36 acres and is a portion of the same land described by deed recorded in Book 1859 Page 219 and Book 495 Page 565 of the Boone County records. Subject to easements and restrictions of record or not of record, if any. 
(Ord. No. 21952, § 4, 1-21-14)  
Sec. 1-11.24. - May, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West in Boone County, Missouri, and being the property described by a survey recorded in Book 3924, Page 97 of the Boone County Records and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of said survey, said corner also being the northwest corner of Lot 1 of Unity Center Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 46, Page 4 of the Boone County Records, thence along the west line of said Lot 1 of Unity Center Subdivision S03°34'25?W, 384.16 feet to a point on the north right-of-way line of Bethel Drive, said point also being the northeast corner of Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 3 as recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 178 of the Boone County Records; thence along said north lines S74°27'30?W, 287.53 feet; thence leaving said north lines N15°32'30?W, 25.00 feet; thence S74°27'30?W, 25.00 feet; thence S15°32'30?E, 25.00 feet; thence S74°27'30?W, 100.00 feet to the northwest corner of said Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 3; thence along the west side of said plat, S15°32'30?W, 190.00 feet to the southwest corner of said plat; thence along the south line of said plat, N74°27'30?E, 365.03 feet to a point on the west line of Lot 21 of Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 81 of the Boone County Records; thence leaving said south line and following the west line of said Lot 21 S01°30'15?E, 33.73 feet to a point on the northerly line of Lot 27 of said Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 2; thence S60°47'45?W, 230.05 feet; thence S46°19'45?W, 219.52 feet; thence N60°18'15?W, 49.14 feet; thence S29°41'45?W, 200.00 feet; thence S60°18'15?E, 115.00 feet; thence N29°41'45?E, 200.00 feet, thence N60°18'15?W, 49.15 feet; thence N46°19'45?E, 212.72 feet; thence N60°47'45?E, 57.22 feet, thence S15°28'10?E, 78.93 feet to the northwest corner of the Hickam Drive right-of-way; thence along the west line said right-of-way S04°05'30?W, 50.00 feet to the southwest corner of said right-of-way, said corner also being the northwest corner of Lot 26 of said Old Plank Road Subdivision Plat No. 2; thence leaving said right-of-way and following along the west line of said Lot 26 S16°16'40?W, 374.29 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 26, said corner also being on the north line of Lot 1 of Rocky Creek Estates Plat 2 as recorded in Plat Book 40, Page 99 of the Boone County Records; thence along the north line of said Lot S78°53'45?W, 447.53 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 1, said corner also being on the easterly line of an easement for street purposes as recorded in Book 2045, Page 46 of the Boone County Records; thence along said west line of said survey N00°38'00?E, 116.00 feet; thence N89°56'55?W, 14.00 feet; thence N00°38'00?E, 24.01 feet; thence along a 428.00 foot curve to the right, 24.50 feet, said curve having a chord which bears N02°16'25?E, 24.50 feet; thence S86°05'10?E, 14.00 feet; thence N06°07'30?E, 149.00 feet; thence N83°44'30?W, 14.00 feet; thence N06°15'30?E, 211.66 feet; thence along a 488.00 foot curve to the left 136.13 feet, said curve having a chord that bears N01°44'00?W, 135.69 feet; thence N09°43'30?W, 299.00 feet; thence N80°16'30?E, 18.00 feet; thence N06°17'50?W, 167.00 feet; thence N34°41'50?W, 122.00 feet; thence S61°26'25?W, 18.00 feet; thence N28°33'35?W, 115.06 feet; thence N61°26'25?E, 71.90 feet, thence N28°38'50?W, 1.51 feet to a point on the north line of said Section 2, said point being S84°57'35?E, 151.62 feet from the northwest corner of said Section 2, T47N, R13W; thence along the north line of said Section 2, said line also being the south line of Cedar Lake Block 1 per Plat Book 11, Page 185, Cedar Lake South Plat 3 per Plat Book 21, Page 54 and Cedar Lake South Plat 4 per Plat Book 25, Page 23, all of the Boone County Records, S84°57'35?E, 794.32 feet to the point of beginning and containing 669,399 square feet or 15.37 acres, more or less. 
( Ord. No. 22046, § 4, 5-5-14 )  
Sec. 1-11.25. - June, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section Nineteen (19), Township Forty-nine (49) North, Range Twelve (12) West, more particularly described by Survey recorded in Book 1375, Page 179 Boone County, Missouri records. 
( Ord. No. 22075, § 4, 6-2-14 )  
Sec. 1-11.26. - July, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in Section 10, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being described by the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 968, Page 34 and being shown by the survey recorded in Book 2404, Page 56 and being more particularly described as follows: 
All of Tract 2 of the survey recorded in Book 2404, Page 56 and containing 131.19 acres. 
( Ord. No. 22127, § 4, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 1-11.27. - October, 2014 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following 
A tract located in the west half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 27, Township 49 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri, being the tract described by the deed in Book 1003 Page 577 of the Boone County Records. 
( Ord. No. 22237, § 4, 10-6-14 )  
Sec. 1-11.28. - March, 2015 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Tract 1 
A tract of land located in the West half of Section 1 and the East half of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, in Boone County, Missouri, being all of a tract of land as described in the Warranty Deed recorded in book 3837, page 91, also being part of Lot 101 of Somerset Village Plat 1 recorded in plat book 46, page 44, and Lot 203 of Somerset Village Plat 2 recorded in plat book 46, page 45, and further described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Lot 203; thence along the Eastern boundary line of said Lot S 00°29'40?W 1492.35 feet; thence along a curve to the right, having a radius of 715.00 feet, a distance of 295.53 feet, the chord being S 12°20'10?W 293.43 feet to a point on the Eastern line of Lot 101 of said Somerset Village Plat 1; thence leaving the Eastern line of said Lot N 65°49'20?W 348.74 feet; thence along a curve to the left, having a radius of 575.00 feet, a distance of 9.80 feet, the chord being N 66°18'40?W 9.80 feet; thence S07°36'20?W 273.05 feet; thence S 46°07'30?W 221.05 feet; thence N 89°58'15?W 209.19 feet; thence S 73°22'00?W 75.89 feet; thence S 05°27'00?W 138.03 feet; thence S 22°52'05?E 232.93 feet; thence S 07°24'00?E 83.61 feet; thence S 26°52'55?W 136.43 feet; thence N 63°07'05?W 43.71 feet; thence N 71°32'40?W 123.63 feet; thence along a curve to the left, having a radius of 149.95 feet, a distance of 33.99 feet, the chord being N 81°27'40?W 33.92 feet to the West line of Lot 101 of said Somerset Village Plat 1; thence along the West line of said Lot S 00°13'25?W 45.14 feet to the Southeast corner of said tract described in the Warranty Deed recorded in book 3837, page 91; thence along the South line of said tract N 89°00'50?W 2018.61 feet; thence along the West line of said tract N 00°28'30?E 1122.05 feet; thence along the North line of said tract S 89°59'50?E 1291.48 feet; thence S 01°41'40?E 288.29 feet; thence along the North line of said tract S 89°59'50?E 712.39 feet to the West line of said Lot 101; thence along the West line of said Lot 101 and Lot 203 N 00°13'25?E 1757.33 feet to the North line of said Lot 203; thence S 89°20'40?E 588.53 feet; thence continuing along said North line S 89°32'35?E 444.88 feet to the point of beginning and containing 95.45 acres. 
Tract 2 
A tract of land located in the West half of Section 1 and the East half of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, in Boone County, Missouri, being part of Lot 101 of Somerset Village Plat 1 recorded in plat book 46, page 44, and part of Lot 203 of Somerset Village Plat 2 recorded in plat book 46, page 45, and further described as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Lot 101; thence along the Eastern boundary line of said Lot along a curve to the right having a radius of 715.00 feet, a distance of 53.36 feet, the chord being S 22°02'20?W 53.34 feet to the point of beginning; 
Thence continuing along the Eastern boundary line of said Lot along a curve to the right having a radius of 715.00 feet, a distance of 176.09 feet, the chord being S 31°13'55?W 175.64 feet; thence S 38°17'15?W 220.36 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 900.00 feet, a distance of 607.96 feet, the chord being S 18°56'10?W 596.47 feet; thence leaving the East line of said Lot S 89°33'55?W 229.94 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 283.00 feet, a distance of 67.97 feet, the chord being N 83°33'15?W 67.81 feet; thence N 76°40'25?W 15.44 feet; thence N 63°07'05?W 49.91 feet; thence N 26°52'55?E 136.43 feet; thence N 07°24'00?W 83.61 feet; thence N 22°52'05?W 232.93 feet; thence N 05°27'00?E 138.03 feet; thence N 73°22'00?E 75.89 feet; thence S 89°58'15?E 209.19 feet; thence N 46°07'30?E 221.05 feet; thence N 07°36'20?E 273.05 feet; thence along a non-tangent curve to the right having a radius of 575.00 feet, a distance of 9.80 feet, the chord being S 66°18'40?E 9.80 feet; thence S 65°49'20?E 348.74 feet to the point of beginning and containing 8.47 acres. 
Tract 3 
A tract of land located in the West half of Section 1, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, in Boone County, Missouri, being part of Lot 102 of Somerset Village Plat 1 recorded in plat book 46, page 44, and further described as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Lot 102; thence along the northern boundary line of said Lot along a curve to the right having a radius of 608.00 feet, a distance of 100.41 feet, the chord being N 85°14'55?W 100.30 feet to the point of beginning; 
Thence leaving said boundary line S 00°03'55?E 130.00 feet; thence S 05°13'35?E 61.93 feet; thence S 14°44'20?W 72.72 feet; thence S 23°36'55?W 67.45 feet; thence S 61°49'55?W 107.99 feet; thence S 03°41'10?E 101.81 feet; thence S 46°29'20?W 48.26 feet; thence S 29°16'20?W 76.52 feet; thence S 06°55'05?W 96.03 feet; thence S 07°08'10?E 24.26 feet; thence S 89°56'05?W 458.39 feet to the West line of said Lot 102; thence along the boundary of said Lot 102, along a non-tangent curve to the right having a radius of 800.00 feet, a distance of 520.10 feet, the chord being N 19°39'45?E 510.99 feet; thence N 38°17'15?E 220.36 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 815.00 feet, a distance of 139.89 feet, the chord being N 33°22'15?E 139.72 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet, a distance of 44.89 feet, the chord being N 71°18'55?E 40.81 feet; thence S 65°49'20?E 104.02 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 608.00 feet, a distance of 155.94 feet, the chord being S 73°10'15?E 155.51 feet to the point of beginning and containing 7.70 acres. 
Tract 4 
A tract of land located in the East half of Section 2, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, in Boone County, Missouri, being part of Lot 101 of Somerset Village Plat 1 recorded in plat book 46, page 44, and further described as follows: 
Beginning at the Southwest corner of said Lot 101; thence along the Western boundary line of said Lot N 01°03'25?E 595.48 feet; thence N 00°13'25?E 45.14 feet; thence leaving said Western line along a non-tangent curve to the right having a radius of 149.95 feet, a distance of 33.99 feet, the chord being S 81°27'40?E 33.92 feet; thence S 71°32'40?E 123.63 feet; thence S 63°07'05?E 93.62 feet; thence S 76°40'25?E 15.44 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 283.00 feet, a distance of 67.97 feet, the chord being S 83°33'15?E 67.81 feet; thence N 89°33'55?E 229.94 feet to the East boundary line of said Lot 101; thence along the said boundary line S 00°26'05?E 415.78 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet, a distance of 41.89 feet, the chord being S 39°33'55?W 38.57 feet; thence S 79°33'55?W 545.45 feet to the point of beginning and containing 6.59 acres. 
Tract 5 
A tract of land located in the West half of Section 1, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, in Boone County, Missouri, being part of Lot 102 of Somerset Village Plat 1 recorded in plat book 46, page 44, and further described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Lot 102; thence along the boundary line of said Lot S 00°03'55?E 1001.15 feet; thence along a non-tangent curve to the left having a radius of 815.00 feet, a distance of 63.18 feet, the chord being S 83°15'55?W 63.17 feet; thence S 81°02'40?W 208.68 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 2050.00 feet, a distance of 52.94 feet, the chord being S 80°18'15?W 52.94 feet; thence S 79°33'55?W 416.40 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet, a distance of 52.36 feet, the chord being N 50°26'05?W 45.96 feet; thence N 00°26'05?W 387.56 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 800.00 feet, a distance of 20.57 feet, the chord being N 00°18'05?E 20.57 feet; thence leaving said boundary line N 89°56'05?E 458.39 feet; thence N 07°08'10? W 24.28 feet; thence N 06°55'05?E 96.03 feet; thence N 29°16'20?E 76.52 feet; thence N 46°29'20?E 48.26 feet; thence N 03°41'10?W 101.81 feet; thence N 61°49'55?E 107.99 feet; thence N 23°36'55?E 67.45 feet; thence N 14°44'20?E 72.72 feet; thence N 05°13'35?W 61.93 feet; thence N 00°03'55?W 130.00 feet to the northern boundary line of said Lot 102; thence along said northern boundary line along a non-tangent curve to the left having a radius of 608.00 feet, a distance of 100.41 feet, the chord being S 85°14'55?E 100.30 feet to the point of beginning and containing 9.60 acres. 
( Ord. No. 22373 , § 4, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 1-11.29. - April, 2015 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following: 
Tract 1 
A tract of land containing 80.00 acres, more or less, being part of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section 1, township 48 North, range 12 West, shown and described by Survey recorded in Book 3263, Page 7, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
Tract 2 
Lot 201 of Somerset Village Plat 2, recorded in the Boone County Recorder of Deeds Office at Plat Book 46, Page 45. 
Tract 3 
Lot 103 of Somerset Village Plat 1, recorded in the Boone County Recorder of Deeds Office at Plat Book 46, Page 44. 
( Ord. No. 22393 , § 4, 4-6-15)  
Sec. 1-11.30. - April, 2015 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Lot 202 of Somerset Village Plat 2, recorded in the Boone County Recorder of Deeds Office at Plat Book 46, Page 45. 
( Ord. No. 22394 , § 4, 4-6-15)  
Sec. 1-11.31. - April, 2016 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Lot 1, Wyatt Lane Acres, Block 2 
Lot One (1) of Wyatt Lane Acres, Block 2 as shown by the plat recorded in Plat Book 22, Page 47, Records of Boone, County, Missouri. 
Lot 2, Wyatt Lane Acres, Block 2 
Lot Two (2) of Wyatt Lane Acres, Block 2 as shown by the Plat Recorded in Plat Book 22, Page 47, Records of Boone, County, Missouri. 
( Ord. No. 22772, § 4, 4-4-16 )  
Sec. 1-11.32. - May, 2016 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 25 T49N R13W, in Boone County, Missouri, being the tracts described by surveys recorded in book 949 page 456 and in book 977 page 236, except that part conveyed to the State of Missouri, by deed recorded in book 3194 page 107, said tract containing 70.56 acres. 
( Ord. No. 22801, § 4, 5-2-16 )  
Sec. 1-11.33. - August, 2016 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract located in the southwest quarter of Section 19, Township 49 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri, West of the 5th principal meridian being all of the tract described by the deed in Book 4541 Page 97 of the Boone County Records and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the south corner of Lot 2 as shown by Gas Light Industrial Park Plat 3 in Book 48 Page 53 of the Boone County Records: Said point being on the south line of said Section 19 thence with the south line of said Section 19 S 89°31'55" W, 149.66 feet to a point on the east right-of-way line of Highway 763; thence with said east right-of-way line N 00°00'15" E, 80.00 feet to the southwest corner of said Gas Light Industrial Park Plat 3; thence with the lines of said Gas Light Industrial Park Plat 3 and said Lot 2 N 89°31'55" E, 149.66 feet; thence S 00°00'20" W, 80.00 feet to the point of beginning and containing 0.27 acres. This tract is subject to a permanent utility and facility easement granted to Missouri Highway and Transportation Commission in Book 3165 Page 121 of the Boone County Records. 
(Ord. No. 22882 , § 4, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 1-11.34. - November, 2016 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 35, Township 49 North, Range 12 West (lying west of State Highway "PP"); 
Commencing at a Type "A" aluminum monument found at the northwest corner of said Section 35 as shown by the survey in Plat Book 39, Page 60 of the Boone County Records; thence S00°33'15"W along the west line of said Section 35 and the east line of Maryland Heights Subdivision, a distance of 431.54 feet (A ½" iron pipe found 0.29 East) to the southwest corner of a survey recorded in Book 801, Page 392 and the point of beginning; 
Thence continue S00°33'15"W along the west line of said Section 35 and the east line of said subdivision, a distance of 934.50 feet (A ¾" iron pipe found 0.42 West) to the northwest corner of the survey in Book 422, Page 946; thence along the north line of said survey S88°57'15"E, a distance of 1331.97 feet to a ¾" iron pipe found at the northeast corner of said survey and the west right of way line of State Highway "PP"; thence N00°51'50"E along the west right of way line of State Highway "PP", a distance of 948.12 feet to a ½" iron pipe found at the southeast corner of a survey recorded in Book 509, Page 316; thence N89°32'20"W along the south line of the survey recorded in Book 509 Page 316 and Book 801 Page 392, a distance of 1337.06 feet to the point of beginning. 
The above described tract of land contains 28.84 acres more or less and is the same land described by deeds recorded in Book 4608 Page 98 of the Boone County Records. Subject to any easement or restriction of record or not of record, if any. 
( Ord. No. 22993 , § 4, 11-21-16)  
Sec. 1-11.35. - November, 2016 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Tract 1 (south 40 acre remnant) 
A tract of land located in the west half of Section 17, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being part of the land described by the trustees deeds recorded in Book 1375, Page 385, Book 3188, Page 67, and Book 3188, Page 69, and being part of Tract 1, as shown by the survey recorded in Book 3182, Page 105 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 17, and the southwest corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35, and with the north line of said southwest quarter, N 83°11'40"W, 934.13 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 1; thence leaving the north line of said southwest quarter of Section 17 and with the lines of said Tract 1, S 1°03'00"W, 1215.13 feet; thence N 88°38'05"W, 371.63 feet; thence S 34°29'15"W, 101.96 feet; thence S 72°16'50"W, 78.46 feet; thence N 72°02'30"W, 242.02 feet; thence N 88°12'10"W, 520.15 feet to the southeast corner of the tract described by the trustees deed recorded in Book 4279, Page 143, thence leaving the lines of said Tract 1 and with the lines of the tract described by said trustees deed recorded in Book 4279, Page 143, N 37°27'35"E, 164.44 feet; thence N 21°46'45"E, 188.56 feet; thence N 2°52'10"E, 361.81 feet; thence N 8°17'00"W, 361.83 feet; thence N 14°09'15"W, 320.35 feet; thence S 83°09'55"E, 657.19 feet; thence N 6°50'05"E, 66.00 feet; thence N 83°09'55"W, 777.69 feet to the west line of said Section 17; thence leaving the lines of the tract described by said trustees deed recorded in Book 4279, Page 143; and with the west line of said Section 17, N 1°13'25"E, 1282.39 feet to the north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 17; thence leaving the west line of said Section 17 and with said north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, S 83°11'40"E, 266.53 feet to the approximate center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39; thence with the center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, S 72°29'10"E, 285.50 feet; thence S 61°02'45"E, 467.55 feet; thence S 53°27'30"E, 194.50 feet; thence S 71°08'50"E, 191.80 feet; thence N 73°57'40"E, 133.37 feet; thence N 33°42'30"E, 57.10 feet to the southwest corner of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601; thence leaving said center of the Main Channel Of Perche Creek as described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, and with the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, N 64°50'45"E, 420.12 feet to the westernmost corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3-A, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 65; thence leaving the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A, N 63°19'55"E, 119.74 feet; thence S 31°30'45"E, 130.72 feet to the west line of Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35; thence leaving the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, S 1°19'10"W, 578.48 feet; thence S 83°13'10"E, 261.85 feet; thence S 1°19'40"W, 659.79 feet to the point of beginning and containing 90.80 acres. 
Excepting from the above described tract: a tract of land located in the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being part of the land described by the deeds recorded in Book 4569, Pages 80 and 81 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 17, and the southwest corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35, and with the north line of said southwest quarter, N 83°11'40"W, 934.13 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 1; thence with the north line of said southwest quarter of Section 17, N 83°11'20"W, 312.53 feet; thence leaving said north line, N 4°00'10"E, 251.59 feet; thence N 7°21'50"E, 60.46 feet; thence N 82°55'35"W, 220.00 feet; thence S 6°48'20"W, 29.80 feet; thence N 87°47'10"W, 180.74 feet; thence N 70°40'30"W, 672.79 feet to the west line of said Section 17; thence with the west line of said Section 17, N 1°13'25"E, 899.65 feet to the north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 17; thence leaving the west line of said Section 17 and with said north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, S 83°11'40"E, 266.53 feet to the approximate center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39; thence with the center of the Main Channel Of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, S 72°29'10"E, 285.50 feet; thence S 61°02'45"E, 467.55 feet; thence S 53°27'30"E, 194.50 feet; thence S 71°08'50"E, 191.80 feet; thence N 73°57'40"E, 133.37 feet; thence N 33°42'30"E, 57.10 feet to the southwest corner of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601; thence leaving said center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek as described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, and with the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, N 64°50'45"E, 420.12 feet to the northwest corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3-A, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 65; thence leaving the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A, N 63°19'55"E, 119.74 feet; thence S 31°30'45"E, 130.72 feet to the west line of Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35; thence leaving the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, S 1°19'10"W, 578.48 feet; thence S 83°13'10"E, 261.85 feet; thence S 1°19'40"W, 659.79 feet to the point of beginning and containing 50.23 acres. 
This remaining tract containing 40.57 acres. 
Tract 2 (north 50 acres) 
A tract of land located in the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Columbia, Boone County, Missouri and being part of the land described by the deeds recorded in Book 4569, Pages 80 and 81 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 17, and the southwest corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35, and with the north line of said southwest quarter, N 83°11'40"W, 934.13 feet to the northeast corner of said Tract 1; thence with the north line of said southwest quarter of Section 17, N 83°11'20"W, 312.53 Feet; thence leaving said north line, N 4°00'10"E, 251.59 feet; thence N 7°21'50"E, 60.46 feet; thence N 82°55'35"W, 220.00 feet; thence S 6°48'20"W, 29.80 feet; thence N 87°47'10"W, 180.74 feet; thence N 70°40'30"W, 672.79 feet to the west line of said Section 17; thence with the west line of said Section 17, N 1°13'25"E, 899.65 feet to the north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 17; thence leaving the west line of said Section 17 and with said north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, S 83°11'40"E, 266.53 feet to the approximate center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39; thence with the center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek and the south line of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, S 72°29'10"E, 285.50 feet; thence S 61°02'45"E, 467.55 feet; thence S 53°27'30"E, 194.50 feet; thence S 71°08'50"E, 191.80 feet; thence N 73°57'40"E, 133.37 feet; thence N 33°42'30"E, 57.10 feet to the southwest corner of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601; thence leaving said center of the Main Channel of Perche Creek as described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 3075, Page 39, and with the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, N 64°50'45"E, 420.12 feet to the northwest corner of Stoneridge Estates, Plat 3-A, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 65; thence leaving the lines of the tract described by said warranty deed recorded in Book 690, Page 601, and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A, N 63°19'55"E, 119.74 feet; thence S 31°30'45"E, 130.72 feet to the west line of Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, recorded in Plat Book 33, Page 35; thence leaving the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3-A and with the lines of said Stoneridge Estates Plat 3, S 1°19'10"W, 578.48 feet; thence S 83°13'10"E, 261.85 feet; thence S 1°19'40"W, 659.79 feet to the point of beginning and containing 50.23 acres. 
( Ord. No. 22994 , § 4, 11-21-16)  
Sec. 1-11.36. - July, 2017 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 33, Township 49 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri being the tract described by Warranty Deed recorded in Book 4499 at Page 89 of the Boone County records and being further described as all of Lot 17 of Wellington Estates Plat 4 as recorded in plat Book 32 at Page 16 of said county records. 
( Ord. No. 23224 , § 4, 7-3-17)  
Sec. 1-11.37. - August, 2017 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A part of Lot 35A, Arrowhead Lake Estates, Plat No. 2, recorded in Plat Book 38, Page 78 of the Boone County records, being part of the tract described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 1138, Page 260, shown by the survey recorded in Book 4744, Page 139 and located in the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the east quarter corner of said Section 4-47-13; thence with the lines of said Lot 35A, S 1°29'50"W, 1377.44 feet to the southeast corner thereof; thence S 89°49'20"W, 105.38 feet to the southwest corner thereof; thence N 5°08'40"E, 887.06 feet; thence 358.68 feet along a 425.00-foot radius curve to the left, said curve having a chord, N 19°02'00"W, 348.13 feet; thence leaving the lines of said Lot 35A, N 46°47'20"E, 240.57 feet to the point of beginning and containing 2.52 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23272 , § 4, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 1-11.38. - November, 2017 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A small tract of land located in the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section 2, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, described as follows: Beginning at an iron stake on the North line of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of said Section on the West right-of-way line of Old Plank Road; thence in a southwesterly direction along the West line of said road 262 feet to an iron stake; thence West and North 90 feet to an iron stake; thence North and West 200 feet to an iron stake; thence East along the North line of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of said Section 332 feet to the point of beginning, all in Boone County, Missouri. 
Subject to building lines, conditions, restrictions, easements and zoning regulations of record if any. 
(Ord. No. 23374 , § 4, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 1-11.39. - December, 2017 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the Northwest Quarter of Section 22, the Southwest Quarter of Section 15 and the Southeast Quarter of Section 16, all of Township 48 North Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri and being the land described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 4733, Page 181 and the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 4733, Page 180 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning on the north right-of-way line of State Route WW at the Southwest Corner of Cedar Grove Subdivision as shown in the survey recorded in Book 374, Page 112 and with the north line thereof, N 42°44'40"W, 212.13 feet; thence N 41°45'45"W, 174.24 feet; thence 275.26 feet along a 746.29-foot radius curve to the left, said curve having a chord N 52°19'45"W, 273.70 feet; thence N 62°53'40"W, 522.53 feet; thence N 62°38'40"W, 774.62 feet; thence N 59°47'00"W, 100.12 feet; thence N 62°38'40"W, 234.35; thence N 64°51'15"W, 166.02 feet; thence N 63°07'40"W, 342.26 feet; thence N 62°36'40"W, 597.41 feet; thence 167.71 feet along a 1402.81-foot radius curve to the right, said curve having a chord N 59°11'10"W, 167.61 feet; thence N 55°45'40"W, 161.21 feet to the Southeast Corner of survey recorded in Book 829 Page 433; thence leaving said north right-of-way line and with the east line of said survey N 0°03'35"W, 708.70 feet; thence N 1°08'35"E, 477.34 feet; thence N 2°10'05"E, 128.92 feet to the Southwest Corner of the survey recorded in Book 4216 Page 23; thence leaving said east line and with the south line of said survey recorded in Book 4216 Page 23, S 89°32'50"E, 1945.32 feet to the east line of said Section 16; thence with the north line of said Southwest Quarter of said Section 15, S 89°57'25"E, 1317.11 feet to the west line of said Cedar Grove Subdivision; thence leaving said north line and with said west line of Cedar Grove Subdivision S 1°35'25"W, 3181.37 feet to the point of beginning and contains 161.84 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23409 , § 4, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 1-11.40. - April, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the Southeast Quarter of Section 5, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri and being lot one (1) of River Hills Estates, as shown by the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 11, Page 214, records of Boone County, Missouri. (Said tract of land is also shown and described by the survey thereof, recorded in Book 432, Page 77, records of Boone County, Missouri) and containing 10.00 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23510 , § 4, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 1-11.41. - May, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land containing 46.95 acres, more or less, located in the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section Eight (8), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Thirteen (13) West, of the Fifth (5th) Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being a part of Tracts One (1) and Two (2) of Boone County Survey No. 7602, and being shown and described by the survey thereof recorded July 22, 1994 as Document No. 16070 in Book 1096, Page 183, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
And also a tract of land located in the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section Eight (8), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Thirteen (13) West, of the Fifth (5th) Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being shown and described as Tract Two (2) of Boone County Survey No. 7602, EXCEPTING therefrom that part located within the survey recorded July 22, 1994 as Document No. 16070 in Book 1096, Page 183, Records of Boone County, Missouri, and ALSO EXCEPTING therefrom that part located within the public road right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 23536 , § 4, 5-21-18)  
Sec. 1-11.42. - July, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 16, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, Boone County, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron, said iron being the Northwest Corner of said section 16, Township 48 North, Range 12 West; thence south along the section line, 584.1 feet set an iron; thence North 88° 15' East, 746.2 feet, set an iron; thence North 584.1 feet, set an iron; thence South 88° 15' West along the section line, 746.2 feet to the point of beginning, containing 10 acres, more or less as shown by the survey recorded in Book 279, Page 389 of the Boone County Records. 
(Ord. No. 23589 , § 4, 7-16-18)  
Sec. 1-11.43. - October, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Lot 3, Lewis and Smarr Subdivision, PB 11 pg 106, Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 23657 , § 4, 10-1-18)  
Sec. 1-11.44. - October, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the Southeast Quarter of Section 29 and the Southwest Quarter of Section 28, all in Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri and being part of a tract of land as described and recorded in Book 2750, Page 72 and being all of Tract 6 as shown on a survey recorded in Book 765, Page 714 and containing 10.36 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23658 , § 4, 10-1-18)  
Sec. 1-11.45. - November, 2018 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Tract One 
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section Thirty-Two (32), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, Boone County, Missouri, and being part of the land as described by the trustees deed recorded in Book 4630, Page 176, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northwest Corner of Lot 97 of Bristol Lake Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 39, Page 88, thence from the point of beginning, N 89°54'35"W, 1320.43 feet to the west line of Section 32; thence with said west line N 1°43'10"E, 150.50 feet; thence leaving said west line, S 89°45'10"E, 235.85 feet; thence N 19°44'55"E, 293.85 feet; thence N 12°50'45"W, 320.85 feet; thence N 67°46'10"E, 352.27 feet; thence S 50°25'50"E, 222.01 feet; thence S 58°32'00"E, 553.18 feet; thence S 56°33'45"E, 429.82 feet; thence S 14°07'10"E, 214.13 feet to the north line of said bristol lake plat 1; thence with said north line N 89°54'35"W, 327.85 feet to the point of beginning and containing 18.88 acres. 
Tract Two 
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section Thirty-Two (32), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, Boone County, Missouri, and being described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 3813, Page 94, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Lot 97 of Bristol Lake Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 39, Page 88, and with the lines of said plat, S 1°22'55"W, 396.00 feet; thence N 89°55'00"W, 617.65 feet to the point of beginning: 
Thence from the point of beginning, N 89°55'00"W, 170.41 feet; thence leaving the lines of said Bristol Lake Plat 1, N 23°21'55"W, 172.01; thence N 66°38'05"E, 55.44 feet; thence S 78°06'40"E, 207.81 feet; thence S 6°29'15"W, 138.21 feet to the point of beginning and containing 0.79 acres. 
Tract Three 
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section Thirty-Two (32), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, Boone County, Missouri, as described by the trustees deed recorded in Book 2669, Page 52, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northwest Corner of Lot 97 of Bristol Lake Plat 1 recorded in Plat Book 39, Page 88, and with the lines of said plat, S 1°22'55"W, 396.00 feet; thence N 89°55'00"W, 617.65 feet; thence leaving lines of said plat, N 6°29'15"E, 138.21 feet; thence N 78°06'40"W, 207.81 feet; thence S 66°38'05"W, 55.44 feet; thence S 23°21'55"E, 172.01 feet to north line of said plat; thence with said line N 89°55'00"W, 534.71 feet to the west line of Section 32; thence with said west line, N 1°43'10"E, 396.24 feet; thence leaving said west line, S 89°54'35"E, 1320.43 feet to the point of beginning and containing 11.22 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23675 , § 4, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 1-11.46. - February, 2019 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Parcel #1 
A tract located in the Northwest Quarter and the East half of Section 31, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri, being part of the tract described by the deed in Book 905 Page 499 of the Boone County Records; also being all that part of Tract C of the survey in Book 813 Page 949 and amended by affidavit of correction recorded in Book 839 Page 938 all of the Boone County records lying south of the north line of said Section 31 and containing 107.76 acres more or less. 
Parcel #2 
A tract located in Section 31, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri being part of the tract described in the trustees quit claim deed in Book 1225 Page 187 of the Boone County Records, also being Tract 1 of the survey in Book 1224 Page 131 of the Boone County Records, except for that part of said Tract 1 shown by the survey in Book 968 Page 112 of the Boone County Records and contains 13.38 acres more or less. 
Parcel #3 
A tract located in Section 31, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri, being the tract described in the trustees deed in Book 1225 Page 185 of the Boone County Records, also being Tract 2 of the survey in Book 1224 Page 131 of the Boone County Records and contains 109.53 acres more or less. 
Parcel #4 
A tract located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 47 North, Range 14 West, the Northwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 47 North, Range 13 West and the Southwest Quarter of Section 31, Township 48 North, Range 13 West, Boone County Missouri, being the tract described by the deed in Book 786 Page 770 of the Boone County Records and contains 80.5 acres more or less. 
Parcel #5 
A tract located in the Northwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 47 North, Range 13 West and the East Half of Section 1, Township 47 North, Range 14 West, Boone County, Missouri, being the tract described by the deed in Book 792 Page 375 of the Boone County Records and contains 90 acres more or less. 
Parcel #6 
A tract located in Section 1, Township 47 North, Range 14 West, Boone County, Missouri being the tract described by the deed in Book 378 Page 984 and shown by the survey in Book 374 Page 793 all of the Boone County Records and containing 52.39 acres. 
(Ord. No. 23781 , § 4, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 1-11.47. - February, 2019 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land located in the North Half of Section 1, Township 47 North, Range 13 West, Boone County, Missouri and being the land shown in the surveys recorded in Book 279, Page 264 and Book 366, Page 507 and described in warranty deeds recorded in Book 285, Page 296 and Book 370, Page 121 and also the West 40 feet of the West Half of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 1, lying south of the tract shown in the survey recorded in Book 279, Page 264 as described by the warranty deed recorded in Book 464, Page 567 and an irregular shaped tract described by the quit-claim deed recorded in Book 283, Page 356 and containing 16.9 acres in all. 
(Ord. No. 23782 , § 4, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 1-11.48. - May, 2019 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Tract 1 
A tract of land containing 0.52 acres, more or less, located in the east half (E ½) of the west half (W ½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section Ten (10), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, of the Fifth (5th) Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being shown and described as Tract One (1) of the survey recorded April 15, 1970 as Document No. 1800 in Book 388, Page 212, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
Tract 2 
A tract of land containing 1.1 acres, more or less, located in the east half (E ½) of the west half (W ½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section Ten (10), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, of the Fifth (5th) Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being shown and described as Tract Two (2) of the survey recorded April 15, 1970 as Document No. 1800 in Book 388, Page 212, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
Tract 3 
Tract One (1) of a survey recorded in Book 509, Page 997, Records of Boone County, Missouri, being located in the east half (E ½) of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section 10, Township 48 North, Range 12 West, lying south of St. Charles Road. 
(Ord. No. 23862 , § 4, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 1-11.49. - June, 2019 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
A tract of land containing 0.24 acres, more or less located in the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section Ten (10), Township Forty-Eight (48) North, Range Twelve (12) West, of the Fifth (5th) Principal Meridian, in Boone County, Missouri, being shown and described by the survey thereof recorded in Book 428, Page 840, Records of Boone County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 23885 , § 4, 6-3-19)  
Sec. 1-11.50. - November, 2019 extension of corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Columbia shall include the following land: 
Parcel #1 
A tract of land being part of that parcel described in Book 3597 Page 0109, Book 4592 Page 0169, Book 4592 Page 0170 and Book 4592 Page 0171, located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 10, Township 48 North, Range 12 West of the 5th p.m. Boone County, Missouri and being more particularly described as follows. 
Commencing at the North Quarter Corner of said Section 10; thence along the north line of said Section 10 N89°55'00"E (bearing per Boone County Survey No. 7633) 171.99 feet to the point of beginning of the herein described tract; thence continuing along said north line N89°55'00"E 1,203.10 feet; thence departing said north line S31°46'57"W 173.55 feet; thence N58°13'03"W 30.00 feet to the northwest right-of-way line of East St. Charles Road; thence along said northwest right-of-way line S31°46'57"W 675.00 feet; thence S37°17'04"W 7.43 feet to the north line of Logan Acres per plat recorded in Plat Book 11 Page 302; thence along said north line N88°17'04"W 725.52 feet; thence departing said north line N00°04'53"W 687.95 feet to the point of the beginning and containing 15.37 acres more or less. 
Parcel #2 
A tract of land being part of that parcel described in Book 3597 Page 0109 and located in the Northeast Quarter Section 10, Township 48 North, Range 12 West of the 5th p.m. Boone County, Missouri and being more particularly described as follows. 
Beginning at the North Quarter Corner of said Section 10; thence along the north line of said Section 10 N89°55'00"E (bearing per Boone County Survey No. 7633) 171.99 feet; thence departing said north line S00°04'53"E 687.95 feet to the north line of Logan Acres per plat recorded in Plat Book 11 Page 302; thence along said north line N88°17'04"W 169.79 feet; thence N00°16'23"W 682.62 feet to the point of the beginning and containing 2.69 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 24067 , § 4, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 1-12. - City seal. 
(a)  Device. The device of the seal of the city shall be an eagle. Such seal shall be so engraved as to represent by its impression the device aforesaid, surrounded by a scroll inscribed with the words "Seal of the City of Columbia, Mo.," in Roman capitals. 
(b)  Form and size. The city seal shall be circular and not more than two (2) inches in diameter. 
(c)  Clerk to affix when ordinance requires. The city clerk shall keep the seal of the city in his office, and shall affix the same to all instruments of writing of whatever nature, whenever required by ordinance, resolution or order of the city council, or on the requisition of the mayor. 
(d)  Clerk to affix seal required by individual, fee. The city clerk is authorized to affix the seal to all documents, whenever required thereto by any individual, and he shall be entitled to receive from the applicant for each certificate and seal the sum of fifty cents ($0.50). 
(Code 1964, §§ 1.130—1.160)  
Sec. 1-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21287, § 1, adopted April 2, 2012, repealed § 1-13, which pertained to Conley Poor Fund and derived from §§ 1.170, 1.180 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - Ordinances saved from repeal generally. 
Nothing contained in this Code of Ordinances or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city not inconsistent with such Code; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, or in any way affecting any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing traffic regulations for specific streets or portions thereof, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property; 
(13)  Any ordinance levying taxes, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any subdivision ordinance or ordinance accepting the plat of a subdivision; 
(15)  Ordinance No. 6033, dividing the city into sprinkling, oiling, repairing, surfacing and resurfacing streets; 
(16)  Any ordinance enacted after January 3, 1984. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which is repealed by this Code.  
Secs. 1-15—1-15.12. - Repealed by Ord. No. 13790, § 2, 9-7-93.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport administration generally, § 3-21 et seq.; administration of animal and fowl regulations, § 5-26 et seq.; administration and enforcement of minimum property standard code, § 6-86 et seq.; disaster preparedness organization, § 7-16 et seq.; fire department, § 9-36 et seq.; administration of health and sanitation, § 11-16 et seq.; administration and enforcement of beverage container regulations, § 11-62 et seq.; commission on human rights, § 12-16 et seq.; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 14-26 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 15; offenses against the administration of justice, § 16-191 et seq.; offenses affecting government, § 16-221 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 17-16 et seq.; parks and recreation department, § 17-26 et seq.; pensions generally, Ch. 18; personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations, Ch. 19; planning department, § 20-21 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 20-36 et seq.; police department, § 21-16 et seq.; public works department, § 22-16 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Public clocks to use official time. 
All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained at the expense of the city shall be set and run according to the official time as provided in chapter 1 of this Code. It is hereby made the duty of the officer or other person having control and charge of such buildings and premises to see that such clocks or other timepieces are set and run in accordance with official time. 
(Code 1964, § 2.023; Ord. of 4-4-66)  
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of each year. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget and accounting year. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
(Code 1964, § 2.020) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 33.  
Sec. 2-3. - General fund. 
There is hereby established a fund designated as the "general fund," which shall be credited with all general revenue receipts and all other receipts and levies for particular purposes for which no special fund has been established by the charter, by state law or by ordinance, except that no special tax or fund voted by the people or no special trust fund in which the city is in any way an interested party shall be included therein. 
(Code 1964, § 2.010) 
Charter reference— Department of finance, § 25 et seq. 
Cross reference— Finance department, § 2-206 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Secs. 2-4—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Council, § 5 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Election; qualifications; powers and duties specified. 
The city council shall be elected, and shall have the qualifications and powers and shall perform the duties prescribed by the charter. 
(Code 1964, § 2.030)  
Sec. 2-21.1. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  Every vacancy in any elective office shall be filled by the council for a period running to the next regular election, unless such period exceeds one (1) year. In the latter case, the council shall make provision for a special election. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy is to be filled by the council, it shall be done at a regular or special meeting after the date the vacancy shall become effective by the nomination of one (1) or more persons and the appointment by majority vote of the council as a whole of one (1) of those persons to fill the vacancy. The person who held the office which has become vacant shall not vote on his replacement. 
(Code 1964, § 2.035; Ord. No. 10097, § 1, 3-5-84)  
Sec. 2-22. - Meeting times; calling special meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Monday evenings of each month, and adjourned meetings whenever the council may deem necessary. A regular meeting shall not be held on a city holiday listed in chapter 19 but shall be held on the day following the holiday. A majority of the council may cancel or change the date of a regular meeting; provided, that the council shall meet not less than once each month. The mayor, the city manager or any two (2) council members may call a special meeting of the council at any time. Notice of any such meeting may be provided to each council member by telephone and/or electronic mail and shall conform to the requirements of section 2-25. 
(Code 1964, §§ 2.040, 2.120; Ord. No. 12805, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 22141, § 1, 7-21-14 ) 
Charter reference— Council meetings, § 14.  
Sec. 2-23. - Definitions. 
As used in sections 2-23 through 2-25.9 unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms mean: 
Closed meeting, closed record, or closed vote. Any meeting, record or vote closed to the public. 
Public governmental body. The city council, any city board, commission, committee, task force or similar group appointed by the city council or mayor; any committee or subcommittee of the city council or of any city board, commission, committee, task force or similar group appointed by the city council or mayor; any city agency, department or division. 
Public meeting. Any meeting of a public governmental body at which any public business is discussed, decided, or public policy formulated, whether the meeting is conducted in person or by means of communications equipment, including but not limited to, conference call, video conference, Internet chat, or Internet message board. "Public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of members of a governmental body for ministerial or social purposes when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this article. 
Public record. Any record whether written or electronically stored retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey, memorandum, or other document or study prepared for the public government body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in whole or in part by public funds including records created or maintained by private contractors under an agreement with the city. The term "public record" shall not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice, opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decision-making process of the public governmental body, unless such records are retained by the public governmental body or presented at a public meeting. 
Public vote. Any vote whether conducted in person, by telephone, or by any other electronic means cast at any public meeting of any public governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11642, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1987 repealed §§ 2-23, 2-24, 2-25.1—2-25.4 and enacted new provisions designated as §§ 2-23, 2-24, 2-25.1—2-25.940 to read as herein set out. Former sections 2-23, 2-24, 2-25.1—2-25.4 derived from Ord. No. 10618, § 1, (2.041, 2.042, 2.044—2.047) adopted June 17, 1985 and Ord. No. 11324, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1986.  
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings, votes, records to be open to public. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all public meetings of public governmental bodies shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all public records of public governmental bodies shall be open to the public for inspection and copying. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all public votes shall be recorded, and if a roll call is taken, as to attribute each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of the individual member of the public governmental body. 
(d)  Sound recordings of city council meetings which are retained by the city clerk shall be open to the public only after the minutes of the meetings have been prepared and approved. Thereafter, such recordings shall be open to the public at such reasonable times as shall be determined by the city clerk, and subject to such reasonable rules as shall be imposed by the city clerk. 
(e)  Any person may record any open public meeting by audiotape, videotape, or other electronic means provided the recording is done in a manner that does not disrupt the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Sec. 2-24.1. - Transparency policy. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of each department of the city to carry out its mission with full transparency to the public. Any data collected in the course of its duties shall be made available to the public in a timely fashion. Data, reports and other information resulting from any activities conducted by such department of the city in the course of its duties shall be easily accessible by any member of the public. 
(b)  Each department of the city shall broadly interpret any request for information under RSMo 610.023: 
(1)  Even if such request for information does not use the words "sunshine request," "open records request," "public records request" or any such similar wording; 
(2)  Even if the communication is simply an inquiry as to the availability or existence of data or information; and 
(3)  Regardless of the format in which the communication is made, including electronic mail, facsimile, internet, postal mail, in person, telephone or any other format. 
(c)  Any failure by a department of the city to release information shall, in addition to any other applicable violation of law, be considered a violation of the transparency policy of the city and shall constitute a breach of the public's trust. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to limit or exceed the requirements of the provisions in RSMo ch. 610, nor shall this section require different treatment of a record considered closed or confidential under RSMo 610.021 than what is required under such section. 
(Ord. No. 22895 , § 1, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 2-25. - Notice of meetings. 
(a)  All public governmental bodies shall give notice of the time, date, and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda, in a manner reasonably calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered. If the meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means, the notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting will be conducted and the designated location where the public may observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by Internet chat, Internet message board, or other computer link, it shall post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting. Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings of a particular governmental body concurrent with the notice being made available to the members of the particular governmental body. Reasonable notice shall also include posting the notice on the bulletin board in the first floor hallway of the City Hall Building, 701 East Broadway and on a bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly designated for that purpose in the building in which the meeting is to be held. 
(b)  Notice conforming with all of the requirements of subsection 2-25(a) shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays when the facility where the required notice is posted is closed, prior to the commencement of any meeting of a public governmental body unless, for good cause, such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much notice as is reasonably possible shall be given. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance by members of the public, and at a time reasonably convenient to the public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special access to the meeting to handicapped or disabled individuals. 
(c)  When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated in the minutes. 
(d)  A formally constituted subunit of a parent public governmental body may conduct a meeting without notice as required by this section during a lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental body. 
(e)  If another provision of law requires a manner of giving specific notice of a meeting, hearing or an intent to take action by a governmental body, compliance with that section shall constitute compliance with the notice requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10618, § 1(2.043), 6-17-85; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20568, § 1, 2-15-10)  
Sec. 2-25.1. - Closed meetings and votes. 
Except to the extent otherwise required by ordinance, a public governmental body is authorized to close meetings and votes, to the extent they relate to the following: 
(1)  Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body and any confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body or its representatives and its attorneys. 
(2)  Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely affect the legal consideration therefor. 
(3)  Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by a public governmental body when personal information about the employee is discussed. However, any vote on a final decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire, promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting where such action occurs; provided, however, that any employee so affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during the seventy-two-hour period before such decision is made available to the public. As used in this section, the term "personal information" means information relating to the performance or merit of individual employees. 
(4)  Preparation, including any discussions on behalf of a public governmental body or its representatives for negotiations with employee groups. 
(5)  Scientific and technological innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest. 
(6)  Any meeting of the city community development loan and grant committee pertaining to financial data disclosed by an applicant for housing rehabilitation assistance shall be a closed meeting. 
(7)  Confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work product. 
(8)  Any other subject which may be discussed and voted upon at a closed meeting under RSMo ch. 610. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Sec. 2-25.2. - Procedure for closing meetings. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, no meeting or vote may be closed without an affirmative public vote of the majority of a quorum of the public governmental body. The vote of each member of the public governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote by reference to a specific section of RSMo ch. 610 shall be announced publicly at an open meeting of the governmental body and entered into the minutes. 
(b)  A public governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote shall give notice of the time, date and place of such closed meeting or vote and the reason for holding it by reference to the specific exception allowed under the provisions of RSMo ch. 610. Such notice shall comply with the procedures set forth in section 2-25 for notice of a public meeting. 
(c)  Any meeting or vote closed pursuant, to section 2-25.1 shall be closed only to the extent necessary for the specific reason announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies shall not discuss any business in a closed meeting which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to justify the closed meeting. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 2-25.3. - Closed records. 
All city records to the extent they relate to the following shall be closed records to the extent allowed by law: 
(1)  Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body and any confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body or its representatives and its attorneys. However, any settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent or entity representing its interest or acting on behalf or with its authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf of a public governmental body as its insured, shall be made public upon final disposition of the matter or upon the signing by the parties of the settlement agreement, unless, prior to final disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy considerations of RSMo 610.011, however, the amount of any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental body shall be disclosed. 
(2)  Legal work product shall be considered a closed record. 
(3)  Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any public record approving a contract relating to the leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the real estate. 
(4)  Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by a public governmental body when personal information about the employee is recorded. However, the record of any vote on a final decision, when taken by a public governmental body to hire, fire, promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting where such actions occurred; provided, however, that an employee so affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during the seventy-two-hour period before such decision is made available to the public. As used in this section, the term "personal information" means information relating to the performance or merit of individual employees. 
(5)  Nonjudicial mental or physical health proceedings involving identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological, or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment. 
(6)  Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again. 
(7)  Welfare cases of identifiable individuals. 
(8)  Preparation, including any discussion or work product, on behalf of a public governmental body or its representatives for negotiations with employee groups. 
(9)  Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation thereof. 
(10)  Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the specifications are officially approved by the public governmental body or the specifications are published for bid. 
(11)  Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed, or all proposals are rejected. 
(12)  Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment, except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions, salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public agencies once they are employed as such. 
(13)  Records which are protected from disclosure by law. 
(14)  Public records relating to scientific and technological innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest. 
(15)  Any record of the city community development loan and grant committee pertaining to financial data disclosed by an applicant for housing rehabilitation assistance. 
(16)  Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting of abuse and wrongdoing. 
(17)  Confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work product; provided, however, that all final audit reports issued by the auditor including the annual independent financial audit report shall be open records and the city manager may declare individual internal audit reports to be open records. 
(18)  Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted or maintained by any city department responsible for law enforcement, public safety, first response, or public health for use in responding to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases, or contracts made by any city department in implementing these guidelines or policies. The city council finds that disclosure of such records would impair the city's ability to protect the safety or health of persons and further states that the public interest in nondisclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the records. 
(19)  Existing and proposed security systems and structural plans of real property owned or leased by the city, and information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public safety. The city council finds that disclosure of such records would impair the city's ability to protect the security and safety of persons and real property, and that the public interest in nondisclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the records. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating to security systems shall be open except to the extent provided in this section. 
(20)  Records that identify the configuration of components or the operation of a computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, and would allow unauthorized access to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, of a public governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data file or database containing public records. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, including the amount of moneys paid by, or on behalf of, a public governmental body for such computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, shall be open; and 
(21)  Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or authorization codes that are used to protect the security of electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a person or entity doing business with a public governmental body. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to close the record of a person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person using a credit card or other method of payment for which reimbursement is made by a public governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 17456, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Sec. 2-25.4. - Availability of public records. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city council's records. 
(b)  Each department head shall be the custodian of the department's records unless the department head appoints one (1) or more record custodians and notifies the city clerk of each appointment. 
(c)  The head of each city office or department responsible for staffing a city board, commission, committee, task force or similar group shall be the record custodian of the group's records unless the head of the office or department appoints another person to serve as record custodian and notifies the city clerk of the appointment. 
(d)  The city clerk shall maintain a complete list of the identity, location and telephone number of each record custodian for each city department, board, commission, committee, task force and similar group. 
(e)  Each public governmental body shall make available for inspection and copying by the public of that body's public records. No person shall remove original public records from the office of a public governmental body or its custodian without written permission of the designated custodian. 
(f)  Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third business day following the date that the request is received by the custodian of records of a public governmental body. If records are requested in a certain format, the public body shall provide the records in the requested format, if such format is available. If access to the public record is not granted immediately, the custodian shall give a detailed explanation of the cause for further delay and the place and earliest time and date that the record will be available for inspection. This period for document production may exceed three (3) days for reasonable cause. 
(g)  If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon request, a written statement on the grounds of such denial. Such statement, shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of the third business day following the date that the request for the statement is received. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 11, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Sec. 2-25.5. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, each public governmental body shall provide access to and, upon request, furnish copies of public records subject to the following: 
(1)  Fees for copying public records shall not exceed ten cents ($0.10) per page for a paper copy not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches, with the hourly fee for duplicating time not to exceed the average hourly rate of pay for clerical staff of the city. Research time required for fulfilling records requests may be charged at the actual cost of research time. Based on the scope of the request, the city shall produce the copies using employees that result in the lowest amount of charges for search, research and duplication time. Prior to producing copies of the requested records, the person requesting the records may request the city to provide an estimate of the cost to the person requesting the records. Documents may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge when the public governmental body determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the public governmental body and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. 
(2)  Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer facilities, recording tapes or disks, video tapes or films, pictures, maps, slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices, and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches shall include only the cost of copies, staff time which shall not exceed the average hourly rate of pay for staff of the city required for making copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk, tape or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints, or plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is required beyond the customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or information, the fees for compliance may include the actual cost of such programming. 
(b)  Payment of such copying fees may be requested prior to the making of copies. 
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 15733, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 18249, § 1, 9-20-04) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Sec. 2-25.6. - Written policy on release of information. 
The provisions of sections 2-23 through 2-25.5 shall constitute the written policy of the city council and all City of Columbia public governmental bodies regarding the release of information on any meeting, record or vote. City public governmental bodies may supplement this policy with additional written policies not inconsistent with the ordinances of the City of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 9-21-87) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 2-23.  
Secs. 2-25.7—2-25.9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15733, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1998 repealed §§ 2-25.7—2-25.9, which pertained to closed meetings and derived from Ord. No. 11642, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1987.  
Sec. 2-26. - Authority to compel attendance of witnesses. 
By a majority vote of its members, the council may compel, by the issuance of process, the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers and records relating to any subjects under investigation in which the interest of the city is involved, and shall have power to call upon the proper officer of the city or county to execute such process. 
(Code 1964, § 2.090) 
Charter reference— Council powers, § 18.  
Sec. 2-27. - Power to administer oaths. 
Any council member or the city clerk may administer oaths or affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.100)  
Secs. 2-28—2-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Rules and order of business to be determined by ordinance, § 8. 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Rules adopted. 
The rules and order of business following in this division are hereby officially adopted for the transaction of the business of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.110) 
Charter reference— Council to provide manner of compelling attendance, § 8.  
Sec. 2-42. - Quorum; calling meetings; adjournment; compelling attendance. 
A majority of the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but any two (2) members may have a call of the council or may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the attendance of absent members and make an order for their censure or fine. 
(Code 1964, § 2.130) 
Charter reference— Council to provide manner of compelling attendance, § 8.  
Sec. 2-43. - Absence from meetings, generally. 
No member shall absent himself from meetings of the council unless he has leave or is sick and unable to attend or is otherwise prevented by circumstances beyond his control; and any member absenting himself without having such an excuse may be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five dollars ($5.00), unless such fine is remitted by consent of a majority of the members of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.140)  
Sec. 2-44. - Duties of mayor at meetings. 
At the hour designated for council meetings, the mayor shall call the council to order, and after roll call, if a quorum is present, he shall cause the minutes of the last preceding meeting to be read for correction and approval. He shall preserve order and decorum and decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.160) 
Charter reference— Mayor to preside at council meetings, § 10.  
Sec. 2-45. - Mayor pro tem. 
The council shall select from among the council members a mayor "pro tempore, " who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. If a vacancy should occur, the mayor "pro tempore" shall become mayor for the completion of the unexpired term, unless that term is for a period exceeding one (1) year. In the absence of the mayor "pro tempore, " the council may select one (1) of its members present to preside at council meetings, who shall be styled "acting mayor pro tempore." 
(Code 1964, § 2.170) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.  
Sec. 2-46. - Order of business. 
The order of business of the council, unless otherwise determined, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Introductory items: 
a.  Pledge of Allegiance; 
b.  Roll call; 
c.  Approval of previous minutes; 
d.  Approval and adjustment of agenda; 
e.  Finalization of consent agenda—Council and public to indicate any items on which comment is requested. 
(2)  Special items. 
(3)  Appointment to boards and commissions. 
(4)  Scheduled public comment. 
(5)  Public hearings, with or without bills. 
(6)  Old business (items not included on consent agenda): 
a.  Ordinances: 
1.  Second reading by title; 
2.  Third reading by council bill number; 
3.  Final consideration of ordinances. 
b.  Resolutions: Final consideration of resolutions previously introduced. 
(7)  Consent agenda, which shall be all bills and resolutions ready for final consideration except bills requiring an advertised public hearing, or bills on which comment is requested by any member of the city council or the public, or bills requiring a super majority vote. 
a.  Second and third reading by council bill number of all bills on the consent agenda; 
b.  Reading of resolutions by number; 
c.  Final consideration of consent agenda. 
(8)  Resolutions not on consent agenda. 
(9)  Introduction and first reading of ordinances by council bill number. 
(10)  Reports and petitions. 
(11)  General comments by public, council and staff. 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1964, § 2.180; Ord. No. 10017, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 12913, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 14821 § 1, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 18212, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 20710, § 1, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 20847, § 1, 1-3-11)  
Sec. 2-47. - Consent agenda procedure. 
The city manager may, at his discretion, place any item of business on the consent agenda, provided the item of business does not involve any advertised public hearing, does not require a super majority vote, and as to which no request has been made by a city council member or other person to discuss the matter. The consent agenda shall be prepared by the city manager. An item of business placed on the consent agenda may be removed from such agenda at any time prior to the finalization of the consent agenda as set forth in section 2-46 of this chapter. An item of business shall be automatically removed from the consent agenda if a request is made by a council member or a citizen that they wish to speak or have discussion on the matter. An item included on the consent agenda shall not be debated or discussed by city council members nor shall any person have a right to speak on said matter unless the person has requested an opportunity to speak on the matter prior to the finalization of the consent agenda. Items of business contained on the consent agenda shall be voted upon by council considering the consent agenda in its entirety and shall not be taken up for consideration as separate matters, except that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit a city council member from voting individually on each separate item shown on the consent agenda. 
A vote by a city council member for adoption of the consent agenda shall mean that the council member has requested that his vote be recorded as an aye vote for each separate item on the consent agenda and shall be recorded as such. A vote against adoption of the consent agenda shall be recorded as a nay vote on each item placed on the consent agenda and shall be recorded as such. Provided, however, a city council member, when casting an aye vote or nay vote, may specifically exclude from such vote for approval or disapproval of the consent agenda specific items on the agenda, and in such event the city clerk shall record the exceptions accordingly. 
(Code 1964, § 2.185)  
Sec. 2-47.1. - Agenda preparation. 
(a)  The city manager shall prepare the agenda for council meetings in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and ordinance. He shall place such matters upon the agenda as may be requested by any council person and those which he presents as head of city administration. 
(b)  In the event that any matter requested by any council person to be presented to the council in the form of a report, ordinance or resolution requires the expenditures of significant staff time or of public monies over and above those costs inherent in the administration of city government, the city manager shall inform the council person. The council person shall present such request to the council in the form of a motion to instruct the city manager and staff to prepare such report, ordinance or resolution. 
(c)  Suggestions from city boards and commissions for staff reports, ordinances or resolutions shall be presented to the council in the form of a report. Neither staff time nor public monies shall be expended in the preparation of any staff report, ordinance or resolution until the council has by motion instructed the city manager and staff to prepare such document or, in the instance of an ordinance or resolution which does not require significant staff time, until a council person has requested such preparation. Any action which may be initiated by any board or commission pursuant to authority granted by the charter, ordinance or statute is specifically exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 10664, § 1(2.187), 8-5-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10664, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 1985 amended Ch. 2 of the Code 1964 by enacting a new § 2.187, which provisions have been included herein at the editor's discretion as § 2-47.1.  
Sec. 2-48. - Addressing chair. 
When a member is about to speak, he shall respectfully address himself to the presiding officer, but shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair. 
(Code 1964, § 2.190)  
Sec. 2-49. - Naming speaker. 
When two (2) or more members address themselves to the presiding officer at once, the presiding officer shall name the person who is to speak first, the other having preference to speak next. 
(Code 1964, § 2.200)  
Sec. 2-50. - Number of speeches; disrespect. 
No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without permission of the council, nor more than once until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken; and in all discussion disrespectful language or personalities shall be avoided. 
(Code 1964, § 2.210)  
Sec. 2-51. - Interrupting speaker. 
While a member is speaking, other members shall not hold private discourses or in any other manner interrupt the speaker. 
(Code 1964, § 2.220)  
Sec. 2-52. - Calling member to order. 
A member called to order shall immediately desist from speaking unless permitted to explain. If there is no appeal, the decision of the chair shall be conclusive, but if the member appeals to the council from the decision of the chair, the council shall decide the question without debate. 
(Code 1964, § 2.230)  
Sec. 2-53. - Voting requirements; abstentions. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 2-53.1, every member who shall be present when a vote is taken on a question shall vote on the question unless excused by a majority of the council. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 2-53.1, every member who intends to abstain shall state the reasons for the abstention, and shall request council permission to abstain. The council shall vote on the request prior to commencement or continuance of the vote. 
(1)  Except for votes under section 29-6.4(n)(1)(ii)(E), an abstention shall be counted with the majority and, if the question before the council requires a super majority for passage, the abstention shall be counted to reach the required super majority. 
(2)  In the event of an abstention on a tie vote, the abstention shall not be counted with either side to break the tie. 
(Code 1964, § 2.240; Ord. No. 10104, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 13097, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 17541, § 1, 1-6-03; Ord. No. 23117 , § 3, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 2-53.1. - Disclosure of interests; abstentions. 
(a)  Every council member who has a substantial personal or private interest in any bill or measure proposed or pending before the council shall file a written report of the nature of the interest with the city clerk. The city clerk shall record the statement in the council minutes. A council member who has a substantial personal or private interest in any bill or measure pending before the council shall disqualify himself from voting on any matter relating to such interest. 
(b)  The following definitions apply to this section: 
Business entity. A corporation, association, firm, partnership, proprietorship, or business entity of any kind or character. 
Dependent child. All children, stepchildren, foster children and wards under the age of eighteen (18) residing in the person's household and who receive in excess of fifty (50) percent of their support from the person. 
Substantial interest. Ownership by the individual, the individual's spouse or the individual's dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly, of ten (10) percent or more of any business entity, or of an interest having a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, or the receipt by an individual, the individual's spouse or the individual's dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, of a salary, gratuity, or other compensation or remuneration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more per year from any individual, partnership, organization, or association within any calendar year. 
Substantial personal or private interest in any measure, bill, order or ordinance. Any interest in a measure, bill, order or ordinance which results from a substantial interest in a business entity. 
(Ord. No. 14962, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 15341, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 15734, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 16159, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 16566, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 17008, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 17808, § 1, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 18198, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 18647, § 1, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 19166, § 1, 8-21-06; Ord. No. 19637, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 20027, § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 20393, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 20717, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 21056, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21404, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 21786, § 1, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 22171, § 1, 8-18-14 ; Ord. No. 22547, § 1, 8-17-15 ; Ord. No. 22898 , § 1, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 23270 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 23978 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 2-54. - Requirements for considering resolution. 
No resolution may be considered by the council unless it is in writing and has been prepared and approved as to form by the city counselor's office, had a resolution number assigned to it by the city manager's office, and has been placed on the agenda at or before the time for approval and adjustment of the agenda in the regular order of business as set forth in section 2-46. 
(Code 1964, § 2.250)  
Sec. 2-55. - Policy resolutions. 
Whenever the mayor and/or city manager, during the preparation of the agenda for a council meeting, or a majority of the council at a council meeting, determines that a resolution sets policy, the resolution shall be designated a "policy resolution" and may not be considered at the meeting at which it is introduced for the first time, but must be held over and placed on the agenda of the following meeting under old business, and public comment, if requested, shall be permitted. 
(Code 1964, § 2.260)  
Sec. 2-56. - Withdrawing motions. 
Any motion may be withdrawn before a vote is taken. 
(Code 1964, § 2.270)  
Sec. 2-57. - Amendment or substitute motion or proposition. 
No new motion or proposition shall be admitted under color of an amendment or of a substitute for the pending motion or proposition which does not relate to the subject matter of the original motion or proposition. 
(Code 1964, § 2.280)  
Sec. 2-58. - Motions or resolutions when question is under debate. 
When a question is under debate, no motion or proposition shall be entertained except for the previous question, to amend, to refer to a committee or to an officer of the city, to lay on the table, or to adjourn. 
(Code 1964, § 2.290)  
Sec. 2-59. - When motion to adjourn in order. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except: first, when a member is in possession of the floor; second, while the ayes and nays are being called; third, while the members are voting; fourth, when it was the last preceding motion; and fifth, when it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
(Code 1964, § 2.300)  
Sec. 2-60. - Previous question. 
The previous question shall be in this form: "Shall the main question be now put?" It shall only be admitted on demand of two (2) members and sustained by a vote of four-fifths of the members present, and until decided, shall preclude all amendments and further debate, and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1964, § 2.310)  
Sec. 2-61. - When motion to amend and debate precluded. 
A motion for the previous question, or to lay the question on the table, until decided, shall preclude all amendments and debate on the main question; and a motion to amend, or to adjourn it to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all further amendment to the main question. 
(Code 1964, § 2.320)  
Sec. 2-62. - Deciding priority of business; objecting to reading paper. 
All questions relating to the priority of business to be acted on shall be decided without debate; and when the reading of paper is called for, and the same is objected to by any member, it shall be determined by a vote of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.330)  
Sec. 2-63. - When ayes and nays taken. 
If any two (2) members require it, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered on the minutes; but the ayes and nays shall not be taken unless called for previous to any vote upon the question. 
(Code 1964, § 2.340)  
Sec. 2-64. - Removal, return of papers and documents. 
No member of the council or other person shall take any paper or document from the clerk's office without leave, and all papers and documents withdrawn therefrom, with leave, shall be returned by the person withdrawing the same uninjured and undefaced. All papers or documents delivered to a member of the council or officer by the clerk, for the purpose of reporting thereon, shall be returned by the member of the council or officer at the time of making the report. 
(Code 1964, § 2.350)  
Sec. 2-65. - How rules repealed, altered or amended. 
The rules provided in this division shall not be repealed, altered or amended except by ordinance receiving the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.360) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 8.  
Sec. 2-66. - Punishment for violation. 
For violation of any of its rules or order of business, or for conduct at a meeting unbecoming a council member, the council may, by majority vote, punish the offender for contempt and fine him, for the use of the city, in a sum not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00), to be recovered from him as any other penalty. 
(Code 1964, § 2.370)  
Secs. 2-67—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STYLE, PASSAGE AND REVIVAL OF ORDINANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Legislative proceedings, § 15. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Passage of ordinances, generally. 
(a)  No ordinance shall be passed except by bill, and no bill shall become an ordinance unless on its final passage a majority of all members elected to the council shall vote therefor, and the yeas and nays are entered on the journal. Every bill shall be read three (3) times before its passage, by title or council bill number. Not more than two (2) of the readings shall be at the same legislative session; and at least one week shall elapse between the introduction and final passage of any bill, except in the case of an emergency bill. 
(b)  No bill shall be considered by the council unless it is in writing, has been prepared and approved as to form by the city counselor's office, a bill number assigned to it by the city manager's office, and it has been placed on the agenda at or before the time for approval and adjustment of the agenda in the regular order of business as set forth in section 2-46. 
(Code 1964, § 2.390) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, §§ 8, 15A; city counselor, § 65.  
Sec. 2-82. - Emergency ordinances. 
An ordinance may be passed as an emergency measure on the day of the introduction of the bill, provided that it contains the statement that an emergency exists and specifies distinctly the facts and reasons constituting the emergency. No ordinance granting, enlarging or affecting any franchise shall be passed as an emergency measure. The emergency procedure shall be restricted to the following: 
(1)  Bills concerning the immediate preservation of public peace, property, health, safety or morals. 
(2)  An appropriation for payment of principal or interest of the public debt. 
(3)  An appropriation for the payment of current expenses of the city government. 
(4)  Calling an election or providing for the submission of a proposal to the people. 
The vote of six-sevenths of the members of the council shall be required to pass an ordinance as an emergency measure. 
(Code 1964, § 2.400) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 15B.  
Sec. 2-83. - Title of bill. 
The title of every bill shall indicate the purpose or object to be accomplished thereby. 
(Code 1964, § 2.420)  
Sec. 2-84. - Enacting clause. 
The enacting clause of ordinances of the city shall be: "Be it ordained by the council of the city of Columbia, as follows:". 
(Code 1964, § 2.380) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 15A.  
Sec. 2-85. - Filing bills; hearing; final passage; amendment. 
Every bill introduced shall be filed with the city clerk on the day of its first reading and shall remain on file in his office for public inspection until it is finally adopted or fails of passage. Prior to the final passage of any bill, other than an emergency bill, all persons interested therein shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the council, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the council may adopt. After the third reading of any bill and compliance with the other provisions herein, the council may finally pass the bill with or without amendment, except that if the council shall make an amendment which constitutes a change in substance, the bill as amended shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for one additional week, and an opportunity afforded for further public hearing, after which final action may be taken thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 2.410) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 15C.  
Sec. 2-86. - Fiscal note required. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions of a legislative nature introduced before the city council shall, before being acted upon, be submitted to the city manager who shall prepare a fiscal note, examining the items contained in paragraph (b), and such additional items as requested by the city council or as may be deemed appropriate by the city manager. (b) The fiscal note shall state: 
(1)  The cost of the proposed legislation to the city for the next two (2) fiscal years; 
(2)  Whether or not the proposed legislation will establish a program or agency that will duplicate an existing program or agency; 
(3)  Whether or not there is a federal or state mandate for the program or agency; 
(4)  Whether or not the proposed program or agency will have significant direct fiscal impact upon any other political subdivision or agency of the state; and 
(5)  Whether or not any new employees, physical facilities, or capital expenditures will be required. 
(c)  The fiscal note for a bill shall accompany the bill throughout its course of passage, and may from time to time be revised to reflect changes made in the bill prior to its final passage. 
(Code 1964, § 2.415)  
Sec. 2-87. - Reconsideration of bill. 
(a)  When a bill which does not involve an advertised public hearing is put upon its final passage and fails to pass, a motion to reconsider may be made by a council member voting on the prevailing side, i.e., for defeat of the ordinance, at any time during the council meeting when the original vote was taken. When such motion to reconsider is made, the vote on such motion shall be immediately taken, and if such motion prevails, a vote on the bill shall be taken and the subject finally disposed of or tabled to a subsequent meeting before the council proceeds to any other business. 
(b)  When a bill which involves an advertised public hearing is put upon its final passage and fails to pass, a motion to reconsider may be made by a council member voting on the prevailing side, i.e., for defeat of the ordinance. If the motion is made before the council recesses or takes up another matter, the vote on such motion shall be immediately taken, and if such motion prevails, a vote on the bill shall be taken and the subject finally disposed of or tabled to a subsequent meeting before the council proceeds to any other business. If the motion is made after the council recesses or proceeds to any other business, the reconsideration shall be governed by the provisions of section 2-88 relating to reconsideration of subject matter. 
(Code 1964, § 2.440; Ord. No. 13650 § 1, 4-19-93)  
Sec. 2-88. - Reconsideration of subject matter. 
Any council member desiring to introduce a bill in the form of a bill considered and defeated by the council not more than ninety (90) days previously, shall make a motion to reconsider the subject matter of the bill and request leave of council to introduce a new bill on the same subject matter. When such motion for reconsideration of a subject matter is made, the vote upon such motion shall be immediately taken, and if such motion prevails, the bill shall be introduced as in the instance of a new bill and shall be considered and adopted in accordance with the requirements of an original bill on that subject matter. 
(Code 1964, § 2.445)  
Sec. 2-89. - Ordinance must be signed; filing and preservation of ordinances passed. 
An ordinance, when passed by the council, shall be signed by the presiding officer and attested by the city clerk. It shall be immediately filed and thereafter preserved in the office of the city clerk and, except as otherwise provided in the charter of the city, shall be subject to the referendum provided in Article XVII of the charter of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.340) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 15D.  
Sec. 2-90. - How ordinances revived. 
No ordinance shall be revived or reordained by mere reference to the title thereof, but the same shall be set forth at length as if it were an original ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 2.450)  
Sec. 2-91. - Ordinance not revived by repeal of repealing ordinance. 
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision is itself repealed, it shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision. 
(Code 1964, § 2.460)  
Sec. 2-92. - When ordinance effective. 
Unless otherwise specified, every ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days after its final passage. If an ordinance is submitted at a referendum election or as a result of an initiative petition, it shall become effective upon the declaration by the council, after canvassing the election returns, that it has received the favorable vote of a majority of those voting thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 2.470) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 15D.  
Sec. 2-93. - Proof of ordinance publication. 
Whenever the city council shall order the publication of an ordinance, due proof of such publication by the affidavit of the printer or publisher shall be procured by the clerk and attached thereto, or written and attested upon the face of such ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 2.480)  
Secs. 2-94—2-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Effect of abolishing office. 
Whenever any duty is imposed upon any officer, or office of the city, and that officer or office has been abolished, such duties shall be performed by the officer, board or committee taking over the duties of such officer or office so abolished. 
(Code 1964, § 2.530)  
Sec. 2-107. - Request by council members for rezoning ordinances. 
Any council member desiring the preparation of an ordinance to change the existing zoning of any property, other than property owned by that council member, shall first request a report from the planning director, which shall include available facts regarding all prior zoning, existing zoning, existing land use, and proposed zoning of such property, and such other factual information as the planning director deems pertinent. If, after reviewing the report, the council member desires the preparation of an ordinance to rezone such property, the council member shall request the preparation of a resolution directing the staff to draft an ordinance to present for consideration by the council to rezone such property. Passage of the resolution by the council shall be required for staff preparation of such ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 2.535)  
Secs. 2-108—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative service, §§ 22-24. 
Cross reference— Emergency powers of mayor, § 7-1; powers of city manager and coordinator in regard to civil defense, § 7-19; director of health services, § 11-31 et seq.; duty of city counselor to represent and advise human rights commission, § 12-19; city traffic engineer, § 14-61 et seq.; municipal court judge, § 15-46 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Tax delinquents not to hold city office. 
No person shall be entitled to hold any city office or employment who is in arrears for any city taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 2.610) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 155.  
Sec. 2-122. - Board and commission members. 
(a)  Residency required. All members of boards and commissions established by ordinances of the city, who are required by law or ordinance to be registered voters of the city, shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  Removal. Any member of a board or commission of the city may be removed from such board or commission by vote of a majority of the members of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.635; Ord. No. 10235, § 1, 7-16-84)  
Sec. 2-123. - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, every officer shall file with the city clerk his certificate of election or appointment, and shall take and subscribe before and file with the city clerk his oath or affirmation that he possesses all the qualifications for the office to which he is chosen, that he is not subject to any of the disqualifications set forth in the Charter, and that he will support the Constitution and laws of the United States and of the state and the Charter and ordinances of the city, and that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office. 
(Code 1964, § 2.560) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 148.  
Sec. 2-124. - Officers bonds in general. 
The city manager, city clerk, city collector, director of finance, all other officers and employees receiving, disbursing or responsible for city funds, and such other officers and employees as the council by ordinance may designate, shall, within such time after election or appointment as may be fixed by ordinance, and before entering upon the discharge of their duties, give bond to the city in such sum and with such sureties as shall be prescribed by ordinance, and subject to approval by the council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of their duties and for the prompt accounting for and paying over to the city of all moneys belonging to the city that may come into their hands. If any person elected or appointed to any office or employment shall fail to give bond as he is required, he shall forfeit his office or employment. The city shall pay the premiums on all such bonds. The bond of the city clerk shall be filed with the mayor, and the bonds of all other officers and employees shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2.570) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 149.  
Sec. 2-125. - Financial interest in contracts. 
No officer or employee of the city shall have any interest in any contract or sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or services where said interest is in violation of the laws or constitution of the State of Missouri or ordinances of the City of Columbia. Any violation of this section shall render the contract or sale void, and any employee or officer so violating this section shall thereby forfeit his office or employment. 
(Code 1964, § 2.620; Ord. No. 21701, § 1, 5-20-13) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 156.  
Sec. 2-125.1. - Disclosure reports. 
(a)  Each member of the council, the city manager, the head of the purchasing division and the city counselor shall disclose, in writing, the following information by May 1 of each year, beginning in 1992, if any such transactions were engaged in during the previous calendar year: 
(1)  For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the political subdivision, other than a city council stipend, compensation received as an employee, payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision; and 
(2)  The date and identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision. 
(b)  The city manager and the head of the purchasing division shall disclose, in writing, by May 1 of each year, beginning in 1992, the following information for the previous calendar year: 
(1)  The name and address of each of the employers of such person from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more was received during the year covered by the statement; 
(2)  The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and address of each partner or coparticipant for each partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the secretary of state; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten (10) percent or more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two (2) percent or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests; 
(3)  The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver. 
(c)  The definitions set forth in section 2-53.1 shall apply to this section. 
(Ord. No. 14962, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 15341, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 15734, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 16159, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 16566, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 17008, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 17808, § 1, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 18198, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 18647, § 1, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 19166, § 1, 8-21-06; Ord. No. 19637, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 20027, § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 20393, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 20717, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 21056, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21404, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 21786, § 1, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 22171, § 1, 8-18-14 ; Ord. No. 22547, § 1, 8-17-15 ; Ord. No. 22898 , § 1, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 23270 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 23978 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 2-125.2. - Filing of disclosure reports. 
(a)  The disclosure reports required by section 2-125.1 shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. Copies of the disclosure reports shall also be filed with the Missouri Ethics Commission. 
(b)  The disclosure reports shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one (1) disclosure report in any calendar year: 
(1)  Each person appointed to office shall file the report within thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment. 
(2)  Every other person required to file a disclosure report shall file the report annually not later than May 1 and the report shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31. 
(Ord. No. 14962, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 15341, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 15734, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 16159, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 16566, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 17008, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 17808, § 1, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 18198, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 18647, § 1, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 19166, § 1, 8-21-06; Ord. No. 19637, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 20027, § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 20393, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 20717, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 21056, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21404, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 21786, § 1, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 22171, § 1, 8-18-14 ; Ord. No. 22547, § 1, 8-17-15 ; Ord. No. 22898 , § 1, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 23270 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 23978 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 2-126. - Departmental interchanges. 
In accordance with procedure established by the city manager and subject to his approval, it shall be the duty of the various department directors to furnish to any other department such service, labor, equipment or materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such other department. The charge for such service, labor, equipment or materials shall be made to the department so furnished at actual cost or reasonable depreciated value. 
(Code 1964, § 2.630) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 156.  
Secs. 2-127—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Social Security, RSMo §§ 105.300—105.400. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Acts extended to officers and employees. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to all eligible employees and officials of the city who are not excluded by this division, and whether in connection with a governmental or proprietary function of the city, the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act amendments of 1950 and by Senate Committee Substitute for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the state, and amendments thereof, as the same may be now and hereafter in effect. 
(Code 1964, § 2.640)  
Sec. 2-142. - Plan and agreement for benefits. 
The city manager and city clerk are authorized and directed, on behalf of the city, to prepare, execute and submit to the division of budget and comptroller of the state, a state agency, a plan and agreement for extending benefits to such eligible employees and officials of the city in the form prepared by the state agency and hereby approved and adopted by the city council, which plan and agreement are to become effective upon approval thereof by the state agency, and are further authorized and directed to execute agreements and modifications and amendments thereof with such state agency, providing for the extension of such benefits to such employees and officials as set forth in the plan and agreement as provided for in section 2-141, such plan and agreement to provide that such extension of benefits is to be effective on January 1, 1951. 
(Code 1964, § 2.650)  
Sec. 2-143. - Contributions—Deductions from employees' wages. 
Commencing on the first day of the month following approval of the plan and agreement of the city by the state agency, there shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the city to whom the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and Survivors' Insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement hereinbefore provided for, the amount of each of such employee's and official's contributions, as determined by the applicable state federal laws and by such plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of such deductions to be paid into the contributions fund created by Senate Committee Substitute for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the State of Missouri; provided, however, that, from the first payment of wages made to each of such employees and officials after the benefits of such system have been extended to such employees and officials, there shall be deducted a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and payable from each of such employees and officials had such extension of benefits been provided and effective on January 1, 1951. 
(Code 1964, § 2.660)  
Sec. 2-144. - Same—Appropriations to pay city's contribution. 
Commencing on the first day of the month following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement of the city by the state agency, there is hereby authorized to be appropriated from the general revenue fund and from the water and light fund of the city, and there is, and shall be, appropriated, the sum of money necessary to pay the contributions of the city which shall be due and payable by virtue of the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System to the eligible employees and officials of the city, such sum of money to be paid into the contributions fund created by Senate Committee Substitute for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the State of Missouri; provided, however, that in making the first payment to such contributions funds, after the benefits of such system have been extended to such employees and officials, such first payment shall include a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and payable had such extension of benefits been provided and effective on January 1, 1951. The fund from which such appropriation is made shall, at all times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the city by this section directed to be paid to the contributions fund. 
(Code 1964, § 2.670)  
Sec. 2-145. - Administration of plan. 
The city, from and after the approval of the plan and agreement of the city by the state agency, shall fully comply with, and shall keep such record, make such reports and provide such methods of administration of such plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, now and hereafter in effect, with respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System to the employees and officials of the city. For the purpose of administering such plan and agreement, the director of finance of the city shall be the official who shall make all required reports, keep all records and be responsible for the administration of such plan and agreement on behalf of the city, and any and all notices and communications from the state agency to the city with respect to such plan and agreement shall be addressed to "Director of Finance, City of Columbia, Missouri." 
(Code 1964, § 2.680) 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of finance director, § 2-208.  
Secs. 2-146—2-156. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 13. 
 
Sec. 2-157. - Election by council; term. 
It shall be the duty of the council to elect some suitable and competent person to the office of the city clerk, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.050)  
Sec. 2-158. - Duties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall, in addition to other duties which are or may be required of him by statute, by the charter, by the council or by the city manager, be the custodian of the seal and all deeds, contracts, ordinances, books, records, papers and other official documents of the city. 
(b)  He shall attend all meetings of the city council, keep a correct record or journal of the proceedings thereof, and authenticate, by his signature, all ordinances and resolutions and record them in full in a book kept for that purpose. 
(c)  He shall prepare all certificates of election or appointment of the city officers, and deliver the same to the persons elected or appointed. 
(d)  He shall record the certificates, oaths and bonds of all the city officers, and shall keep an index of the records of the proceedings of the city council. 
(e)  He shall, at the request of anyone and a tender of his fees, make copies, certified under his signature and seal of this city, of any public book, record, paper or document in his office. 
(Code 1964, §§ 2.060, 2.080) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 13.  
Sec. 2-159. - Appointment of temporary clerk. 
Whenever for any reason the city clerk is absent or otherwise unable to perform the duties of such office, the deputy city clerk shall serve in such capacity and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the regular clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2.070; Ord. No. 21829, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Secs. 2-160—2-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Directors of departments. 
At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall be an officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the city manager. The director of the police department shall be the chief of police, and the director of the fire department shall be the fire chief. Except as may be otherwise provided by the Charter, all directors of departments shall be appointed by the city manager. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, the city manager shall establish the qualifications and duties of department heads. Two (2) departments may be headed by the same individual; the city manager may head a department, or more than one with consent of the council; and directors of departments may serve as chiefs of divisions. 
(Code 1964, § 2.550; Ord. No. 21091, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 2-177. - Departments listed. 
(a)  The following city departments have been established: 
Community development (section 29-6.1(e)). 
Community relations. 
Convention and visitors (section 26-82). 
Cultural affairs. 
Economic development. 
Finance (section 2-206). 
Fire (section 9-36). 
Human resources. 
Information technology. 
Law (Charter, section 65). 
Municipal court (Charter, section 114). 
Parks and recreation (section 17-26). 
Police (section 21-16). 
Public health and human services (section 11-31). 
Public safety joint communications and emergency management. 
Public works (section 22-16). 
Utilities. 
Water and light (Charter, section 99). 
(b)  The departments may be divided into divisions as set forth in this Code or in the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 21091, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22577, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23117 , § 3, 3-20-17)  
Secs. 2-178—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21091, § 1, passed September 19, 2011, repealed §§ 2-191—2-193, which pertained to data processing and derived from §§ 2.1600—2.1620 of the 1964 Code. 
 
Secs. 2-191—2-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Finance department, § 25 et seq. 
Cross reference— General fund, § 2-3. 
 
Sec. 2-206. - Department established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Article III, section 22 of the city charter, there is hereby established a department to be known as the "finance department."  
Sec. 2-207. - Director—Appointment; qualifications. 
The director of the department of finance shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. 
(Code 1964, § 2.2100)  
Sec. 2-208. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the fiscal affairs of the city and to that end the director of finance shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Keep books of account of the receipts and expenditures of all departments. 
(2)  Keep accurate detailed accounts of: 
a.  All taxes assessed by the city and all money due the city from any and every source. 
b.  Moneys received and the several sources from which derived. 
c.  All funds of the city and disbursements made therefrom and all obligations incurred. 
(3)  Prescribe the method of keeping accounts for all departments and offices of the city, which method shall be uniform as nearly as practicable and conform to the laws of the state. 
(4)  Examine and audit all accounts and claims against the city except claims for unliquidated damages. The director of finance shall not issue or sign any draft, check or warrant until the correctness of the account for which the same is issued has been verified; neither shall the director allow the payment of the account unless the money shall have been appropriated therefor, nor shall the director issue or sign any draft, check or warrant for any account against the city unless sufficient money is in the fund on which it is drawn. 
(5)  At the close of the fiscal year, and at any time upon the direction of the council, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official, board or department. 
(6)  Balance the books of account of all departments of the city each calendar month under the direction of the city manager, who shall make quarterly public financial statements to the council. 
(7)  Present to the council annually, and whenever required by the council, a detailed statement of the financial condition of the city, which shall include all receipts and expenditures of the various departments; a detailed statement of the debt of the city, and the purpose for which it was incurred; and an inventory of all personal property, supplies and equipment of the city, with both their cost and estimated current value. 
(8)  Serve as city treasurer and have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city government; deposit all funds coming into the city in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, or, if no such resolution be adopted, in such depositories as may be designated by the city manager, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits. 
(9)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity; have the safe-keeping of all bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness of the city; and be responsible for the receipt and delivery of the same for transfer, registration or exchange. 
(10)  As director of finance and as city treasurer, perform such additional duties not herein specifically set out as may be required of the director by the charter, by law, by ordinance, or by the city manager. 
(11)  Be responsible for the approval of all proposed expenditures; and unless the director of finance shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made. 
(12)  Be responsible for the collection of all charges for the services of all utilities owned and operated by the city, and of all monies due the city from any other source whatsoever, unless otherwise provided by the charter or ordinances of the city. All monies collected by the officers or other employees of the city shall be promptly accounted for and paid into the city treasury. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service charge may be assessed by the director of finance for any returned or rejected forms of payment including checks, electronic payments, or credit card payments, received for any obligation owed the city. 
(13)  Establish a policy and procedure for determining and handling uncollectible accounts owed the city. The director of finance shall submit, as part of the annual budget, an allowance for bad debts to cover the estimated amount of accounts receivables which will be uncollectible during the fiscal year. All accounts receivables which are determined to be uncollectible by the finance director, pursuant to established policies and procedures, shall be written off by a charge to the bad debt allowance account established above. The finance director shall report the total amount of bad debt write-offs to the city council annually. 
In the event that an accounts receivable due and payable remains outstanding for a period of sixty (60) days, the account may be submitted to a collection agency for collection. All such collection costs, as well as any costs pertaining to adjudication, will be borne by the debtor. 
(Code 1964, § 2.2110; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 23934 , § 1, 7-15-19) 
Cross reference— Finance director's duty to administrator social security plan and agreement, § 2-145; duty of finance director to prescribe purchasing procedures and forms, § 2-458.  
Sec. 2-209. - Purchasing division; established. 
A purchasing division is established in the department of finance. The division is under the supervision of the purchasing agent. 
(Code 1964, § 2.690; Ord. No. 18178, § 1, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-210. - Authority of purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent has authority to: 
(1)  Enter into contracts on behalf of the city as provided in this chapter; 
(2)  Document specifications for supplies, materials and equipment; 
(3)  Conduct competitive bidding processes and requests for proposals processes; 
(4)  Inspect all supplies, materials and equipment purchased through the purchasing division to determine quality, quantity and conformance with specifications; 
(5)  Supervise the transfer of supplies, materials and equipment between departments; 
(6)  Dispose of surplus city supplies, materials and equipment as provided in this chapter; and 
(7)  Perform any other functions assigned by the city manager or the director of finance. 
(Code 1964, § 2.700; Ord. No. 18178, § 1, 7-19-04)  
Secs. 2-211—2-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21571, § 1, adopted January 7, 2013, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-221—2-375.20, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to commissions. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference— Administrative organization, § 22. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-221—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CULTURAL AFFAIRS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Commission on human rights, § 12-16 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 17-16 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 20-36 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Commission established; purposes. 
There is hereby established a commission on cultural affairs to plan, promote and encourage programs to further public awareness of, accessibility to, participation in, and support for the artistic and cultural development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-232. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms; vacancies. 
The commission on cultural affairs shall be composed of twelve (12) members, appointed by the city council. Four (4) members shall have significant knowledge and demonstrated interest in one (1) or more areas of the arts, including music, dance, literature, visual arts, theater, folk arts, media arts, design and arts education. Two (2) members shall be from the business and professional community, one of which shall be from a business or professional office in the Downtown Community Improvement District. Two (2) members shall be involved in education. One member shall be a lay person with no specialized knowledge in the arts. The commission shall have representation from at least four (4) of the six (6) city wards. Appointments shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Terms shall begin on November 1. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full three-year terms. Members shall serve without compensation. At least nine (9) members shall be qualified voters of the city. The city manager shall appoint a staff liaison to work with the commission. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 24013 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 2-233. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the arts and cultural environment of the city; 
(2)  To hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its proceedings; 
(3)  To make recommendations on city funding of arts programs and services; 
(4)  To recommend applications and solicitations for grants, gifts and donations from individuals, groups, organization and agencies, both private and public, for any purpose consistent with the purposes of the commission; 
(5)  To make recommendations regarding city initiation or sponsorship, either alone or in cooperation with other agencies, of public programs to further the development of public awareness of and accessibility to arts programs and activities; 
(6)  To make recommendations regarding technical and professional assistance to arts and arts administrators; 
(7)  At the request of the city council, to work with area agencies on broad community issues in which a cultural perspective is relevant and desirable; 
(8)  To engage in comprehensive planning for the cultural development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-234. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The commission shall hold a minimum of six (6) meetings annually at times and places to be determined by the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chair of the commission or by the city council. Seven (7) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city council through the city clerk of such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-235. - Election of officers; terms. 
The commission shall elect from its membership a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary. Officers shall serve terms of one (1) year, and may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms in each office. The commission may adopt rules and procedures for the conduct and transaction of its business. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-236. - Conflicts of interest. 
Commission members shall not serve on the board of directors or be employed by any agency which applies for funding through the commission or which receives funding upon recommendation of the commission. For purposes of this section, each academic and administrative unit of the University of Missouri shall be considered a separate agency and each school of the Columbia Public School District shall be considered a separate agency. Any commission member who violates this section shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-237. - Gifts of works of art; procedures and guidelines for acceptance. 
(a)  Persons wishing to donate works of art to the city shall submit the following information to the manager of cultural affairs: 
(1)  A description of the work of art including the dimensions; 
(2)  The proposed display site, if a particular site is preferred; 
(3)  If the work of art has not been completed, relevant information on the artists; 
(4)  The estimated value of the work of art; 
(5)  An estimate of any cost to the city for installing the work (including such items as cost of removal from and restoration of an existing site, relocation costs and site preparation costs); 
(6)  If applicable, the identity of the persons installing the work and the manner in which the installation shall be accomplished; 
(7)  A description of any repair or restoration work needed and an estimate of the cost of such repair or restoration. 
(8)  A description of any necessary maintenance procedures and an estimate of the annual cost of such maintenance. 
The manager of cultural affairs, to the extent feasible, shall assist potential donors in assembling this information. 
(b)  The manager of cultural affairs shall forward information received on a proposed gift of a work of art to the commission on cultural affairs and, if applicable, to the department head in charge of the proposed display site. 
(c)  The commission on cultural affairs shall make a recommendation to the city council on whether to accept the proposed gift of a work of art. In making its recommendation, the commission shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The quality of the work of art; 
(2)  If the work has not been completed, the ability of the artist; 
(3)  The appropriateness of locating the work of art at the proposed display site; 
(4)  Any proposed restrictions on the gift; 
(5)  The technical feasibility of accepting and installing the work of art; 
(6)  The cost to the city of accepting the work of art. 
In considering a proposed gift of a work of art, the commission shall consider the comments of the department head in charge of the proposed display site and the comments of any authorities or experts with whom the commission has consulted. 
(d)  The city council shall decide whether to accept or reject works of art offered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-238—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BICYCLE/PEDESTRIAN COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Establishment; members; qualifications; appointment; terms. 
The bicycle/pedestrian commission is hereby established. The commission shall be composed of nine (9) members. One (1) member shall have knowledge of street construction and maintenance; four (4) members shall have knowledge of bicycling, bicycle safety, or bikeways; and four (4) members shall have an interest in pedestrian safety and infrastructure. All members shall be qualified voters of the city. The members succeeding the original members shall be appointed by the city council for three-year terms. A non-voting member shall be appointed by the parks and recreation department director to attend meetings of the commission and serve as a liaison to the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22738, § 1, 2-15-16 )  
Sec. 2-242. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The commission shall meet at the call of the chair. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not less than five (5) members. The commission shall elect from its members a chair, vice-chair and a secretary. The chair shall preside at all meetings, and in the absence of the chair or the inability of the chair to preside at any meeting, the vice-chair shall preside. The secretary shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the commission and forward a report of such proceedings to the city council. The commission shall establish its own rules and procedures. The members appointed shall serve for the terms of their appointments, and until their successors are appointed and qualified, and each shall serve without compensation. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the appointing authority of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22738, § 1, 2-15-16 )  
Sec. 2-243. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall be to: 
(1)  Develop a master bike plan for the city, such master plan being subject to periodic review and revision by the commission based on changes in traffic patterns and other changes associated with the growth of Columbia. 
(2)  Work in concert with the administration in preparation and submission of yearly grant requests. 
(3)  Implement the plan as money becomes available according to priorities based on need and cost of bike routes. 
(4)  Develop programs and methodology for teaching proper bike use and registration. 
(5)  Advise the city council on issues relating to city sidewalks, walkways and trails. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-244—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Establishment of commission; powers and duties. 
There is hereby established the Human Services Commission whose purpose is to advise the city council in all matters regarding the planning and contracting for human service programs to adequately meet the needs of the citizens of the City of Columbia, especially the low-income. To meet this responsibility, the commission shall: 
(1)  Determine the human service needs of the citizens of Columbia. This process would include the awareness of existing human services and of any proposed changes in programs and funding which would affect the community. 
(2)  Prepare each year, in conjunction with the department of public health and human services, a comprehensive plan for the City of Columbia which outlines the needs and services essential to meet those needs. The commission shall encourage and seek public input in the discussion and decision-making process. The plan shall include the recommended amount of funds to be allocated for each service and shall be reviewed by and subject to approval of the city council. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council the appropriate providers of the approved services, including the quality, quantity and cost of each service. Recommendations shall be submitted to the city council. No requests for funding of human services shall be considered by the city council without accompanying written recommendations from the commission. 
(4)  Review, as necessary, the provision of human services in Columbia and recommend measures for increasing effectiveness and efficiency whenever possible. 
(5)  Review the actions of local, state and federal government and other funding sources having an effect on human services in Columbia and develop strategies for providing input into any decisions affecting Columbia. 
(6)  Exercise such other powers and duties as the city council may from time to time direct. 
(7)  The provisions of this section related to the powers and duties of the Human Services Commission do not apply to funding requests, activities or services administered by or under the supervision of any department of the City of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22005, § 1, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 2-252. - Members, terms. 
The Human Services Commission shall be composed of ten (10) members appointed by the city council. The city manager shall designate the staff of the department of public health and human services as consultant and advisor to the commission. Members shall be qualified voters and residents of the City of Columbia, shall serve without compensation, and shall not be paid officers or employees of the city. Selection of members will be made so as to encourage representation of individuals with an interest in and understanding of human services. Appointments shall be made to become effective January 1 of each year and the term of office shall be three (3) years. The first appointments made shall be for staggered terms as follows: Two (2) members for three (3) years, two (2) members for two (2) years and three (3) members will complete their present two-year terms; thereafter, appointments for all ten (10) members shall be for three (3) years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be unexpired terms only. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22005, § 1, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 2-253. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
Meetings shall be held in accordance with rules established by the commission. A simple majority of all members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent from fifty (50) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-254. - Election of officers; terms. 
The commission shall elect annually a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary. Each officer shall hold office for a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible for re-election. When there is a vacancy of any elected office, the commission shall elect an officer to serve until the next regular annual election. Duties of the officers shall be outlined in the commission's rules of procedure. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22005, § 1, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 2-255. - Conflicts of interest. 
Commission members shall not serve on the board of directors or be employed by any organization which applies for funding through the commission or which receives funding upon recommendation of the commission. For purposes of this section, each academic and administrative unit of the University of Missouri shall be considered a separate organization and each school of the Columbia Public School District shall be considered a separate organization. Any commission member who violates this section shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22005, § 1, 3-17-14)  
Secs. 2-256—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DOWNTOWN COLUMBIA LEADERSHIP COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Established. 
The Downtown Columbia Leadership Council is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-262. - Membership; officers. 
The Downtown Columbia Leadership Council shall consist of fifteen (15) members, two (2) of whom shall be nonvoting members. Six (6) members shall be appointed by the city council. At least two (2) members appointed by the city council shall be representatives of recognized neighborhood associations. Applicants for these positions must submit with their application, a letter from an officer of the neighborhood association certifying that the applicant has been designated by the association as its representative. At least one (1) member appointed by the city council shall reside in the expanded downtown development concept plan and study area as defined in the "Downtown Columbia Leadership Council Interim Report" dated May, 2009. The director of community development and director of economic development shall be nonvoting members. Each of the following shall appoint one (1) member: the planning and zoning commission, the Boone County Commission, the Chancellor of the Columbia Campus of the University of Missouri, the President of Columbia College, the President of Stephens College, the Downtown Community Improvement District and the Historic Preservation Commission. Two (2) of the initial members appointed by the city council shall serve a term of one (1) year, two (2) shall serve a term of two (2) years and two (2) shall serve a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Members shall serve without compensation. The Downtown Columbia Leadership Council shall elect from its members a chair, vice-chair and secretary. The chair shall preside at meetings. If the chair is absent or unable to preside, the vice-chair shall preside. The secretary shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the leadership council. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 22526, § 1, 7-20-15 )  
Sec. 2-263. - Duties. 
The Downtown Columbia Leadership Council (DCLC) shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Periodically review the boundaries of the expanded downtown development concept plan and study area as defined in the "Downtown Columbia Leadership Columbia Interim Report" dated May, 2009 (roughly Garth Avenue to Business Loop 70 to Old Highway 63 to Stewart Road and the northern edge of the University of Missouri campus). 
(2)  Monitor current assets and additional opportunities within the expanded study area that would assist in the area's redevelopment. 
(3)  Advise city staff and consultants on preparation of a blight/conservation study and preparation of a Missouri Downtown and Rural Economic Stimulus Act (MODESA) application. 
(4)  Work with city-funded consultants to conduct annual downtown planning activities and to create a comprehensive downtown strategic plan. 
(5)  Recommend to the city council possible development guidelines and physical attributes for downtown Columbia. 
(6)  Monitor the implementation of recommendations resulting from the downtown planning charrette project and future DCLC downtown planning projects. 
(7)  Review and comment on all future downtown public finance mechanisms including tax increment financing (TIF), Brownfields and other economic incentives. 
(8)  Provide downtown awareness and outreach to include, but not limited to, DCLC annual report (measurables, progress, investment, jobs, etc.), annual downtown awards program and quarterly downtown seminars and presentations. 
(9)  The DCLC shall meet regularly and at the call of the chair. The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided, that the member had requested to be excused at least one (1) day before the meeting. Members who are absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit their office. Members who are absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit their office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of any such vacancy. The DCLC shall have the power to adopt its own additional procedural regulations, provided that such regulations are consistent with city ordinances and state law. 
(10)  Work on other projects requested by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-264—2-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FINANCE ADVISORY AND AUDIT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Establishment; composition; terms. 
The finance advisory and audit committee is hereby established. The committee shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the city council to serve three-year staggered terms. Members shall be qualified voters and residents of the City of Columbia for at least one (1) year prior to their appointment. One (1) member appointed must be a commercial banker, with knowledge of public finance and investment banking. One (1) member appointed must be a certified public accountant with knowledge of public administration and finance. Consideration shall be given to the appointment of at least one (1) member who is an owner of a business. Members appointed by the city council shall serve without compensation. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. The committee shall elect its own chair annually. The finance director or the director's designee shall serve as a nonvoting ex-officio member. Staff for the committee shall be provided by the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-272. - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet as needed. Three (3) members appointed by the city council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-273. - Duties. 
The finance advisory and audit committee shall be solely advisory to the city council. The committee shall make recommendations on financial matters to the city council as needed. In formulating reports, policies and recommendations to the city council, the committee may consider the following areas: 
(1)  Accounting and financial reporting policies. 
(2)  Debt management and fiscal policies. 
(3)  Cash and investment management policies. 
(4)  Purchasing policies. 
(5)  Business services policies. 
(6)  Other matters as may be referred by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-274—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, adopted July 1, 2019, amended division 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 2-281—2-286, pertained to community development, and derived from Ord. No. 21571 , § 1, 1-7-13. 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Established. 
The housing and community development commission is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Sec. 2-282. - Members; qualifications; compensation; terms. 
The housing and community development commission shall be composed of nine (9) members, who shall be qualified voters of the city, and shall consist of one (1) member from the Human Services Commission chosen by that commission, one (1) member from each of the six (6) wards of the city, and two (2) at-large members. Selection of members shall be made so as to encourage substantial representation of low and moderate income citizens and members of minority groups in accordance with federal guidelines as well as persons with expertise in real estate, finance, construction or housing. They shall serve without compensation and shall not be paid officers or employees of the city. The terms of office shall be three (3) years. The city council shall, on or before the first day of November of each year, make appointments to fill the terms expiring at that time. The member from the Human Services Commission shall be a voting member but shall not be eligible to serve as an officer of the housing and community development commission. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Sec. 2-283. - Election and terms of officers; vacancies. 
The commission shall elect three (3) of its members to serve as chair, vice-chair and secretary. Each officer shall hold office for a term of one (1) year. When any officer's appointment to the commission expires or becomes vacant, the commission shall elect a new officer. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Sec. 2-284. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The housing and community development commission shall hold meetings once each month at a time and place to be determined by the commission, and such special meetings as called for by the chair of the commission. When there is no business to conduct, the chair may cancel the monthly meeting. A simple majority of the current members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Sec. 2-285. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The housing and community development commission shall have responsibility and be required to: 
(1)  Act in an advisory capacity in all matters pertaining to affordable housing and community development. 
(2)  Consider the annual application for the expenditures of federal funds under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 and make recommendations with respect thereto to the city manager and the city council. 
(3)  Assist in the planning of such funded activities, promote and stimulate public interest therein; and to that end, solicit to the fullest possible extent the cooperation of the neighborhood associations and other public and private agencies. 
(4)  Provide citizens with an adequate opportunity to participate in an advisory role in planning, implementing and assessing the program and affordable housing metrics in accordance with federal regulations now or hereafter adopted by providing adequate information to citizens, holding public hearings to obtain views of citizens, and providing citizens an opportunity to comment on the city's affordable housing and community development performance. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Sec. 2-286. - Conflict of interest. 
Commission members shall not serve on the board of directors or be employed by any agency which applies for funding through the commission or which receives funding upon recommendation of the commission. For purposes of this section, each academic and administrative unit of the University of Missouri shall be considered a separate agency and each school of the Columbia Public School District shall be considered a separate agency. Any commission member who violates this section shall automatically forfeit such member's office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 23912 , § 1, 7-1-19)  
Secs. 2-287—2-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT COMMISSION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24044 , § 1, adopted October 7, 2019, repealed the former Div. 8, §§ 2-291—2-295, and enacted a new Div. 8 as set out herein. The former Div. 8 pertained to environment and energy and derived from Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13. 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Established. 
The climate and environment commission is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 24044 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 2-292. - Membership, terms. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of fifteen (15) members to be appointed by the city council. Members should have an interest or expertise in the three pillars of sustainability: economic prosperity, environmental integrity and social/cultural vibrancy. Selection of members will be made so as to encourage representation of the socio-economic, geographic, and demographic diversity of the community, including youth representation, and members should represent a wide-range of stakeholders within the community including business, neighborhoods, and non-profit and educational institutions. 
(b)  Commission members shall be residents of Boone County. Members shall serve without compensation. A member may not be a paid officer or employee of the city, be a party to any pending litigation against the city, or be an elected public office holder. 
(c)  Commission members shall initially be appointed to staggered terms as follows: five (5) members for a term of one (1) year, five (5) members for a term of two (2) years, and five (5) members for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years, except that any appointment to fill a vacancy, occurring other than by expiration of a term, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. No. 24044 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 2-293. - Meetings, quorum, attendance. 
The commission shall meet at least quarterly. Eight (8) members shall constitute a quorum to do business. The commission shall hold annual elections, electing a chair and vice-chair. When any officer's appointment to the commission expires or becomes vacant, the commission shall elect a new officer. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 24044 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 2-294. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To advise city staff in the preparation of an annual Climate Adaptation and Action Plan (CAAP) progress report and recommendations for city council. 
(2)  To present the annual CAAP report, with policy and budget priorities, to city council for acceptance in January. 
(3)  To identify opportunities for and barriers to equitable implementations of CAAP strategies. 
(4)  To review annual greenhouse gas emissions inventory for progress on meeting greenhouse gas emission reduction goals. 
(5)  To evaluate additional opportunities for mitigation and resilience actions not included in the original CAAP. 
(6)  To educate and engage the public on commission priorities. 
(7)  To coordinate and communicate with other boards and commissions on commission priorities. 
(8)  To advise city council and the Boone County Commission on environmental issues, from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 24044 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Secs. 2-295—2-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - COLUMBIA VISION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Established. 
The Columbia Vision Commission is hereby established for the purpose of engaging the community on the implementation of the current city strategic plan and on future strategic visions and goals and other initiatives as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Sec. 2-302. - Visioning defined. 
Visioning began as a concerted effort to seek public input for implementation of "Imagine Columbia's Future" and continues with efforts to provide planning alignment and public dialogue between and among city leaders, agencies and the public. Visioning is a continuing and ongoing process where new information and public input are integrated with the work of agencies, paid consultants and the business community. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Sec. 2-303. - Duties; staff liaison. 
The commission is advisory to the city council and shall have the following duties and authority: 
(a)  Reconciling plan alignment. To the extent the city seeks to optimize operations and outcomes in all aspects of governance and livability, the commission shall review department-level strategic plans and report annually in April to the city council on areas of misalignment, both internally and externally with third-party reports of city rankings and public perception. 
(b)  Coordination with other governmental boards, commissions, departments and nongovernmental entities. The commission shall have the authority to solicit the cooperation of other boards and commissions in the city and throughout the region as needed to assist with its reporting and other duties, and also to solicit and receive information from other entities involved in visioning implementation. 
(c)  Public engagement. The commission, through various means, will collect public input on the strategic and relevant plan initiatives and departmental goals. The commission, in preparation for its annual report submitted to the city council, will hold at least four public hearings for public comment on the current state of city initiatives and collected public feedback. 
(d)  Incidental authority. The commission shall have such other authority as may be assigned by the city council from time to time and shall act in an advisory capacity in making recommendations to improve the ongoing process of visioning implementation. 
(e)  Staff liaison. The city manager shall appoint a staff liaison to work with the commission. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Sec. 2-304. - Composition; compensation; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members. The majority of members shall be qualified voters residing within the City of Columbia. The members of the commission should, to the extent practicable, reflect a broad cross section of the community. 
(b)  Commission members shall be appointed by the city council following completion of an application submitted to the city clerk. Candidates shall be evaluated based on their demonstrated commitment to the visioning process; ability to work with data and understand system relationships; ability to work collaboratively; management skills; independence and existing memberships or positions; and contributions to the diversity of the commission. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Members of the coordinating committee shall serve for a term of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members whose terms expire may be reappointed for successive terms. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Sec. 2-305. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, adopted May 7, 2018, repealed § 2-305, which pertained to nominating and application process. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 2-306. - Officers; meetings; quorum. 
(a)  The commission shall select its chair who shall preside over meetings, and a vice-chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. The commission shall annually appoint a secretary who shall keep a record of its activities and actions, and shall also fill any vacancy in such position for the remainder of the term. 
(b)  A majority of those duly appointed and acting members of the commission required to vote on a matter shall be a quorum for making decisions. 
(c)  The commission shall hold monthly meetings during at least ten (10) months of the year. Other meetings may be scheduled at the call of the chair. One of the monthly meetings shall be a regularly scheduled annual meeting which shall include the appointment of officers. Special meetings may also be called at the request of any three (3) or more voting members of the commission. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided as prescribed by law prior to such meeting. The city manager or the manager's designee shall receive notice of all meetings of the commission. The commission shall designate a regular place for its meetings which can be changed from time to time. In scheduling and conducting meetings, the commission shall comply with the sunshine law and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(d)  The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting if the member requests to be excused prior to that meeting. Any member of the commission who is absent without asking to be excused from four (4) or more of the regular meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any such member who is absent without being excused from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of any vacancy on the coordinating committee. 
(e)  The commission may from time to time adopt such rules for the conduct of its meetings and business as it may deem proper provided that such rules are not inconsistent with city ordinances or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Secs. 2-307—2-315. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23533 , § 1, adopted May 7, 2018, repealed §§ 2-307—2-309, which pertained to conflicts of interest; visioning implementation; responsibilities of city boards and commissions in relation to visioning. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
DIVISION 10. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-316. - Establishment of commission; objectives. 
The substance abuse advisory commission of the City of Columbia is hereby established, and shall have the following purposes and objectives: 
(1)  To advise the city council in matters pertaining to substance abuse. 
(2)  To make recommendations intended to prevent and eliminate the abuse of alcohol and other controlled substances. 
(3)  To promote the coordination of programs directed towards the youth of the community intended to prevent and eliminate alcohol and substance abuse. 
(4)  To promote policies of inter-governmental cooperation in strengthening existing alcohol and drug abuse programs. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-317. - Members; terms. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of ten (10) members with the following qualifications: One (1) member shall be a representative of the University of Missouri appointed by the chancellor of the University of Missouri - Columbia; one (1) member shall be a prevention or treatment professional; one (1) member shall be a representative of the Columbia School District appointed by the superintendent of Columbia Public Schools; one (1) member shall be a healthcare professional; one (1) member shall be under the age of twenty-five (25); and the five (5) remaining members shall have demonstrated interest in and concern for substance and alcohol abuse problems in the community. 
(b)  The members shall be appointed for three-year terms, and shall serve without compensation. The first members of the commission shall be appointed for staggered terms as follows: Three (3) members three (3) years, three (3) members two (2) years, three (3) members one (1) year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 23178 , § 1, 5-1-17)  
Sec. 2-318. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The commission shall meet at the call of the chair as necessary in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the commission. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not less than five (5) members. Any member who is absent from fifty (50) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-319. - Election of officers; terms. 
The commission shall elect from its members a chair, vice-chair, and secretary. The chair shall preside at all meetings, and in the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to preside, the vice-chair shall preside. The secretary shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the commission, and forward a report of such proceedings to the council. The commission shall establish its own rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-320—2-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-326. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this division: 
Act means the Real Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, RSMo §§ 99.800 thru 99.865, as amended. 
Redevelopment area means an area designated by the city in respect to which the city, after consideration and recommendation of its TIF commission, has made a finding that there exist conditions which caused the area to be classified as a blighted area, a conservation area, an economic development area or an enterprise zone pursuant to RSMo §§ 135.200 to 135.256, or a combination thereof, which area includes only those parcels of real property directly and substantially benefited by the proposed redevelopment project. 
Redevelopment plan means the comprehensive plan for redevelopment of a redevelopment area by the payment of redevelopment costs to reduce or eliminate those conditions, the existence of which qualified the redevelopment area as a blighted area, a conservation area, an economic development area or a combination thereof, and thereby enhance the tax base of the taxing districts which extend into the redevelopment area. Each redevelopment plan adopted shall conform to the requirements of Section 99.810 of the Act. 
Redevelopment project means any redevelopment project within a designated redevelopment area in furtherance of the objectives of the redevelopment plan. 
TIF commission means the Tax Increment Financing Commission of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-327. - TIF commission established. 
(a)  The Tax Increment Financing Commission of the City of Columbia, Missouri is hereby established. 
(b)  The TIF commission shall consist of eleven (11) members. Six (6) members shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Board of Education of the Columbia School District. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Presiding Commissioner of Boone County, Missouri with the consent of the Boone County Commission. One (1) member shall be appointed, in any manner agreed upon by the affected districts, to represent all other districts levying ad valorem taxes within the area selected for a redevelopment project or the redevelopment area, excluding representatives of the city council. 
(c)  Of the members first appointed by the mayor, two (2) shall serve terms of two (2) years, two (2) shall serve terms of three (3) years and two (2) shall serve terms of four (4) years. Thereafter, the members appointed by the mayor shall serve terms of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as the original appointments. 
(d)  Members who are appointed by taxing districts other than the city shall serve on the TIF commission for a term to coincide with the length of time a redevelopment project, redevelopment plan or designation of a redevelopment area is considered for approval by the TIF commission. Such terms shall terminate upon final approval of the project, plan or designation of the area by the city council. If any taxing jurisdiction fails to appoint members of the TIF commission within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of a proposed redevelopment plan, redevelopment project or designation or redevelopment area, the remaining members shall proceed to exercise the power of the TIF commission. 
(e)  All members shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  The TIF commission shall elect from among its members a chair, vice-chair and secretary. Meetings of the TIF commission shall be open to the public to the extent provided by law and a record of each meeting shall be kept. The TIF commission shall have the authority to establish rules and procedures not in conflict with city ordinances or policies or the Act and shall meet as required to fulfill its obligations set forth in the Act. 
(g)  The TIF commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city council as it relates to the consideration of tax increment financing proposals submitted by interested parties or initiated by any public agency in accordance with the Act. The TIF commission shall hold public hearings and give notice pursuant to Sections 99.825 and 99.830 of the Act on proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and designation of redevelopment areas and amendments thereto. The TIF commission shall vote on all proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and designations of redevelopment areas and amendments thereto, within thirty (30) days following completion of a hearing on any such plan, project, designation or amendment and shall make recommendations to the city council within ninety (90) days of a hearing referred to in Section 99.825 of the Act concerning adoption of or amendment to redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects or designation of redevelopment areas. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-328. - Procedures for bids and proposals. 
The city council hereby adopts the following procedures for bids and proposals for the implementation of redevelopment projects: 
(1)  The city council or the TIF commission shall solicit proposals with respect to the implementation of proposed redevelopment projects. 
(2)  Each request for proposals, or notice thereof, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be mailed to those persons or firms that the city manager or the city's planning consultant determines might be interested in submitting a bid. Each request for proposals shall provide at least thirty (30) days for the submission of a proposal. 
(3)  Criteria for the selection of proposals will include the impact of the proposed project on the city and other taxing jurisdictions, including the projected term for which tax increment financing will be utilized. The city council may establish such additional criteria as it deems appropriate for the selection of bids and proposals. The city council or the TIF commission shall provide reasonable opportunity for any person to submit alternative proposals or bids. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-329—2-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - PUBLIC TRANSIT ADVISORY COMMISSION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21681, § 2, adopted May 20, 2013, renamed Div. 12 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such division was titled Public Transportation Advisory Commission. 
 
Sec. 2-336. - Established. 
The public transit advisory commission is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21681, § 2, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 2-337. - Duties. 
The commission shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Advise city staff with regard to transit policy and safety matters concerning transit issues affecting the city, for example, alternative modes, accessibility, and customer amenities. 
(2)  Serve as a sounding board for citizen transit, pedestrian and safety and access issues and make recommendations to the city council and city staff for appropriate action. 
(3)  Recommend rules and procedures governing public transit service programs, equipment and facilities considering regulatory guidelines, service improvements, and activities of persons utilizing transit services and facilities. 
(4)  Aid in the development of a city transportation improvement program by providing citizen input on needed projects for submission to the metropolitan planning organization. 
(5)  Create and review surveys and facilitate public input on public transit programming and facility usage. 
(6)  Recommend and promote marketing strategies for community outreach programs in order to strengthen the transit image, increase usage, and integrate its role within the community. 
(7)  Study issues arising under the Columbia Transit Master Plan as they relate to transportation, make recommendations to the city council and metropolitan planning organization, and prepare reports to aid in the development, implementation and general improvement of the master plan relating to the public transit in the city. 
(8)  Other duties assigned by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21681, § 2, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 2-338. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of thirteen (13) members. One (1) member shall be a University of Missouri student appointed by the council to a one (1) year term. One (1) member shall be a Columbia College student or administrator appointed by the Columbia College administration. One (1) member shall be a Stephens College student or administrator appointed by the Stephens College administration. One (1) member shall be a representative of the University of Missouri appointed by the University of Missouri administration. The remaining nine (9) at large members shall be appointed by the city council. Consideration shall be given to the appointment of an eligible Columbia Transit paratransit rider, an owner or representative of a business, a member of the disabilities commission, a member of the bicycle/pedestrian commission, a representative of the Columbia Public School District, and/or a representative of Columbians for Modern Efficient Transit (CoMET), an advocacy group of PedNet. 
(b)  Three (3) of the initial at large members appointed by the city council shall serve terms of one (1) year, three (3) shall serve terms of two (2) years, and three (3) shall serve terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, appointments made to the at large positions by the council shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies, occurring other than by expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The term of each member appointed by the council shall end on March 1, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of a vacancy. The members appointed by persons other than the city council shall serve for terms designated by the appointing authority and shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21681, § 2, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 2-339. - Officers. 
The commission shall annually elect one of its members as chair at the first meeting in April of each year. The chair shall appoint a vice-chair from the remaining commission members. The chair shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to preside, the vice-chair shall preside. The commission rules may specify the duties of the officers. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21681, § 2, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 22443, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 2-340. - Meetings; quorum; rules. 
The commission shall meet at least quarterly. Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum to do business. The commission may adopt rules for the conduct of its business. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city council through the city clerk of such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21681, § 2, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 22443, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Secs. 2-341—2-345. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - DISABILITIES COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-346. - Disabilities commission; establishment, composition, terms. 
(a)  An advisory commission to be known as the Columbia Disabilities Commission is hereby established. The commission shall be composed of the city's ADA coordinator and twelve (12) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Seven (7) members shall be persons with significant disabilities as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Two (2) members shall own or operate businesses in the Columbia area. Three (3) members shall have particular knowledge or experience in providing services to individuals with disabilities or an interest in the welfare of the city residents with disabilities. All appointed members shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  Members shall serve three-year staggered terms. In order to establish staggered terms, four (4) members of the initial board shall be appointed to one-year terms, four (4) shall be appointed to two-year terms and four (4) shall be appointed to three-year terms. After the initial appointment, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Members shall serve until their replacements are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 2-347. - Duties, meetings. 
(a)  The commission shall meet at least quarterly. Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum to do business. The commission shall elect a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary from its members. Each officer shall hold office for a term of one (1) year. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(b)  The commission shall hold public meetings to consider the concerns of residents of the city with disabilities and advise the city council as necessary. 
(c)  The commission shall review or monitor accessibility of public and private facilities and shall educate the business community, civic groups and the public as to the concerns of residents with disabilities. 
(d)  The commission shall act as liaison between the city and other organizations working with persons with disabilities and shall encourage communication and cooperate among them. 
(Ord. No. 21571, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 2-348—2-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - MAYOR'S COUNCIL ON PHYSICAL FITNESS AND HEALTH 
 
Sec. 2-356. - Established. 
The mayor's council on physical fitness and health is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 21664, § 2, 4-15-13)  
Sec. 2-357. - Duties. 
The mayor's council on physical fitness and health shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Promote and support the mission of the United States President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sport at the municipal level. 
(2)  Sponsor and support local physical fitness and health promotion activities. 
(3)  Educate the public about the importance of regular physical activity, nutrition, smoking cessation, weight control, and other health promoting activities. 
(4)  Support and encourage individuals, civic groups, professional associations, and other organizations to promote personal health and fitness. 
(5)  Identify local fitness and health resources and facilitate their involvement in the promotion of fitness and health activities. 
(6)  Recognize outstanding programs, contributions and individual achievements in physical fitness and health promotion. 
(7)  Submit an annual report to the city council. 
(8)  Assist schools, businesses and other organizations in developing and implementing physical fitness and health promotion programs. 
(9)  Work in concert with city administration in preparation and submission of grant requests. 
(Ord. No. 21664, § 2, 4-15-13)  
Sec. 2-358. - Membership; terms of office; officers; rules and procedures. 
The mayor's council on physical fitness and health shall be composed of thirteen (13) members appointed by the city council. If feasible, members should include persons in the following categories: education; health care; business and labor; communications and media; volunteer organizations; sports organizations and clubs; and coaches, trainers, prominent athletes, and sports administrators. Members shall be appointed to three (3) year terms and shall serve without compensation. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. The mayor's council shall elect from its members a chair, vice-chair and a secretary. The chair shall preside at all meetings, and in the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to reside, the vice-chair shall preside. The secretary shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the mayor's council. The mayor's council on physical fitness and health may establish its own rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 21664, § 2, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 23857 , § 1, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 2-359. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The mayor's council on physical fitness and health shall meet every other month and at the call of the chair. Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from fifty (50) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 21664, § 2, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 23857 , § 1, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 2-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-361. - Established. 
The youth advisory council is hereby established to advise the city council on issues relating to youth issues and concerns. 
( Ord. No. 22326 , § 1, 1-5-15)  
Sec. 2-362. - Membership; appointment; terms; meetings. 
(a)  The youth advisory council shall consist of a minimum of fifteen (15) but no more than twenty-one (21) members. The council shall be composed of high school students between fourteen (14) and nineteen (19) years-of-age at the time of appointment. The city council shall appoint a diverse group of members to include the various city wards, public and private high schools, and other elements of diversity whenever possible. Of the members first appointed, one-third (?) shall serve a term of one (1) year, one-third shall serve a term of two (2) years, and one-third (?) shall serve a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for up to a maximum of three (3) years. Members shall serve without compensation. Terms will expire on June 1 and reappointments shall be made upon any of the following: 
(1)  Resignation of a youth advisory council member; 
(2)  Term expiration; 
(3)  Graduation from high school; 
(4)  Completion of General Educational Development (GED); or 
(5)  A member reaching the age of twenty (20). 
(b)  On an annual basis, the following non-voting liaison members shall be appointed to assist the youth advisory council in its work: 
(1)  The city council shall appoint a city council member; and 
(2)  The youth community coalition (YC2) shall appoint a YC2 staff member. 
(c)  The youth advisory council shall elect three (3) of its members to serve as chair, vice chair, and secretary, respectively. Each officer shall hold office for a term of one (1) year. When any officer's appointment to the youth advisory council expires or becomes vacant, the youth advisory council shall elect a new officer. 
( Ord. No. 22326 , § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 22739, § 1, 2-15-16 ; Ord. No. 23248 , § 1, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 23872 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 2-363. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)  The youth advisory council shall hold meetings a minimum of once each month throughout the school year, at a time and place to be determined by the youth advisory council, and any such special meetings as called for by the chair. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)  The chair of the youth advisory council is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) regular meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent from six (6) regular meetings in a school year shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(c)  The youth advisory council may, from time to time, form sub-committees to study issues and make recommendations to the overall youth advisory council for the youth advisory council's consideration and recommendation to the city council. 
(d)  The youth advisory council shall prepare and maintain permanent minutes of the meetings including actions taken. 
(e)  All meetings, records and activities of the youth advisory council shall comply with the requirements of the Missouri Sunshine Law, state records retention laws, and the City Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
( Ord. No. 22326 , § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 23872 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 2-364. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The youth advisory council: 
(1)  Shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to youth and youth-related issues. 
(2)  May request that the city council allow up to two (2) members to serve as liaisons and non-voting members to another city board or commission studying an issue affecting youth. 
(3)  May hold an annual city-wide youth summit, as needed. 
(4)  May request funding from the city council for events or training. 
( Ord. No. 22326 , § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 23872 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 2-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - PARKING ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-365.1. - Established. 
The parking advisory commission is hereby established to study, plan and advise the city council on parking resources. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 2-365.2. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Evaluate the effectiveness of existing parking resources; 
(2)  Make recommendations on policies and procedures affecting parking resources; 
(3)  Study parking alternatives and make recommendations to most effectively manage existing parking supply and reduce parking demand; 
(4)  Monitor future demand trends for public parking structures; 
(5)  Examine neighborhood parking programs; 
(6)  Provide citizens with an adequate opportunity to participate in planning and assessing parking programs by holding public hearings to obtain views of citizens along with facilitation of other forms of community input to ensure transparency; and 
(7)  Advise the city council on any other matters referred to the commission by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 2-365.3. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, appointed as follows: 
(1)  One (1) member shall be a representative of the University of Missouri appointed by the University of Missouri administration; 
(2)  One (1) member shall be a Downtown Community Improvement District (CID) representative appointed by the CID; 
(3)  One (1) member shall be a Downtown Leadership Council (DLC) representative appointed by the DLC; and 
(4)  Six (6) members shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Commission members shall be residents and qualified voters of the city. Members shall serve without compensation. A member may not be a paid officer or employee of the city, be a party to any pending litigation against the city, or be an elected public office holder. 
(c)  The six (6) members appointed by the city council shall initially be appointed to staggered terms as follows: two (2) members for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members for a term of three (3) years each. Thereafter, appointments made by the city council shall be for a term of three (3) years, except that any appointment to fill a vacancy, occurring other than by expiration of a term, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The members appointed by persons other than the city council shall serve for terms designated by the appointing authority and shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 2-365.4. - Election of officers; terms. 
The commission shall annually elect from one of its members a chair and a vice-chair. Officers shall serve a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible for re-election. In the event of a vacancy of any elected office, the commission shall elect an officer to serve until the next regular annual election. The chair shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to preside, the vice-chair shall preside. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 2-365.5. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)  The commission shall meet at least quarterly at times and places accessible to the public to be determined by the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chair of the commission. All meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the requirements of the Missouri Sunshine Law and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia. 
(b)  Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from fifty (50) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city clerk and the appointing authority of any such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 2-365.6. - Conflicts of interest. 
Commission members shall not serve on the board of directors or be employed by any organization which receives funding upon recommendation of the commission or when such member's immediate family or an organization owned or controlled by such member or such member's immediate family could derive a financial or other material gain arising out of action or recommendation by the commission. For purposes of this section, each academic and administrative unit of the University of Missouri shall be considered a separate organization and each school of the Columbia Public School District shall be considered a separate organization. When there is doubt as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the matter shall be resolved by a vote of the commission, excluding the person that is the subject of the potential conflict. For purposes of this section "personal interest" means more than a nominal interest arising from family; close business, political or other associations or other factor likely to affect the welfare of the member or the member's family and is something more than a well-known opinion, or interest in, or academic study of, a subject matter. "Immediate family" includes any person living in the same household as the member together with children, grandchildren, parents and grandparents of the member. Any commission member who violates this section shall automatically forfeit the office. 
(Ord. No. 23413 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Secs. 2-365.7—2-365.9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - TREE BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-365.10. - Established. 
The tree board is hereby established to study, plan and advise the city council on urban forest resources. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 2-365.11. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Provide guidance to the city council on ordinances related to the management of the urban forest; 
(2)  Assist in the development, review and revision of an urban forest master plan; 
(3)  Educate the public on the proper care and management of trees and the importance of the urban forest to the environment; 
(4)  Act as liaison between the public and city staff on tree-related issues; 
(5)  Promote the integration of urban forestry in the city organization; and 
(6)  Advise the city council on any other urban forestry matters referred to the board by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 2-365.12. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council. Board members shall demonstrate an interest and experience in arboriculture, urban forest management, tree care, horticulture, botany, ecology, environmental education, environmental policy, landscape architecture, or related fields. 
(b)  Board members shall be residents and qualified voters of the city. Members shall serve without compensation. A member may not be a paid officer or employee of the city, be a party to any pending litigation against the city, or be an elected public office holder. 
(c)  Board members shall initially be appointed to staggered terms as follows: two (2) members for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and three (3) members for a term of three (3) years each. Thereafter, appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years, except that any appointment to fill a vacancy, occurring other than by expiration of a term, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 2-365.13. - Election of officers; terms. 
The board shall annually elect from one (1) of its members a chair and a vice-chair. Officers shall serve a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible for re-election. In the event of a vacancy of any elected office, the board shall elect an officer to serve until the next regular annual election. The chair shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to preside, the vice-chair shall preside. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 2-365.14. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)  The board shall meet at least quarterly at times and places accessible to the public to be determined by the board. Special meetings may be called by the chair of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the requirements of the Missouri Sunshine Law and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia. 
(b)  Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from fifty (50) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city clerk and the appointing authority of any such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 2-365.15. - Conflicts of interest. 
Board members shall not serve on the board of directors or be employed by any organization which receives funding upon recommendation of the board or when such member's immediate family or an organization owned or controlled by such member or such member's immediate family could derive a financial or other material gain arising out of action or recommendation by the board. For purposes of this section, each academic and administrative unit of the University of Missouri shall be considered a separate organization and each school of the Columbia Public School District shall be considered a separate organization. When there is doubt as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the matter shall be resolved by a vote of the board, excluding the person that is the subject of the potential conflict. For purposes of this section "personal interest" means more than a nominal interest arising from family; close business, political or other associations or other factor likely to affect the welfare of the member or the member's family and is something more than a well-known opinion, or interest in, or academic study of, a subject matter. "Immediate family" includes any person living in the same household as the member together with children, grandchildren, parents and grandparents of the member. Any board member who violates this section shall automatically forfeit the office. 
(Ord. No. 23720 , § 1, 12-3-18)  
Secs. 2-365.16—2-365.20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - COLUMBIA SPORTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-365.21. - Established. 
The Columbia Sports Commission is hereby established to provide support and assistance in the city's efforts in recruiting, retaining and organizing regional, state, and national sporting events, as well as promoting amateur, club, college, and professional local sporting teams. 
(Ord. No. 24077 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 2-365.22. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Assist the convention and visitors bureau with its sports sales efforts to recruit, retain and organize regional, state, and national sporting events; 
(2)  Promote amateur, club, college and professional local sporting teams; 
(3)  Make recommendations to the convention and visitors advisory board related to the support of sporting events and sporting-related projects and promotions; 
(4)  Evaluate Columbia's current sports market and identify existing sporting events, tournaments and existing facilities; 
(5)  Identify qualifying events that will fit current facilities; 
(6)  Provide support to new and existing events; and 
(7)  Advise the city council on any other sports-related efforts. 
(Ord. No. 24077 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 2-365.23. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of eleven (11) voting members who shall serve without compensation and shall not be paid employees of the city. Commission members shall demonstrate a knowledge of and passion for sporting events in the community and have an ability to positively impact events through their knowledge and resources. The eleven (11) voting members shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Seven (7) voting members shall be appointed by the city council and shall be residents of the city, comprised of the following: 
a.  Two (2) members shall be representatives from sports clubs or organizations located and active in the community with established regular season activities and scheduled hosted tournaments. 
b.  Two (2) members shall be representatives from the hotel or motel industry. 
c.  One (1) member shall be a representative from a small to mid-sized business or employer within the city limits of Columbia. 
d.  One (1) member shall be a representative from a large business or major employer within the city limits of Columbia. 
e.  One (1) member shall be a citizen-at-large interested in sporting events. 
(2)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the Chancellor of the University of Missouri-Columbia. 
(3)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the President of Columbia College. 
(4)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the Superintendent of Columbia Public Schools. 
(5)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the Chair of the Columbia Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors. 
(6)  Three (3) members shall be nonvoting liaison members as follows: convention and visitors department director, or the director's designee; the parks and recreation department director, or the director's designee; the convention and visitors advisory board chair, or the chair's designee. 
(b)  The term of office of the members appointed by the city council shall be two (2) years. The members appointed by entities other than the city council shall serve for terms designated by the appointing authority and shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. To provide for staggered terms, of the members first appointed by the city council, three (3) members shall serve a term of one (1) year and four (4) members shall serve terms of two (2) years. Thereafter, appointments made by the city council shall be for terms of two (2) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies, occurring other than by expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. No. 24077 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 2-365.24. - Officers; meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)  The commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its voting members. The term of these officers shall be one (1) year. The chair shall preside at meetings. The vice-chair shall preside when the chair is absent or otherwise unable to preside. 
(b)  The commission shall meet at least quarterly at times and places accessible to the public to be determined by the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chair of the commission. All meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the requirements of the Missouri Sunshine Law and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia. 
(c)  Seven (7) voting members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(d)  The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a meeting; provided that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from fifty (50) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city clerk and the appointing authority of any such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 24077 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Secs. 2-365.25—2.365.30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21467, § 1, adopted October 1, 2012, repealed §§ 2-376—2-381, which pertained to armory board and derived from §§ 2.800—2.850 of the 1964 Code. 
 
Secs. 2-366—2-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21571, § 1, adopted January 7, 2013, repealed §§ 2-401—2-403, which pertained to finance advisory and audit committee and derived from Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 18577, § 1, 7-5-05. 
 
Secs. 2-401—2-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFICE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Office established; responsibility. 
There is hereby established an office of community services, which shall be a division of the health department. The office of community services shall be responsible for coordinating, monitoring, evaluating and planning for community human service programs for the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1100; Ord. No. 18868, § 1, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 2-422. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The office of community services shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Present to the Boone County Community Services Advisory Commission and to the city manager plans and recommendations regarding the appropriation of public funds for community human services. 
(2)  Make application and negotiate with funding sources including the city, county, state and federal governments for funds, and to expend appropriated funds for coordinating, monitoring, evaluating and planning community human services. 
(3)  Perform administrative duties related to grants and purchase of service agreements. 
(4)  Provide technical assistance to the Boone County Community Services Advisory Commission and the several human service provider agencies. 
(5)  Monitor the administration of agencies who receive funding from the city council either directly or through state and federal programs. The office of community services may conduct reviews of those agencies which may include a review of the agency's effort in administering human services, the agency's expenditure of funds received pursuant to contracts with the city, and any and all acts which relate to its contract with the city. 
(6)  Exercise such other powers and duties as the city manager may from time to time direct. 
(b)  The provisions of this section relating to the duties of the office of community services do not apply to funding requests or activities or services administered by or under the supervision of any department of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1110; Ord. No. 18868, § 1, 1-17-06)  
Secs. 2-423—2-435. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21467, § 1, adopted October 1, 2012, repealed §§ 2-436—2-439, which pertained to special business district board and derived from §§ 2.2390, 2.2400 of the 1964 Code. 
 
Secs. 2-436—2-457. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PURCHASING[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18178, § 2, adopted July 19, 2004, repealed former Art. X, in its entirety, and enacted provisions designated as a new Art. X to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of Ord. No. 18178, Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 2.760, 2.770, 2.710, 2.720, 2.730, 2.740, 2.750, 2.780, 2.785, 2.787, 2.790, 2.795, 2.797; Ord. No. 10249, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 10789, § 1(2.797), 11-18-85; Ord. No. 12044, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 13511, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 14459 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 15267, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 15991, § 1, 5-3-99. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of finance director generally, § 2-208. 
 
Sec. 2-458. - Scope of article; rules and procedures. 
(a)  This article delegates authority to the city manager and the purchasing agent to contract for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services. It does not impose procedural limitations on the city council or otherwise limit the power of the city council to contract for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services. 
(b)  The director of finance is authorized to establish rules and procedures for the purchasing division. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-459. - Authority of purchasing agent to contract. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, the purchasing agent is authorized to contract for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services for which appropriated funds are available. 
(b)  Subject to the competitive bidding provisions of this article, when appropriated funds are available, the purchasing agent is authorized to contract for any project that fits into any of the following categories: 
(1)  Ordinary maintenance of public improvements, 
(2)  Construction, upgrade or relocation of electric distribution lines less than sixty-nine (69) KV that is estimated to cost less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and that does not require the exercise of the power of eminent domain, and 
(3)  Construction, upgrade or relocation of water distribution mains sixteen (16) inches or less in diameter that is estimated to cost less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and that does not require the exercise of the power of eminent domain. 
Public improvement projects falling within any of these categories may be contracted for under this subsection without following the public improvement process of Chapter 22. However, special assessment tax bills shall not be issued for any public improvement unless the public improvement process of Chapter 22 has been followed. 
If a project with a cost limitation is bid under this subsection and the bid of the lowest and best, responsive and responsible bidder is for more than the authorized amount, the contract may be entered into only with the specific authorization of the city council. 
The total amount of all change orders executed in connection with any contract for capital or public improvements authorized by this article shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the contract price without the written approval of the city manager. 
(c)  When appropriated funds are available, the purchasing agent may contract for emergency work on public improvements and for repairs of public improvements requiring prompt attention without following the competitive bidding provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 20880, § 1, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 2-460. - Bids and requests for proposals required; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, all contracts for purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services which have not been specifically authorized by the city council shall be entered into only after a competitive bidding process or a request for proposals process. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may enter into contracts for emergency purchases without following a competitive bidding process or a request for proposals process. "Emergency purchases" are purchases necessitated by nonrecurring emergency situations posing a substantial danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens or of a risk of substantial financial loss to the city unless the required supplies, materials, equipment or services are obtained as expeditiously as possible. The department head requesting an emergency purchase shall certify that the purchase is an emergency within the meaning of this section by a memorandum which sets forth the nature of the emergency. If the purchasing agent and the department head do not agree that the proposed purchase is an emergency purchase, the matter shall be referred to the city manager for final decision. 
(c)  The purchasing agent may enter into contracts with sole source suppliers and governmental entities without following a competitive bidding process or a request for proposals process. "Sole source suppliers" are suppliers of supplies, materials, equipment or services which are unique or which are not available from more than one (1) competitive source in the normal course of business. The purchasing agent shall certify in writing that each purchase from a sole source supplier under this subsection meets the requirements of this subsection. 
(d)  The city manager may enter into contracts for professional and other services without following a competitive bidding process or a request for proposals process when factors such as prior experience, skills, education, local knowledge or unique knowledge are considerations in selecting the contractor. The city manager may waive attorney conflicts of interest if the manager determines that the waiver is in the city's interest. This subsection shall not apply to contracts for auditing services for the annual fiscal audit or to contracts for architectural, engineering and land surveying services. 
(e)  The purchasing agent may enter into contracts for specialized services relating to art conservation, restoration, archiving and installation without following a competitive bidding process or a request for proposals process when the required services are not widely available and when factors such as experience and local knowledge play an important role. The department head requesting these services shall document and certify that the proposed contract meets the requirements of this subsection. 
(f)  The city manager and purchasing agent are encouraged to pursue informal bidding and requests for proposals in the above categories of exceptions whenever time and business conditions permit. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 19271, § 1, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 20880, § 1, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 2-461. - No contract to exceed five years. 
The purchasing agent has no authority to contract for the purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment or services for a term exceeding five (5) years. The purchasing agent has no authority to extend the term of any contract for the purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment or services so that the length of the original term plus all extended terms exceeds five (5) years and three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-462. - Procurement of architectural, engineering and land surveying services. 
The city council may, by ordinance, establish special procedures and guidelines for procurement of architectural, engineering and land surveying services. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-463. - Sale of surplus material. 
(a)  A department head having charge of any surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials or equipment may request the purchasing agent to dispose of the property. The purchasing agent is authorized to sell the property in any form of open market competition to the highest bidder. The purchasing agent may set a minimum sale price and may reject any bid that, in the purchasing agent's judgment, is not a fair sale price. 
(b)  The purchasing agent, with the approval of the city manager, is authorized to sell any surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials or equipment to any governmental entity without open market competition. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Secs. 2-464, 2-465. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-466. - Bidding process; contracts for fifteen thousand dollars or more. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the purchasing agent shall not contract for the purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment or services costing fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more unless the bidding process of this section has been followed. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall advertise for sealed bids in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five (5) days before the time set for opening bids. All bids must be sealed and addressed to the purchasing division and must be received by the purchasing division by 2:00 p.m. on the day specified in the advertisement for bids. The bids shall be opened by the purchasing agent at the purchasing agent's office between 2:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the day the bids are due, if practicable. If not practicable, then the bids shall be opened on the earliest day thereafter that the purchasing agent is able to open the bids. The purchasing agent may require bidders to deposit a cashier's check or a certified check drawn on a solvent financial institution or a surety bond in an amount not less than five (5) percent of the bid. The deposit shall be forfeited to the city if the successful bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract. 
(c)  The purchasing agent may use an electronic bidding system if the system is secure and allows the bids to be opened only at the time designated for bid opening. 
(d)  The purchasing agent, after consulting with all affected departments and subject to the provisions of subsection (e), may reject any or all bids, may award the contract to the bidder that is, in the judgment of the purchasing agent, the lowest and best, responsive and responsible bidder, or may split the award between two (2) or more bidders if, in the judgment of the purchasing agent, it is in the best interest of the city to split the award. 
(e)  Before taking any action on bids, the purchasing agent shall inform all affected departments of the purchasing agent's proposed action. The head of any affected department who disagrees with the purchasing agent's proposed action may inform the purchasing agent and the head of any other affected department of the disagreement. If, after conferring on the matter, the purchasing agent and the heads of all affected departments are unable to agree on an appropriate action on the bids, the matter shall be referred to the city manager for final decision. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-467. - Bidding process; contracts for five thousand dollars or more but less than fifteen thousand dollars. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the purchasing agent shall not contract for the purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment or services costing five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more but less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) unless the bidding process of this section or the bidding process of section 2-466 has been followed. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall solicit by telephone, written notice or otherwise at least three (3) bids, if three (3) independent vendors are available. 
(c)  Bids shall be awarded or rejected as provided in section 2-466. 
(d)  The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all solicitations made under this section. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 21577, § 1, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 2-468. - Contracts for less than five thousand dollars. 
The purchasing agent may contract for the purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment or services costing less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) by following the provisions of section 2-467 or by making open market purchases from vendors with proven ability to furnish supplies, materials, equipment and services at the lowest and best price. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 21577, § 1, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 2-469. - Procurement cards. 
The purchasing agent may establish a procurement card policy that allows card holders to charge up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per transaction. 
(Ord. No. 21577, § 1, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 2-470. - Plans, specifications and descriptions to be kept by purchasing agent. 
When calling for bids, the purchasing agent shall keep on file the plans, specifications or descriptions of the article or service to be purchased. These plans, specifications or descriptions shall be available for public inspection. The purchasing agent may require a deposit for the return of plans or specifications taken from the office. The deposit shall not exceed the reasonable cost of preparing the plans or specifications. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-471. - Requests for proposals. 
The purchasing agent may authorize a request for proposals process instead of a bidding process whenever the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or services may be facilitated by such a process. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-472. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing agent is authorized to participate in cooperative purchasing programs with the United States or any agency of the United States; with the State of Missouri or any agency, municipality or political subdivision of the State of Missouri; with other states or any agency, municipality or political subdivision of any other state; or with any association of municipalities or political subdivisions; provided, that the cooperative purchasing program follows a competitive bidding process. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-473. - Recycled and environmentally preferable products. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Environmentally preferable product means a product which by its chemical or physical nature has a less adverse impact on the environment when compared to a similar product with a different chemical or physical nature or a product whose manufacturing process is less harmful to the environment than the manufacturing process of an equivalent product. 
(2)  Post consumer waste means material generated by a consumer which has served its intended end use and has been separated or diverted from the solid waste stream for the purpose of collection, recycling and disposition. 
(3)  Recycled product means a product that utilizes recycled materials or materials diverted from the waste stream, including an appropriate amount of post consumer waste, in its manufacture and construction. 
(b)  In evaluating bids and awarding contracts, the purchasing agent is authorized to give preference to recycled and environmentally preferable products as follows: 
(1)  The cost of recycled product may exceed by up to ten (10) percent the lowest priced bid on a comparable product which does not utilize recycled materials. 
(2)  The cost of an environmentally preferable product may exceed by up to five (5) percent the lowest priced bid on a comparable product which is not environmentally preferable. 
(c)  In order to qualify for recycled consideration on paper and paper products, proposed stock must meet U.S. Environmental Protection Agency recommended minimum content standards of selected papers and paper products. Standards identifying the minimum content of recovered materials and products other than paper products shall be done on a case by case basis. The purchasing division shall utilize standards established by industry organizations, federal agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency, nationally recognized standards organizations such as the American Society for Testing and Materials and state agencies. 
(d)  All bidders who wish to receive a preference on products made with recycled materials must properly complete, sign and return with their bid a certification of product content. 
(e)  The city manager is authorized to designate certain post consumer recycled materials for use in city projects to demonstrate and encourage the use of these products. Wherever possible, markers shall be erected listing the recycled content of the products. These products shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) annually. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-474. - Debarment. 
(a)  The purchasing agent is authorized to debar a person from consideration for award of contracts for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of integrity or honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor or vendor. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with contract specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract. 
(5)  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor or vendor shall not be considered a basis for debarment. 
(6)  The person is in arrears on any debt owed the city or has a history of being chronically in arrears on debts owed the city. 
(7)  Any other cause so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor or vendor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this article. 
(b)  The length of debarment shall not exceed three (3) years. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall initiate a debarment by serving written notice of the debarment to the person the purchasing agent intends to debar. The notice shall set forth the specific grounds for the debarment and advise the person of the right to appeal. The notice shall be served by registered or certified mail or by delivering a copy of the notice to the person subject to debarment or the person's agent or employee. The debarment shall take effect ten (10) days after service of the notice unless an appeal is taken to the director of finance. If an appeal is taken, the debarment shall not take effect until a final order upholding the debarment is entered by the director or until the appeal is dismissed by the appellant. 
(d)  Within ten (10) days after service of a written notice of debarment, the person affected by the notice may file a written request for a hearing before the director of finance contesting the debarment. 
(e)  The director of finance shall set the matter for hearing on the record within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. At least ten (10) days notice of the hearing shall be given to the affected person and to the purchasing agent. 
(f)  At the hearing, each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses and impeach any witness. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. All evidence shall be suitably recorded and preserved. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply, but the director may exclude evidence which is irrelevant or repetitious. Each party shall be entitled to present oral arguments or written briefs at or after the hearing. 
(g)  Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the transcript of the hearing, the director of finance shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue a final order. Findings of fact shall be based upon competent and substantial evidence found in the record as a whole. A copy of the director's order, findings of fact and conclusions of law, shall be delivered or mailed to the purchasing agent and to the affected person. 
(h)  An appeal from the director's order shall be to the circuit court pursuant to chapter 536, RSMo. 
(i)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the purchasing agent to accept the bid which in the judgment of the purchasing agent is the lowest and best bid, or to reject any or all bids or to reject a bid on grounds which could have been used to debar the bidder. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 2-475. - Contracts involving hazardous materials. 
(a)  In evaluating bids or proposals for contracts involving the transportation, handling or disposal of hazardous materials, the purchasing agent and the head of the department requesting the contract shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The experience of the bidder in successfully completing similar projects; 
(2)  The financial strength and stability of the bidder; 
(3)  The ability of the bidder to provide adequate insurance to protect the city from the bidder's negligence; and 
(4)  The history of the bidder in complying with federal and state environmental laws. 
(b)  In awarding a contract involving the transportation, handling or disposal of hazardous materials, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to the bidder which the purchasing agent and the head of the department requesting the contract have determined to be the best bidder, regardless of whether that bidder has submitted the lowest bid. If the purchasing agent and the department head cannot agree, the matter shall be referred to the city manager for final decision. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 2, 7-19-04)  
Secs. 2-476—2-485. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SELF-INSURANCE PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-486. - Self-insurance program coverage. 
The city's self-insurance program covers the following losses and claims: workers' compensation, automobile and property damage, automobile liability, public officials' liability and general liability for which sovereign immunity does not exist. The scope of workers' compensation coverage is governed by applicable state statutes. The scope of all other self-insurance program coverage is limited to the types of claims and losses covered by the city's most recent excess insurance policies. However, a noncontractual monetary claim against the city excluded from an excess insurance policy may be included by the city manager in the self-insurance plan. 
(Ord. No. 15402, § 1, 10-20-97)  
Sec. 2-487. - Sovereign immunity; no rights established. 
The city's self-insurance plan does not provide coverage for claims or losses for which sovereign immunity exists and nothing in the self-insurance plan shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity. Nothing in the city's self-insurance plan shall be construed as conferring any rights on any person or establishing any remedies for any person. 
(Ord. No. 15402, § 1, 10-20-97)  
Sec. 2-488. - Settlement authority; third party administrator. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to settle or resist all claims covered by the self-insurance program. The city manager may delegate the authority to settle claims covered under the self-insurance program; provided, that no claim shall be settled for more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) without the approval of the city manager. The city manager shall notify the city council of any claim settlement exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(b)  The services of a third party administrator for the self-insurance program may be contracted for under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15402, § 1, 10-20-97)  
Secs. 2-489—2-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - COLUMBIA TRUST 
 
Sec. 2-500. - Columbia Trust established. 
The city council hereby establishes the City of Columbia Community Trust Funds to be known collectively as the Columbia Trust. The Columbia Trust shall exist separately from the general fund and is for the purpose of holding, aggregating and investing charitable contributions to be used for the betterment of the city. Establishment of the Columbia Trust shall not affect charitable programs established by the city council or city manager within the general fund or other city funds. 
(Ord. No. 15993, § 1, 5-3-99)  
Sec. 2-501. - Administration. 
(a)  Columbia Trust accounts shall be established for receipt of unrestricted charitable contributions made to the Columbia Trust. Assets in the Columbia Trust shall be commingled and invested in a way that provides for the growth and security of the Columbia Trust. 
(b)  The city council or city manager may establish individual funds or accounts in the Columbia Trust for special purposes or to receive restricted gifts or contributions. Restricted gifts or special purpose accounts shall be managed in a fiscally advantageous manner and in compliance with the restrictions or special purposes. 
(c)  All Columbia Trust assets shall be managed and accounted for according to procedures approved by the city manager. The city manager shall report the status of the Columbia Trust to the city council annually. 
(Ord. No. 15993, § 1, 5-3-99)  
Sec. 2-502. - Gifts. 
(a)  Gifts to the Columbia Trust of real property may be accepted only by the city council. 
(b)  Gifts to the Columbia Trust of personal property and gifts in cash may be accepted by the city manager or, in his discretion, referred to the city council. 
(c)  Restricted gifts, other than those made to an existing restricted or special program or account, of personal property valued at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less or of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less in cash shall not be accepted for the Columbia Trust. 
(Ord. No. 15993, § 1, 5-3-99)  
Sec. 2-503. - Expenditures. 
(a)  Columbia Trust funds shall be expended only after they have been appropriated by the city council. 
(b)  A restricted gift shall be used only for the purpose specified by the donor. If any restricted gift of personal property or cash is used for a purpose other than that specified by the donor, the donor or the donor's heirs or successors shall have the right to a return of the gift or its cash equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 15993, § 1, 5-3-99)  
Secs. 2-504—2-514. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SALE, TRADE OR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-515. - Sale, trade or lease of real property. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, real property owned by the city may be sold, traded or leased only when authorized by ordinance and only after competitive bids have been obtained. The real property may be sold, traded or leased only to the person submitting the highest and best bid. 
(b)  City property may be sold, traded or leased without competitive bids: 
(1)  To any person to whom the property has a unique or enhanced value because of its accessibility, configuration, location, size or use; 
(2)  To any adjacent property owner at fair market value as determined by an appraisal; 
(3)  When use of the property is limited to public purposes specified by the council; 
(4)  When the sale, trade or lease is part of a settlement in a condemnation proceeding; and 
(5)  When the council determines that it is in the public interest to sell, trade or lease the property to a particular person. 
(c)  Farmland owned by the city may be leased by the city manager without obtaining competitive bids and without further council authorization under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The person seeking to lease the property conducts a farming operation adjacent to the property sought to be leased from the city; 
(2)  The person seeking to lease the property has previously leased the property and has demonstrated good farming practices; or 
(3)  The property was acquired by the city from the person seeking to lease the property. 
(Ord. No. 18178, § 3, 7-19-04)  
Secs. 2-516—2-525. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21571, § 1, adopted January 7, 2013, repealed §§ 2-526—2-534, which pertained to Columbia Vision Commission and derived from Ord. No. 20081, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 20161, § 1, 1-5-09. 
 
Secs. 2-526—2-535. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21570, § 1, adopted January 7, 2013, repealed §§ 2-536—2-539, which pertained to enhanced enterprise zone board and derived from Ord. No. 21326, § 1, 5-21-12. 
 
Secs. 2-536—2-539. - Reserved.  
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 10665, adopted Aug. 5, 1985, repealed Ch. 3 of the Code 1964, pertaining to the airport, and enacted in lieu thereof, a new Ch. 2, relative to similar subject matter, the provisions of which have been set out herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. I, §§ 3-1—3-8; Art. II, §§ 3-21—3-23; and Art. III, §§ 3-41—3-45. Former Ch. 3 derived from the city's Code 1964, Ch. 3, §§ 3.010—3.120. 
Charter reference— Powers generally, § 18. 
Cross reference— Civil defense, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 20; public works and improvements, Ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; subdivision regulations, Ch. 25; zoning regulations, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Aircraft and airports, RSMo. § 305.010 et seq.; authority of the city to establish and maintain airports, RSMo. § 305.170. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Columbia Regional Airport. 
The city shall establish and maintain a certificated airport to be known as Columbia Regional Airport. All ordinances of the city shall be in full force and effect within the boundaries of the airport. The airport boundaries are hereby defined as including all real property owned, leased, or controlled by the city for airport purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.010), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as designated: 
Airport shall mean the Columbia Regional Airport. 
Board shall mean the airport advisory board. 
City shall mean the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Commercial enterprise shall mean any activity for which a payment or charge shall be made. 
Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Director shall mean the Director of Economic Development of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Limousine shall mean any motor vehicle, other than a taxi, offered to the public by a public limousine business for the purpose of carrying or transporting passengers for a fixed charge or fee, or any hourly rate. 
Limousine service shall mean the business of offering to the public motor vehicles for carrying or transportation of passengers between Columbia Regional Airport and points within the city for a fixed charge or fee, or offering a vehicle with driver for transportation of passengers at an hourly rate. 
Manager shall mean the airport manager. 
Taxi shall mean any motor vehicle, other than a limousine, offered to the public by a public taxicab business for the purpose of carrying or transporting passengers for a charge or a fee. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.020), 8-5-85; Ord. No. 22946 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 3-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18514, § 1, adopted May 16, 2005, repealed former § 3-3 of the Code, which pertained to city control of the airport and derived from Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.030), adopted Aug. 5, 1985.  
Sec. 3-4. - Airport manager—Office created; appointment. 
The position of airport manager is hereby established. The manager shall be selected by and be immediately responsible to the director and may be dismissed or removed by the director. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.040), 8-5-85) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2.  
Sec. 3-5. - Same—Responsibilities. 
The manager shall have immediate charge of activities at the airport. The duties of the manager shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Managing the airport's business operations and financial functions; 
(2)  Promoting the development and efficient utilization of airport properties; 
(3)  Enforcement of all federal, state, and municipal laws and regulations at the airport. 
(4)  Supervision of all city employees at the airport. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.050), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-6. - Rules and regulations for the operation and use of airport. 
The director, after consultation with the airport advisory board, may adopt rules and regulations for the operation and use of the airport. Such rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall become effective upon the approval of the council by ordinance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place or places at the airport. Violation of such rules and regulations shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.060), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-7. - License or permit revocation. 
(a)  The director may revoke or suspend any license or permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whenever he shall find, after a hearing, that the licensee or permittee has violated any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to section 3-6 or when any licensee or permittee shall have been convicted in municipal court of violating any city ordinance. In such case all license or permit fees paid by said licensee shall be forfeited. 
(b)  The licensee or permittee may appeal any revocation or suspension to the city council. Such appeal shall delay the revocation or suspension until the city council conducts a hearing and either upholds, overrules, modifies, or amends the director's action. 
(c)  The manager may immediately suspend any license, contract, permit, enterprise, or conduct whenever an emergency exists or the continuance of said license, contract, permit, enterprise or conduct poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of others. The director may continue the suspension, regardless of an appeal, if an emergency or threat to safety continues in existence. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.070), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-8. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Enter any restricted area at the airport posted as being closed to the public except: 
a.  Those persons assigned to duty therein. 
b.  Those persons authorized by the director or the manager. 
c.  Passengers under appropriate supervision entering the aircraft parking apron area for the purposes of embarkation and debarkation. 
(2)  Solicit funds for any purpose or offer merchandise or services for sale on airport property without the permission of the director or manager. 
(3)  Post, distribute, or display signs, advertisements, circulars, or other printed or written matter on airport property except with the approval of the director or manager under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. 
(4)  Operate any vehicle for hire from the airport unless such operation conforms to the city ordinance or is with the approval of the city council and under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. 
(5)  Operate any vehicle on any aviation ramp, landing area or air operation area without authorization from the manager. 
(6)  Park any unattended vehicle in any area used for the operation, taxiing, landing, taking off, or parking of aircraft. 
(7)  Operate any motor vehicle (except emergency vehicles) in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in an air operation area. 
(8)  Operate any vehicle, aircraft, or mechanized equipment on airport property while under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
(9)  Smoke or use vapor products on the aviation ramp, landing area, or any other area designed for the operation of aircraft or in any space within one hundred (100) feet of any fuel carrier not in motion, or within one hundred (100) feet of a fueling operation in progress. 
(10)  Fuel or defuel any aircraft fuel tank in any building or structure, or within twenty-five (25) feet of any service hangar; or deposit or drain onto, or leave any aviation fuel, lubricant, oil, grease, chemical, or other harmful liquid or material on any paved surface of airport property. 
(11)  Transport or store fuel on airport property in bottles, cans, or any other container with less than fifty (50) gallons capacity or fuel any aircraft from such container, except as permitted in writing by the manager. 
(12)  Operate or taxi any aircraft when the engine is running unless the operator is a licensed pilot or mechanic. 
(13)  Start an aircraft engine or leave any aircraft unattended while an engine is running with no one at the controls. 
(14)  Fail to yield to taxiing aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.080), 8-5-85; Ord. No. 22312, § 2, 12-15-14 )  
Secs. 3-9—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22946 , § 2, adopted September 19, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 3-21—3-23, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Established. 
The airport advisory board is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 22946 , § 3, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 3-22. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; compensation; terms 
(a)  The board shall be composed of nine (9) voting members who shall serve without compensation and shall not be paid employees of the city. The nine (9) members shall consist of the following: 
• Five (5) members shall be appointed by the city council and shall be residents of the city, comprised of the following: 
• A representative from the general aviation industry and/or a pilot. 
• A representative from the hotel or motel industry. 
• A representative from an educational institution. 
• A representative from a major employer within the City of Columbia. 
• A citizen-at-large interested in aviation and travel. 
• One (1) member shall be appointed by the presiding commissioner of the County of Boone. 
• One (1) member shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Jefferson. 
• One (1) member shall be appointed by the chair of the board of directors of the Columbia Chamber of Commerce. 
• One (1) member shall be appointed by the chair of the board of directors for Regional Economic Development Incorporated (REDI). 
There shall also be three (3) nonvoting liaison members of the board as follows: the convention and visitors bureau director, or the director's designee; the director of public works, or the director's designee; and the airport manager, or the manager's designee. 
(b)  The term of office of the members appointed by the city council shall be three (3) years. The members appointed by persons other than the city council shall serve for terms designated by the appointing authority and shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. To provide for staggered terms, of the members first appointed by the city council, one (1) member shall serve a term of one (1) year, two (2) members shall serve terms of two (2) years, and two (2) members shall serve terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, appointments made by the council shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies, occurring other than by expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Unless otherwise removed, a member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until such time as a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 22946 , § 3, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 3-23. - Election of officers; terms. 
The board shall annually elect one of its members as chair at the first meeting in December of each year. The chair must be a member appointed by the council. The chair shall appoint a vice chair from the remaining board members. The chair shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the chair or the chair's inability to preside, the vice chair shall preside. 
(Ord. No. 22946 , § 3, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 3-24. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The board shall make a continuous study of airport needs and of aviation in the area, and shall make recommendations to the council for the development and use of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 22946 , § 3, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 3-25. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)  The board shall hold regular monthly meetings at such times as it shall fix, and other meetings at the call of the chair. The city manager shall receive notice of all meetings of the board. 
(b)  Five (5) voting members shall constitute a quorum to transact business. 
(c)  The chair is authorized to excuse any member from attendance; provided that, except in case of emergency, the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council through the city clerk of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 22946 , § 3, 9-19-16)  
Secs. 3-26—3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-41. - Commercial use; generally. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any commercial enterprise at the airport, without entering into a contractual agreement with the city and obtaining all necessary licenses and permits. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, commercial enterprise shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Repair and/or service aircraft; 
(2)  Store and handle aircraft; 
(3)  Sell new, used, or reconditioned aircraft; 
(4)  Sell aircraft parts and accessories; 
(5)  Handle, store, or sell fuel, oil or petroleum products; 
(6)  Operate a concession, vending machine, automobile rental agency; 
(7)  Transport freight, mail or other articles; 
(8)  Offer or provide passenger flight, air taxi service, rental or charter; 
(9)  Operate a scheduled commercial airline or scheduled commercial ground transportation services; 
(10)  Offer pilot instruction; 
(11)  Other commercial enterprise of any sort or character. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.120), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-42. - Commercial use by taxis; permit issuance. 
(a)  The manager is hereby authorized to designate an area for the exclusive use of taxis, and to limit the solicitation of business by operators and owners of such vehicles to that area. 
(b)  Operating permits for each taxi may be issued by the manager for a period not to exceed one (1) calendar year upon a showing that: 
(1)  Each taxi is licensed by a city, when required. 
(2)  Each taxi is clearly and permanently marked as a taxi and has an approved meter and a functioning two-way radio with communications to a base station that is capable of summoning emergency aid. 
(3)  Each person operating a taxi does possess a valid chauffeur's license issued by the State of Missouri. 
(c)  A fee may be charged for such permit as set forth in the airport rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.130), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-43. - Commercial uses by limousines; permit issuance. 
(a)  The manager is hereby authorized to designate an area for the exclusive use of each limousine service operating to and from the airport and to limit the solicitation of business by the operators and owners of such vehicles to that area. 
(b)  Operating permits for each limousine may be issued by the manager for a period not to exceed one (1) calendar year upon a showing that: 
(1)  Each limousine is licensed by the State of Missouri and the Public Service Commission when required; 
(2)  Each limousine is licensed by the city to which it operates when required; 
(3)  The owner or operator can present proof to the manager that each limousine is in good mechanical condition and has been inspected by a certified mechanic within thirty (30) days of the application for such permit; 
(4)  Each limousine has a functioning two-way radio with communications to a base station that is capable of summoning emergency aid; 
(5)  The owner or operator of each vehicle owns and maintains a policy of liability insurance for each limousine as approved by the city finance director; 
(6)  Each person operating a limousine does possess a valid chauffeur's license issued by the State of Missouri. 
(c)  Each person operating a limousine must obtain a City of Columbia chauffeur's license. 
(d)  All limousines must be maintained clean and in good mechanical condition and all drivers must be clean and well groomed at all times. 
(e)  Current limousine rates must be posted in the vehicle and in the airport manager's office. 
(f)  A fee may be charged for such permit as set forth in the airport rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.150), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-44. - Commercial use by taxis and limousines; restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any taxi or limousine to park, stand, or stop said vehicle or to solicit business in any area within the airport other than the area designated by the manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park, stand or stop such vehicle within the area designated by the manager for the exclusive use of taxis and limousines unless such vehicle shall display a valid operating permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall display a placard in a window of the vehicle designating the city from which said vehicle is licensed. 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.140), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-45. - Revocation of taxi or limousine permits. 
In the event any taxi or limousine is found to be in violation of this chapter, the manager may immediately suspend its permit by removing the same from the vehicle. Suspensions shall be for a period of from five (5) to thirty (30) calendar days depending upon the severity of the offense. Suspensions may be appealed by the filing of a written request for a hearing with the director within ten (10) calendar days of the date of suspension. The filing of a written appeal by the permittee shall serve to delay the imposition of the suspension until a final decision by the director. The director's decision may be appealed to the council in the same manner as provided in section 3-7(b). 
(Ord. No. 10665, § 1(3.160), 8-5-85)  
Sec. 3-46. - Lease of parking space for commercial vehicles. 
(a)  The airport manager may lease space on airport property for parking of vehicles involved in commercial uses at the airport. 
(b)  The monthly rate to be charged each lessee of such parking shall be as follows: 
1 or 2 vehicles ..... 	Fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle 
3 or more vehicles ..... 	Forty dollars ($40.00) per vehicle 
 
(c)  Lessees of such parking space shall be bound to comply with all federal, state and local regulations relating to lease of property at airports. 
(Ord. No. 13334, § 1, 6-1-92)  
Sec. 3-47. - Agreements for advertising space in main terminal. 
The airport manager is authorized to execute agreements for advertising space in the main terminal at the airport. The form and content of the agreements shall be substantially in accordance with contract forms approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 14938, § 1, 8-19-96)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; municipal court, Ch. 15; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16; disorderly intoxication and consumption of liquor in certain public places prohibited, § 16-183; alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain parks, § 17-114; police, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, RSMo. §§ 311.010 to 312.510; authority of city to license, regulate and control sale, etc., RSMo. §§ 311.220, 312.140. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to have the meanings hereinafter specified: 
Alcoholic beverages. All beverages of alcoholic content, whether intoxicating or nonintoxicating. 
Amusement place. Any establishment whose business building contains a square footage of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet, and where games of skill commonly known as billiards, volleyball, indoor golf, bowling or soccer are usually played, or has a dance floor of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, or any outdoor golf course with a minimum of nine (9) holes, and which has annual gross receipts of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of which at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts is in nonalcoholic sales. 
Closed place. A place where all doors are locked and where no patrons are in the place or about the premises. 
Conviction. Conviction upon final determination of any prosecution of any violation of this chapter. 
Intoxicating liquor. Alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess of one half of one per cent by volume except for nonintoxicating beer. 
Light wine. Wine containing not in excess of fourteen (14) per cent of alcohol by weight, manufactured exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits or vegetables. 
Microbrewery. A business whose primary activity is the brewing and selling of beer, with an annual production of ten thousand (10,000) barrels or less. 
Nonintoxicating beer. Any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops, pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals, wholesome yeast, pure water, free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants, and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one per cent by volume and not exceeding three point two (3.2) per cent by weight. 
Original package. Any package containing not less than eight (8) ounces of any intoxicating liquor, excepting malt liquor, or, any package containing three (3) or more standard bottles of malt liquor or, as to nonintoxicating beer, any package containing three (3), six (6), twelve (12) or twenty-four (24) small standard beer bottles, and any package containing three (3), six (6) or twelve (12) large standard beer bottles, when such bottles contain nonintoxicating beer as defined by this section. 
Restaurant bar. 
(a)  Any establishment having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least fifty (50) per cent of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises. 
(b)  Any railroad dining car or other railroad rolling stock equipped or modified to operate upon a line of railroad as a dining car or as part of a dinner train operation. Several railroad cars operating as a single dinner train shall be considered together as a restaurant. 
Substantial quantities of food. The amount of prepared meals and food from which at least fifty (50) per cent of the gross income of an establishment is derived. 
Wholesalers or distributors. Persons selling intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer to retailers for resale. 
Wine shop. Any establishment that uses automated wine dispensing equipment to dispense wine by the glass at retail for consumption on the premises where sold, so long as at least fifty (50) per cent of the total sales of the wine shop are from package sales. 
(Code 1964, § 4.010; Ord. No. 12707, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 14253 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Cross reference— Rules of construction and definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, RSMo. §§ 311.020, 311.030, 311.097, 311.100, 311.200, 312.010.  
Sec. 4-2. - License—Required; term; renewal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either personally or through the use of agents or employees, to engage in the manufacture, brewing, sale or distribution of intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer within the city, without the appropriate license issued under this chapter. Licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) year from the thirtieth (30th) day of June each year. Persons desiring to secure licenses after the thirtieth (30th) day of June shall pay for such portion of the license year remaining at the time such license is issued. Thereafter, all renewals of licenses shall be made on the thirtieth (30th) day of June each year. 
(b)  If the business services administrator determines that there is good reason not to issue a license for the full period of time ending on June 30, the business services administrator may issue a license for a shorter period of time. Persons licensed under this subsection shall pay only a prorated license fee. 
(Code 1964, § 4.020; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-3. - Same—Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No individual shall be granted a license under this chapter unless the individual is of good moral character, or, in the case of a corporation or limited liability company, whose managing officer or manager in charge of the business to be licensed is of good moral character. In determining whether an individual is of good moral character, the individual's reputation in the community and criminal history may be considered. 
(b)  No license shall be granted to any individual or managing officer who has ever had a permit or license revoked under the liquor laws of any state or who employs in the licensed business any person whose permit or license has been revoked under the liquor laws of any state. 
(c)  No person shall be granted a license to sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer unless the person is a taxpaying citizen of the state. 
(d)  No license issued under this chapter shall be denied, suspended, revoked or otherwise affected based solely on the fact that an employee of the licensee has been convicted of a felony unrelated to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor so long as any such employee does not directly participate in retail sales of intoxicating liquor. Each employer shall report the identity of any employee convicted of a felony to the business services administrator. 
(e)  No person shall be denied a license or renewal of a license issued under this chapter solely due to a conviction for unlawful sale or supply to a minor when serving in the capacity as an employee of a licensed establishment. 
(Code 1964, §§ 4.210, 4.420; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.060, 311.080(2), 311.200, 312.040.  
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Premises. 
(a)  No license shall be granted or retained under this chapter for the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises if the premises includes a building occupied or used for unlawful purposes or the premises are connected by an entrance or exit or other means of communication with any place used for unlawful purposes. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with the operation of one (1) or more of the following businesses: a drugstore, a cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a general merchandise store, a confectionary or a delicatessen store, nor to any such person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value according to invoices of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-5. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license under this chapter shall apply to the business services administrator in writing and under oath. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name, residence and birth place of the applicant. If the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the application shall state the place and time of naturalization. 
(2)  If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners or any person who has a financial interest in the partnership. 
(3)  If the application is on behalf of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the state in which incorporated, the amount of paid in capital, the amount of authorized capital, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and stockholders who hold ten (10) per cent or more of the capital stock, including the number of shares held by each, the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be, in fact, actively engaged in the actual control and management of the establishment for which the license is sought. 
(4)  If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability company, the date of formation, the state in which formed, the names and addresses of the members and managers and the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be, in fact, actively engaged in the actual control and management of the establishment for which the license is sought. 
(5)  The length of time the applicant has resided in the state, and the residence addresses of the applicant for the preceding five (5) years. 
(6)  That the applicant, if an individual, is the person who will be actively engaged in the actual control and management of the establishment for which the license is sought. If the application is on behalf of a corporation, that the applicant is an officer or director of the corporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited liability company, that the applicant is a member or manager of the company. 
(7)  The name and business address of applicant's employers for the five (5) years immediately prior to the application. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony. 
(9)  The location, place or premises for which a license is sought. 
(10)  The zoning district in which the proposed location is located. 
(11)  The class of license for which the application is made. 
(12)  Whether or not the applicant has had a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer suspended or revoked, or has been convicted of the violation of any state law or city ordinance applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, or whether the applicant employs, or will employ in the business, any person not of good moral character, or whose license has been revoked or suspended, or who has been convicted of violating the provisions of any state law or city ordinance applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(13)  Any further reasonable information required by the business services administrator. 
(b)  The department of finance shall obtain a criminal record check of the applicant. If the application is on behalf of a partnership, a criminal record check must be provided for each partner. If the application is on behalf of a corporation or limited liability company, a criminal record check must be provided for the officer, member or manager who will be in charge of the establishment for which the license is sought. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee plus a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining the criminal record check. 
(d)  Applications for license renewals should be submitted to the business services administrator no later than May 1. The business services administrator may allow a renewal applicant to continue the manufacture, brewing, sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer with a temporary license if the renewal application has been submitted to the business services administrator but has not been processed. 
(e)  For failure to submit a renewal application on or before May 1, a late charge shall be added to the renewal fee as follows: 
(1)  May 2 to May 31 ..... $100.00 
(2)  June 1 to June 30 ..... $200.00 
(3)  July 1 and later ..... $300.00 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 19518, § 1, 5-7-07; Ord. No. 21799, § 1, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 4-6. - Same—Investigation of application. 
The business services administrator, upon receipt of an application, shall cause an investigation to be made of the statements in the application, the character of the applicant, and the location and condition of the premises to be licensed. Copies of all applications shall be forwarded to the police department for review and comment. On each application for an original license, the fire department, the community development department and the health department shall investigate the safety and sanitation of the premises of the applicant, and the equipment and furnishings contained in the applicant's premises. The departments shall report the findings of the investigation to the business services administrator. After the original license has been issued, the business services administrator may, at any reasonable time, have the premises of the licensee investigated. 
(Code 1964, § 4.030; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 21095, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 4-7. - Same—Approval of applications. 
If the applicant meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this chapter and, in the case of a renewal, the business has been conducted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the business services administrator shall grant the license. 
(Code 1964, § 4.040; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-8. - Same—Denial of application; appeal. 
(a)  Denial. When a license under this chapter is denied, the business services administrator shall send a letter to the applicant stating why the license was denied and how to appeal the denial. This letter shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed letter shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed. 
(b)  Appeal by applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the liquor license review board by mailing or delivering a written notice of appeal to the director of finance and a copy to the business services administrator. The notice of appeal must be received by the director no later than ten (10) days after the applicant received the letter of denial. The applicant may submit to the director of finance a position statement explaining why applicant believes the license should be granted. The business services administrator may also submit to the director a position statement explaining why the administrator believes the denial should be upheld. 
(c)  Right to continue operation. If an application for renewal of a license is denied, an applicant who has filed an appeal under this section shall be allowed to continue operating as though the license were renewed until the liquor license review board has rendered a decision. If the board affirms the denial of the license, the applicant shall be allowed to continue operating as though the license were renewed until ten (10) days after receiving the letter of denial. If an appeal is taken to Circuit Court, the Court may allow the applicant to continue operation as though the license were renewed. 
(d)  Appeal by neighbor. Any person residing, owning property or maintaining a place of business within six hundred (600) feet of property upon which a licensed establishment is located may send a letter to the business services administrator objecting to the renewal of a liquor license. The letter shall state the grounds for the objection. After renewing or denying the license, the business services administrator shall promptly notify the objecting neighbor, by first class mail, of the action taken on the application. The notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed. If the license is renewed, the objecting neighbor may appeal the renewal to the liquor license review board by mailing or delivering a written notice of appeal to the director of finance and mailing or delivering copies to the business services administrator and to the licensee. The notice of appeal must be received by the director no later than ten (10) days after the objecting neighbor received the notice that the license was renewed. The objecting neighbor may submit to the director of finance a position statement explaining why the objecting neighbor believes the license should not be renewed. The licensee and the business services administrator may also submit position statements to the director. 
(Code 1964, § 4.050; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-9. - Liquor license review board. 
(a)  A three-member liquor license review board is hereby established consisting of the director of finance, another city employee appointed by the city manager and a member appointed by the city council to serve a three-year term. The city manager's appointee shall be either a department head or an assistant city manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The chief of police and the fire chief shall not be eligible to serve on the board. 
(b)  The liquor license review board may adopt rules and procedures that are consistent with this Code and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18006, § 1, adopted March 1, 2004, in part repealed former § 4-9 of the Code and added new provisions as § 4-9 as herein set out. Former § 4-9 pertained to suspension or revocation of license and derived from the 1964 Code, § 4.080.  
Sec. 4-10. - Liquor license review board—Review of license denial. 
(a)  The director of finance, after receiving an appeal from a license denial, shall schedule a meeting of the liquor license review board. Before the meeting, the board members shall be provided with copies of the letter of denial, the notice of appeal and any documentation and position statements provided by the business services administrator and the applicant pertaining to the license denial. The board may allow the business services administrator and the applicant or the applicant's representative to explain their positions to the board at the meeting. The board may either affirm the denial of the license or direct the business services administrator to grant the license. The license, in the board's discretion, may be for less than the full period of time ending on June 30. In that case, the licensee shall pay only a prorated license fee. If the board affirms the denial, it shall set forth the grounds for denial in a letter to the applicant. The letter shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed letter shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed. 
(b)  The director of finance, after receiving an appeal from the renewal of a license, shall schedule a meeting of the liquor license review board. Before the meeting, the board members shall be provided with copies of the letter of objection, the notice of appeal and any documentation and position statements provided by the objecting neighbor, the business services administrator and the licensee. The board may allow the objecting neighbor, the business services administrator and the licensee or the licensee's representative to explain their positions to the board at the meeting. The board may either affirm the renewal of the license or deny the license. The license, in the board's discretion, may be for less than the full period of time ending on June 30. In that case, the licensee shall pay only a prorated license fee. The board shall set forth the grounds for its decision in a letter to the objecting neighbor and the licensee. The letter shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed letter shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-11. - Judicial review of license denial. 
A decision of the liquor license review board may be appealed by the applicant or by an objecting neighbor by filing a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Circuit Court of Boone County within thirty (30) days of receiving the letter from the liquor license review board renewing or denying the license. The petition shall set forth with particularity the grounds for review. The court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the liquor license review board to review the record and decision of the board. The writ shall prescribe the time within which a return must be made and served upon the relator's attorney, which shall be at least ten (10) days from issuance of the writ and may be extended by the court. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-12. - License—Issuance. 
On approval of the application for a license under this chapter, the business services administrator shall issue the applicant a license to conduct business at the location specified in the application for the period set forth in section 4-2 of this chapter. Every license issued under this chapter shall set forth the type of license granted and shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer may be sold and the license shall not authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at any other place. 
(Code 1964, § 4.060; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-13. - Standards of conducting business on licensed premises. 
The standards set forth in this section shall be considered in determining whether a license under this chapter should be renewed, suspended or revoked. In conducting business on the licensed premises, a licensee and the licensee's agents and employees shall: 
(1)  Prevent or suppress any violent quarrel, disorder, brawl, fight or other unlawful conduct of any person on the premises. As used in this section, "premises" includes the licensed premises and the parking lots and areas around the business which are owned, used or maintained as part of the business. 
(2)  Immediately report to the police any illegal or violent act committed on the premises when the licensee or the licensee's employee knew or should have known that the act occurred on the premises. 
(3)  Cooperate fully with law enforcement authorities during an investigation of an illegal or violent act committed on the premises. 
(4)  Operate the business in such a manner that it does not constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  Take appropriate and necessary steps to supervise the outdoor area of the premises including keeping the area free from litter and preventing the parking area from becoming a gathering place for customers of the business. 
(6)  Comply with all provisions of this chapter and this Code. 
(7)  Comply with all state and federal law including all rules and regulations pertaining to the sale and licensing of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer. 
(8)  Answer all summons and appear for all scheduled hearings and trials in any court for purported violations of this chapter or state and federal law, including all rules and regulations pertaining to the sale and licensing of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer. 
(9)  Every licensee shall be responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages by its employees. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11)  
Sec. 4-14. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Suspension or revocation. The business services administrator may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee under this chapter who has failed to meet the standards of conducting business set forth in this chapter or who has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the license application. A suspension may be from one (1) day to one (1) year. 
(b)  Notice of suspension or revocation . The business services administrator shall suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter by sending notice of the suspension or revocation to the licensee by first class mail or by personal service on the licensee or the person in charge at the licensed premises. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  A statement of the grounds for the suspension or revocation. 
(2)  The effective date of the suspension or revocation, which shall be at least ten (10) days after the notice is received. 
(3)  In the case of a suspension, the length of the suspension. 
(4)  Instructions on how to appeal the suspension or revocation. 
(c)  Appeal to liquor license review board. The licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation by requesting a hearing before the liquor license review board. The appeal must be in writing, addressed to the director of finance and received by the director of finance within ten (10) days after the notice of suspension or revocation was received. Receipt of an appeal by the director of finance shall automatically stay enforcement of the suspension or revocation. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. After receipt of an appeal, the director of finance shall schedule a hearing before the liquor license review board. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee. Notice shall be given in the same manner as the notices of suspension or revocation. 
(e)  There shall be no right to depositions. 
(f)  The liquor license review board shall have the authority to issue subpoenas duces tecum for purposes of hearings only. Requests for subpoena duces tecum must be submitted in writing at least three (3) days before the hearing. 
(g)  Hearing and decision. The liquor license review board shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision within thirty (30) days in accordance with the rules and procedures adopted by the board and the requirements of RSMo Ch. 536, for contested cases. The board may affirm or reverse the decision of the business services administrator. If the board finds that a liquor license violation has occurred, the board may impose a suspension from one (1) day to one (1) year or revoke the license. The board is not bound by the penalty imposed by the business services administrator. 
(h)  Appeal. The licensee may appeal an adverse decision of the Liquor License Review Board to the Circuit Court of Boone County in accordance with RSMo Ch. 536. The court may stay the suspension or revocation pending the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11)  
Sec. 4-15. - Changing location of establishment; license transfer; license required for each place of business. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter shall move the location of the licensed establishment as pertains to intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer without the express approval of the business services administrator. 
(b)  No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred from one person to another, nor shall such license be used at any place except on the premises for which such license is issued, and the proper license shall be procured for each place of business for which a state license is required. 
(Code 1964, § 4.070; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-16. - Selling to drunkards and minors. 
No person shall sell or supply or permit another to sell or supply any alcoholic beverage to a habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of alcohol. No person shall give, sell or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one (21), except that this shall not apply to the supplying of any alcoholic beverage to a person under such age for medicinal purposes only, or by the parent or guardian of such person, or to the administering of any alcoholic beverage to such person by a physician. 
(Code 1964, § 4.090; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
Cross reference— Youth advisory commission, § 2-361 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.310, 312.400.  
Sec. 4-17. - Consumption by minors. 
(a)  The drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer shall not be permitted in, upon or about any licensed premises by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  In any prosecution or licensing action involving this section, it shall be an affirmative defense that the licensee was in full compliance with the identification provisions of section 311.328.1 RSMo. and that the licensee was acting in good faith. 
(Code 1964, § 4.100; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-18. - Sales, handling by minors. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(b)  In any place of business licensed in accordance with state statute, where at least fifty (50) per cent of the gross sales made consists of goods, merchandise or commodities other than intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in the original package, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange displays, accept payment for, and sack for carryout intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. Delivery of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer away from the licensed business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this subsection, shall, when at least fifty (50) per cent of the licensee's gross sales does not consist of nonalcoholic sales, have an employee twenty-one (21) years of age or older on the licensed premises during all hours of operation. 
(c)  In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar place of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer but which does not sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at retail, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may be employed and their duties may include the handling of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer for all purposes except consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail. 
(d)  Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in places of business which sell food for consumption on the premises if at least fifty (50) per cent of all sales in those places consists of food; provided, that nothing in this section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages or nonintoxicating beer. 
(Code 1964, § 4.110; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.300.  
Sec. 4-19. - Misrepresentation of age by minors. 
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall represent that he has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for, or in any way receiving, any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(Code 1964, § 4.120; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.320, 312.405.  
Sec. 4-20. - Purchase or possession by minors; intoxicated minors; exceptions. 
(a)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or attempts to purchase, or possesses any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, as defined in this chapter, or who is in an intoxicated condition as defined in section 14-611 of this Code, or has a detectable blood alcohol content of more than two-hundredths of one per cent or more by weight of alcohol in such person's blood, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section pertaining to possession of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer shall not apply to a student who: 
(1)  Is eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(2)  Is enrolled in an accredited college or university and is a student in a culinary course; 
(3)  Is required to taste, but not consume or imbibe, any beer, ale, porter, wine or other similar malt or fermented beverage as part of the required curriculum; and 
(4)  Tastes a beverage under subdivision (3) of this subsection only for instructional purposes during classes that are part of the curriculum of the accredited college or university. 
The beverage must at all times remain in the possession and control of an authorized instructor of the college or university, who must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older. Nothing in this subsection may be construed to allow a student under the age of twenty-one (21) to receive any beer, ale, porter, wine, or other similar malt or fermented beverage unless the beverage is delivered as part of the student's required curriculum and the beverage is used only for instructional purposes during classes conducted as part of the curriculum. 
(c)  After a period of not less than one year after reaching the age of twenty-one (21) a person who has pleaded guilty to or has been found guilty of violating this section for the first time, and who since such conviction has not been convicted of any other alcohol-related offense and who is not on probation for the violation of this section at the time application is made, may apply to the court in which the person was sentenced for an order to expunge all official records of the arrest, plea, trial and conviction except the municipal prosecutor's records. No records shall be expunged if the person who has pleaded guilty to or has been found guilty of violating this section is licensed as a commercial motor vehicle driver or was operating a commercial motor vehicle as defined in RSMo § 302.700, at the time of the violation. If the court determines, upon review, that such person has not been convicted of any other alcohol-related offense at the time of the application for expungement, and the person has had no other alcohol-related enforcement contacts, as defined in RSMo § 302.525, the court shall enter an order of expungement. The effect of such an order shall be to restore such person to the status the person occupied prior to such arrest, plea or conviction, as if such event had never happened. No person as to whom such order has been entered shall be held thereafter under any provision of any law to be guilty of perjury or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of the person's failure to recite or acknowledge such arrest, plea, trial, conviction or expungement in response to any inquiry made of the person for any purpose whatsoever. A person shall be entitled to only one expungement pursuant to this section. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the municipal court or other city officials from maintaining such records as are necessary to ensure that an individual receives only one expungement pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1964, § 4.130; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 19549, § 1, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 20118, § 1, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 20629, § 1, 5-17-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.325, 312.407.  
Sec. 4-21. - Presumption. 
In prosecutions under this chapter, there is a rebuttable presumption that a container marked or labeled as containing an alcoholic beverage actually contains the described alcoholic beverage. This rebuttable presumption applies to both open and sealed containers. This rebuttable presumption applies only in cases where a sample of the contents of the container has been preserved and is available to the defendant for testing. 
(Ord. No. 17600, § 1, 2-17-03; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Sec. 4-22. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter where no penalty is otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1964, §§ 4.140, 4.340, 4.490; Ord. No. 17053, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04)  
Secs. 4-23—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
The operation or possession of any unlawful gambling device in or about the premises where intoxicating liquor is sold, either in the original package or for consumption on the premises where sold, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license required by this article, and no licensee shall permit any gambling device to be set up or used in or about such premises. 
(Code 1964, § 4.240; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
Cross reference— Offenses against morals, § 16-131 et seq.  
Sec. 4-27. - Authorized liquor only to be kept on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license authorized by this article for the sale of any intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, to keep or secrete, or to allow any other person to keep or secrete in or upon the premises described in such license, any intoxicating liquor other than the kind of liquor expressly authorized to be sold by such license, or any kind of liquor used exclusively as an ingredient in any foods being prepared and sold on the premises. 
(Code 1964, § 4.250; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.330, 312.050.  
Sec. 4-28. - Applicability of article to drugstores. 
Regularly licensed drugstores may be lawfully in possession of intoxicating liquor, to be used in connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicines, or as a solvent or preservant, without being subject to the provisions of this article. However, any druggist or drugstore operator desiring to sell intoxicating liquors, either for consumption on the premises, or in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises, shall procure the proper license therefor, and be in all matters subject to the provisions of this article relating to location, license fees to be paid and hours at which such intoxicating liquor may be sold. 
(Code 1964, § 4.260) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.470.  
Sec. 4-29. - Hours of sale and consumption. 
(a)  Package liquor. No person having a license under the provisions of this article shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or suffer the same to be done on or about his premises, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  Package liquor Sunday sales. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under this chapter, may apply for, and may be issued, a special license to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sundays. 
(c)  Liquor by the drink. The premises of persons having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink shall be and remain a closed place, as defined in this chapter, between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(d)  Applicability. Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink are held by clubs or hotels, this section shall apply only to the room or rooms in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where such licenses are held by restaurants whose business is conducted in one room only and substantial quantities of merchandise, other than intoxicating liquors, are dispensed, then the licensee shall keep securely locked during the hours and on the days herein specified, all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. 
(e)  Restaurant bars and hotels. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this chapter, may apply for, and may be issued, a license to sell intoxicating liquor, as in this chapter defined, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday, by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any restaurant bar as described in the application or on the premises of any establishment having at least forty (40) rooms for the overnight accommodations of transient guests. 
Any new restaurant bar having been in operation for less than ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the restaurant bar can show a projection of annual business from prepared meals or food consumed on the premises of at least fifty (50) per cent of the total gross income of the restaurant bar for the year or can show a projection of annual business from prepared meals or food consumed on the premises which would exceed not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). The license fee shall be prorated for the period of the temporary license based on the cost of the annual license for the establishment. 
Applications for a restaurant bar license, records thereof, or temporary license for such purposes shall be subject to procedures, rules and regulations now or hereafter established by the Missouri Supervisor of Alcohol and Tobacco Control on the same subject. 
(f)  Amusement places. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this chapter, may apply for, and may be issued, a license to sell intoxicating liquor, as defined in this chapter, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any amusement place as described in the application. 
Any new amusement place having been in operation for less than ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the amusement place can show a projection of gross receipts of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of which at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts are in nonalcoholic sales for the first year of operation. The license fee shall be prorated for the first period of the temporary license based on the cost of the annual license for the establishment. 
(g)  Malt liquor Sunday sales. Retailers selling intoxicating malt liquor who are licensed under section 4-47(5) or (8) may sell malt liquor at retail between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday. 
(h)  Wine shop Sunday sales. Any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, and who meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this chapter, may sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any wine shop, as defined in this chapter, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(i)  Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 4.270; Ord. No. 10018, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 14253 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.290.  
Sec. 4-30. - Sale in connection with certain holidays and events. 
When January first, March seventeenth, July fourth, or December thirty-first falls on Sunday, and on the Sundays prior to Memorial Day and Labor Day, and on the Sunday on which the national championship game of the national football league is played, commonly known as "Super Bowl Sunday," any person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day from the time and until the time which would be lawful on another day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of section 4-29 or any other ordinance to the contrary. 
(Code 1964, § 4.280; Ord. No. 10018, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 14253 § 1, 10-17-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.298.  
Sec. 4-31. - Consumption on unlicensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any premises where food, beverages or entertainment are sold or provided for compensation, who does not possess a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, to permit the drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in the premises without having a license as provided in section 4-47(10). 
(Code 1964, § 4.290; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. 311.480(1).  
Sec. 4-32. - Consumption on premises where signs prohibit same. 
No intoxicating liquor, as defined in this chapter, shall be drunk, consumed or publicly exhibited in a public dining room, lunch room, soda fountain or any place where meals or lunches and soft drinks are served, where the owner or manager exhibits on the premises signs or placards to the effect that intoxicating liquor may not be drunk in or about the premises. Such signs or placards shall be of sufficient size and in sufficient number to be easily discernible to the general public. 
(Code 1964, § 4.300)  
Sec. 4-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17849, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2003, in part repealed former § 4-33 of the Code, which pertained to display of bottles, packages, etc., and exterior signs resembling bottles and derived from the 1964 Code, § 4.310.  
Sec. 4-34. - Possession of illegal whiskey. 
No person shall possess intoxicating liquor within the city unless the same has been acquired from some person holding a duly authorized license to sell the same under this article, or unless the intoxicating liquor is had or kept with the written or printed permission of the state supervisor of alcohol and tobacco control, and the package in which the intoxicating liquor is contained and from which it is taken for consumption has, while containing intoxicating liquor, been labeled and sealed with the official seal prescribed under the state law and regulations made thereunder. Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prevent the natural fermentation of fruit juices in the home for the exclusive use of the occupants of the home and their guests. 
(Code 1964, § 4.320; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03)  
Sec. 4-35. - Sanitary and inspection provisions. 
Each licensee and each of the premises covered by the license under this article where intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises is sold, shall be subject to the sanitation and inspection provisions of article V of chapter 11 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 4.330)  
Secs. 4-36—4-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18006, § 1, adopted March 1, 2004, in part repealed former § 4-46 of the Code, which pertained to intoxicating liquor license application; form and contents and derived from the 1964 Code, § 4.200; Ord. No. 12707, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1990; and Ord. No. 13733, § 1, adopted July 6, 1993.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 4-47. - Number of licenses required; fees. 
A separate license shall be required for each place of business, and the following license fees shall be paid annually: 
(1)  Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00)—Manufacturers of intoxicating malt liquor containing not more than five (5) per cent of alcohol by weight. Such license shall entitle the manufacturer to distribute such malt liquor as a wholesaler, but shall not include the right to sell at retail. 
(2)  Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)—Manufacturers or distillers of intoxicating liquors containing alcohol in excess of five (5) per cent by weight. 
(3)  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)—Distributors or wholesalers of intoxicating malt liquors containing not in excess of five (5) per cent of alcohol by weight. 
(4)  Three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00)—Distributors or wholesalers of intoxicating liquors containing in excess of five (5) per cent of alcohol by weight. 
(5)  Seventy-five dollars ($75.00)—Retailers selling intoxicating malt liquors with an alcoholic content of more than three and two-tenths (3.2) per cent by weight and not more than five (5) per cent by weight, or light wine or both such malt liquor and light wine for consumption on the premises. This license allows the licensee to sell malt liquor at retail between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday. 
(6)  Four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00)—Retailers selling all kinds of intoxicating liquor at retail or by drink for consumption on the premises of the licensee, which shall include the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package; provided, however, no such license shall be issued unless and until the applicant shall have, by proof satisfactory to the city manager, established that he has and will maintain within the premises proposed to the licensed, an investment in furniture and equipment of not less than five thousand ($5,000.00) book value. 
(7)  Three hundred dollars ($300.00)—Additional license for Sunday sales by restaurant bars, the premises of any establishment having at least forty (40) rooms for the overnight accommodations of transient guests, amusement places and package liquor licensees. The holder of a Sunday sales license shall be limited in Sunday sales to the kinds of intoxicating liquor permitted under the holders primary license. 
(8)  Seventy-five dollars ($75.00)—Retailers selling intoxicating malt liquor with an alcoholic content of more than three and two-tenths (3.2) per cent by weight and not more than five (5) per cent by weight in the original package direct to the consumer, and not for consumption on the premises where sold. This license allows the licensee to sell malt liquor at retail between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday. 
(9)  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)—Retailers selling intoxicating liquors containing alcohol in excess of five (5) per cent by weight, in the original package, not to be opened or consumed on the premises where sold; provided, that no license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor containing more than five (5) per cent alcohol by weight, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with, the operation of one or more of the following businesses: drugstore, cigar and tobacco store, grocery store, general merchandise store, confectionary or delicatessen store; nor shall such license be issued to any person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value, according to invoices, of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. This license shall include authorization to conduct wine tastings on the licensed premises. This license shall not be construed to permit the licensee to sell wine for consumption on the premises. 
(10)  Three hundred dollars ($300.00)—Annual license fee for operation described in section 4-31. 
(11)  Seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each one hundred barrels or fraction thereof up to a maximum license fee of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00)—Microbreweries. The holder of a microbrewer's license may apply for and the city manager may issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the brewery premises and in the original package for off-premises consumption. The holder of a microbrewer's license may also sell beer and malt liquor produced on the brewery premises to duly licensed wholesalers. 
(12)  Three hundred dollars ($300.00)—Annual license fee for wine shop Sunday sales described in section 4-29(h). 
(13)  Thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50)—Annual license for wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the licensed premises for persons licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under sections 4-47(8) and 4-47(9). 
(Code 1964, § 4.220; Ord. No. 13733 § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 14253 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 14291 § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 21918, § 1, 12-2-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 311.180(1), 311.180(4), 311.200(4), 311.097(2), 311.200(1), 311.200(2).  
Sec. 4-48. - Sidewalk cafes serving alcohol. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to serve an alcoholic beverage on a public sidewalk without a license under this section. 
(b)  In addition to a license under this section, a plan for a sidewalk cafe shall also be filed with the director of public works as required by section 24-2 of this Code. 
(c)  A place of business licensed to sell intoxicating malt liquors with an alcoholic content of more than three and two-tenths (3.2) per cent by weight and not more than five (5) percent by weight and light wine for consumption on the premises may be licensed to sell such products on the public sidewalk adjacent to the place of business. A place of business licensed to sell all kinds of intoxicating liquor at retail or by the drink for consumption on the premises may be licensed to sell such products on the public sidewalk adjacent to the place of business. The following restrictions shall apply to serving and consuming alcoholic beverages on the adjacent sidewalk: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages can only be served between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(2)  All alcoholic beverages served must be consumed by 1:00 a.m. 
(3)  Only alcoholic beverages served by the licensee may be consumed on the sidewalk. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages may be served only to persons and consumed only by persons who are seated on a chair or bench provided by the licensee. This provision shall not apply to disabled persons in wheelchairs. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed only in an area enclosed by a decorative barrier in compliance with the procedures and standards for sidewalk cafes in chapter 24 of this Code. 
(6)  All alcoholic beverage sales must comply with the statutes and regulations of the state. 
(7)  These areas shall be nonsmoking. 
(d)  An application for a license under this section shall be accompanied by a written plan demonstrating compliance with subsection (c)(5). The plan must show the location of the business, the adjacent sidewalk, any structure located on the sidewalk, the proposed barrier and the required straight, unobstructed pathway. The plan shall also contain a description of the barrier. 
(e)  There shall be no fee charged for a license issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 18460, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 22044, § 1, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 23770 , § 1, 2-4-19; Ord. No. 24094 , § 1, 11-18-19)  
Sec. 4-49. - Temporary location for liquor by drink, permit and fee required; other ordinances applicable. 
(a)  The business services administrator may issue a temporary permit to caterers and other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises, including intoxicating liquor in the original package, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function, occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed premises. The permit shall be in effect for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours. The permit shall authorize serving alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion or event during the hours alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every permit issued under this section, the permittee shall pay fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each calendar day, or fraction thereof, for which the permit is issued. 
(b)  The business services administrator may issue a temporary permit as provided above in (a) for the operation of railroad excursions or dinner train operations, provided that no caterer or other person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquor shall be issued more than six (6) such temporary permits in any year. The business services administrator may issue a temporary permit to any railroad excursion operator who has a state liquor license for railroad or railroad car companies and whose regular place of business is outside of the county without requiring the operator to obtain a city liquor-by-the-drink license. 
(c)  All provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city shall extend to such premises and shall be in force and enforceable during all the time that the permittee, its agents, servants, employees, or stock are in such premises. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any caterer who possesses a valid state liquor license and a valid liquor license issued by any city or county may deliver alcoholic beverages in the city, in the course of the catering business. 
(e)  Sampling of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any winery, distiller, manufacturer, wholesaler, brewer or designated employee may provide or furnish distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage samples on a licensed retail premises for customer tasting purposes so long as the winery, distiller, manufacturer, wholesaler, brewer or designated employee has permission from the person holding the retail license. The retail licensed premises where such product tasting is provided shall hold a by-the-drink-for-consumption-on-the-premises-where-sold retail license. No money or anything of value shall be given to the retailers for the privilege or opportunity of conducting the on-the-premises product tasting. 
(2)  Distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage samples may be dispensed by an employee of the retailer, winery, distiller, manufacturer or brewer, or by a sampling service retained by the retailer, winery, distiller, manufacturer or brewer. All sampling service employees that provide and pour intoxicating liquor samples on a licensed retail premises shall be required to complete a server training program approved by the division of alcohol and tobacco control. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage sample provided by the retailer, winery, distiller, manufacturer, wholesaler or brewer remaining after the tasting shall be returned to the retailer, winery, distiller, manufacturer, wholesaler or brewer. 
(Code 1964, § 4.285; Ord. No. 12707, § 1, 8-2-90; Ord. No. 14253 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.485.  
Sec. 4-50. - Limited permit to sell liquor by the drink, who may obtain; time limited. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, a permit for the sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on premises where sold, including intoxicating liquor in the original package, may be issued to any church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or organization for the sale of such intoxicating liquor at a picnic, bazaar, fair, or similar gathering. Said permit shall be issued only for the day or days named therein and it shall not authorize the sale of aforesaid intoxicating liquor for more than seven (7) days by any said organization as described above. For each such permit issued, the licensee shall pay to the city the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00). No provision of law or rule or regulation of the city shall prevent any wholesaler or distributor from providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for use by the holder of the license at such picnic, bazaar, fair, or similar gathering. 
(Code 1964, § 4.295; Ord. No. 13072, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 17849, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21176, § 1, 12-5-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 311.215.  
Sec. 4-51. - Annual caterer's permit. 
(a)  The business services administrator may issue a special license to caterers and other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this chapter who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function, occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed premises. The special license shall be effective for a maximum of fifty (50) days during any year, and shall authorize the service of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion or event during the hours at which alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every special license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the licensee shall pay the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) a year payable at the same time and in the same manner as its other license fees. 
(b)  The business services administrator may issue a special license to caterers and other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this chapter who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function, occasion, or event at a particular location other than the licensed premises. The special license shall be effective for an unlimited number of functions during the year, and shall authorize the service of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion, or event during the hours at which alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every special license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the licensee shall pay the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a year payable at the same time and in the same manner as its other license fees. 
(c)  Caterers issued a special license pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall report to the business services administrator the location of each function three (3) business days in advance. The report of each function shall include permission from the property owner, description of the premises, and the date or dates the function will be held. 
(d)  All provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city shall extend to such premises and shall be in force and enforceable during all the time that licensee, its agents, servants, employees, or stock are in such premises. The provisions of this section shall not include the sale of packaged goods covered by this special license, except for wines in the original package. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any caterer who possesses a valid liquor license issued by any city or county may deliver alcoholic beverages in the city, in the course of the catering business. 
(Ord. No. 18381, § 1, 1-18-05)  
Secs. 4-52—4-65. - Reserved  
ARTICLE III. - NONINTOXICATING BEER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-66. - Requirements for original package sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, any nonintoxicating beer unless the same is sold or offered for sale in the original bottle or can, or in the original package containing bottles or cans, bearing the original label and the full name of the brewer or manufacturer thereof, both upon the label of the bottle or can and upon the cap or cork of such bottle. In the case of the sale of nonintoxicating beer on draught, the same must be drawn from the original keg or barrel having stamped on the ends thereof the full name of the manufacturer or brewer of the nonintoxicating beer therein contained. 
(Code 1964, § 4.440)  
Sec. 4-67. - Hours of sale. 
No person having a license under the provisions of this article shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or permit the same to be done upon his premises, any nonintoxicating beer in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1964, § 4.450)  
Sec. 4-68. - Hours of consumption. 
No person having a license under the provisions of this article shall permit the drinking or consumption of any nonintoxicating beer by any person, in any quantity, upon or about his premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1964, § 4.460)  
Sec. 4-69. - Sale of intoxicating liquor prohibited. 
No person holding a license to sell nonintoxicating beer only shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or permit the same to be done, or consumed in, upon or about his premises any malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) per cent by weight, or any other intoxicating liquor of any kind or character. 
(Code 1964, § 4.470)  
Sec. 4-70. - Increasing alcoholic content. 
It shall be the duty of every holder of a license to manufacture and sell, or sell nonintoxicating beer, to use every precaution to prevent any person on the premises described in such permit from pouring into, mixing with or adding to such nonintoxicating beer any alcohol or other liquid, or any alcohol cube or other ingredient that will increase the alcoholic content of such nonintoxicating beer. Any such license holder who shall knowingly permit any person on the premises described in such permit to pour into, mix with or add to such nonintoxicating beer any alcohol or other liquid, or any alcohol cube or other ingredient that will increase the alcoholic content of such nonintoxicating beer, shall be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1964, § 4.480) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 312.460.  
Secs. 4-71—4-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Number required; fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or expose for sale, either at wholesale or retail in the city, nonintoxicating beer in any quantity without first having obtained a license therefor. A separate license shall be required for each place of business, and the following license fees shall be paid annually: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)—Manufacture and sale by manufacturer of nonintoxicating beer, brewed or manufactured in this city. 
(2)  Fifty dollars ($50.00)—Sale by distributor or wholesaler other than the manufacturer and brewer thereof, of nonintoxicating beer; provided, however, that any person holding a license as a distributor or wholesaler to sell five (5) per cent beer is hereby authorized to sell nonintoxicating beer under such wholesaler or distributor license to sell five (5) per cent beer. 
(3)  Thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50)—Sale of nonintoxicating beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(4)  Twenty-two dollars and fifty cents ($22.50)—Sale of nonintoxicating beer by grocers and other merchants and dealers for sale in the original package direct to consumers, but not for resale. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 312.100(1)—(4).  
Sec. 4-82. - Manufacture of nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating liquor—Limitations on aggregate amount. 
No person at least twenty-one (21) years of age shall be required to obtain a license to manufacture nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating liquor for personal or family use. The aggregate amount of nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating liquor manufactured per household shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per calendar year if there are two (2) or more persons over the age of twenty-one (21) years in such household, or one hundred (100) gallons per calendar year if there is only one (1) person over the age of twenty-one (21) years in such household. 
(Ord. No. 18006, § 1, 3-1-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18006, § 1, adopted March 1, 2004, in part repealed former § 4-82 of the Code and added new provisions as § 4-82 to read as herein set out. Former § 4-82 pertained to nonintoxicating beer license application; form and contents and derived from the 1964 Code, § 4.410; and Ord. No. 13733, § 1, adopted July 6, 1993.  
Secs. 4-83—4-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES 
 
Sec. 4-96. - Entertainment areas restricted. 
Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter who permits or allows any entertainer or any patron to perform upon the bar or upon any other place used for serving food or beverages or in any place within the premises open to view from the sidewalk or street, or allows such performance other than on a raised dais or platform or some designated area adequately set aside from the immediate vicinity where patrons may be seated or standing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 4.510)  
Sec. 4-97. - Solicitation for sales. 
No holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall sell or give any intoxicating liquor, nonintoxicating beer, nonintoxicating beverage, drink, merchandise, or other thing of value in any quantity to any employee who shall solicit another to buy said intoxicating liquor, nonintoxicating beer, nonalcoholic beverage, drink, merchandise or other thing of value, in any quantity; nor shall he permit any such person to solicit the purchase of intoxicating liquor, nonintoxicating beer, nonalcoholic beverage, drink, merchandise, or other thing of value, in any quantity, by another on the premises of such licensee. 
(Code 1964, § 4.530)  
Sec. 4-98. - Indecent exposure, performances. 
No holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall permit any employee to be in violation of section 16-131 relating to indecent exposure. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer or performer to perform in any indecent or immoral show. 
(Code 1964, § 4.520; Ord. No. 9823, § 1, 5-16-83)  
Secs. 4-99, 4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SERVER CERTIFICATE 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Department means the department of public health and human services. 
Director means the director of public health and human services or the director's designee. 
Permit means to give permission to; or to allow by silent consent, by not prohibiting, or by failing to exercise control. 
Server means any person directly engaged in the retail sale, service, delivery or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including taking orders for, accepting payment for, mixing, serving or assisting in mixing or serving any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-102. - Server certificate required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work as a server without a valid server certificate issued to that person by the director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license under this chapter to permit any person to work as a server unless the server has deposited with the license holder a valid server certificate issued to the server by the director. 
(c)  Each person holding a server certificate who is employed by a person licensed under this chapter shall deposit the certificate with such employer during the tenure of the holder's employment. The director shall issue duplicate certificates to persons employed by more than one employer licensed under this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this section that the person working as a server, at the time of the alleged offense, had been employed at the place of business for less than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-103. - Qualifications. 
A holder of a server certificate must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-104. - Server certificate; how obtained. 
(a)  A person desiring to be employed as a server shall submit a written application for a server certificate to the department on forms provided by the department. The application shall be submitted by the applicant in person so that the applicant may be photographed. There shall be a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each new or renewed server certificate and a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each duplicate server certificate. This fee shall be waived if the server certificate is obtained in conjunction with a new or renewed food manager's or food handler's certificate. 
(b)  An applicant must successfully complete the State of Missouri Alcohol Responsibility Training (SMART) or some other training program approved by the director within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding submission of the application. 
(c)  The server certificate shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance and shall be in the form of a badge displaying the name and photograph of the certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-105. - Suspension and revocation of server certificates. 
(a)  The director may suspend or revoke the server certificate of any certificate holder who violates any of the laws pertaining to serving alcoholic beverages or who has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the certificate application. 
(b)  The director shall suspend or revoke the server certificate by sending notice of the suspension or revocation to the certificate holder by first class mail or by personal service on the certificate holder. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  A statement of the grounds for the suspension or revocation. 
(2)  The effective date of the suspension or revocation, which shall be at least ten (10) days after the notice is received. 
(3)  In the case of a suspension, the length of the suspension. 
(4)  Instructions on how to appeal the suspension or revocation. 
(c)  The certificate holder may appeal the suspension or revocation by requesting a hearing before the liquor license review board. The appeal must be in writing, addressed to the director and received by the director within ten (10) days after the notice of suspension or revocation was received. Receipt of an appeal by the director shall not automatically stay enforcement of the suspension or revocation. 
(d)  After receipt of an appeal, the director shall schedule a hearing before the liquor license review board. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the certificate holder. Notice shall be given in the same manner as the notices of suspension or revocation. 
(e)  The liquor license review board shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of RSMo Ch. 536 for contested cases. 
(f)  The certificate holder may appeal an adverse decision of the liquor license review board to the circuit court of Boone County in accordance with RSMo Ch. 536. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-106. - Additional unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess any forged or false server certificate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, forge, reproduce in any way or otherwise falsify a server certificate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, lend, sell or otherwise provide a false server certificate to any other person. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any lawful holder of a server certificate to give, lend, sell or otherwise provide the server certificate to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Sec. 4-107. - Implementation of server certificate requirement. 
The director is authorized to implement the server certificate requirement in stages; provided, that the requirement shall be fully implemented no later than January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 21513, § 1, 11-19-12)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dead animals as constituting public nuisance, § 11-225; noise regulations regarding animals and birds, § 16-260. 
State Law reference— Disposal of dead animals, RSMo. § 269.010 et seq.; animals restrained from running at large, RSMo. § 270.010 et seq.; strays, RSMo. § 271.010 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
Dangerous exotic animal includes the following exotic animals: 
(1)  Lions, tigers, leopards, ocelots, jaguars, cheetahs, margays, mountain lions, Canada lynx, bobcats, jaguarundis, bears, hyenas, wolves and coyotes. 
(2)  Deadly, dangerous or venomous reptiles and venomous arthropods. 
(3)  All nonhuman primates. 
(4)  Any other exotic animal declared by the director to be dangerous. 
Department means the department of public health and human services except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Director means the director of public health and human services. 
Domesticated animals are those animals which have reproduced while in captivity in the U.S. for at least two hundred (200) generations (with the burden of such proof resting entirely on the owner). A particular animal shall not be regarded as domesticated unless both parents are domesticated animals. 
Exotic animal includes the following: 
(1)  Any mammal not generally accustomed to live in or near human populations. 
(2)  Any mammal not considered to be a member of the class generally referred to as domesticated animals. 
(3)  Venomous reptiles and venomous arthropods. 
(4)  All nonhuman primates. 
(5)  All animals listed on the endangered species list as designated by the U.S. Department of Interior in the Endangered Species Act of 1969. 
(6)  All animals protected from hunting and capture by federal and state law. 
(7)  All predatory birds. 
Feral cat means any cat of any breed that is or becomes undomesticated, untamed, wild or is not a pet. 
Livestock shall include cattle, horses, mules, goats, sheep, hogs, ducks, geese, turkeys, lamas, emu, ostriches, camels or any other domestic beast or fowl but shall not include chickens. 
Person shall include natural persons and business entities, their agents, officers, and anyone having an ownership interest therein. 
Rabies Compendium shall mean the most current edition of a document by that name published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, which serves as the standard for rabies vaccine, treatment and policy. 
Tethering means the use of a line, rope, or chain by which an animal is fastened so as to restrict its range of movement. 
(Code 1964, § 5.031; Ord. No. 10427, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 11055, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 15069, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 17381, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18) 
Cross reference— Rules of construction and definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-2. - Animal habitats to be clean, sanitary; inspections authorized. 
All structures, pens, coops or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept or permitted to be, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from offensive, disagreeable or noxious smell or odor to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of any person. The interior walls of all such structures shall be whitewashed or painted annually or oftener as the health officer shall direct. The enclosed area of all such structures shall be constructed in such a way as to be dry at all times on the inside. The health officer may at any time inspect, or cause to be inspected, any structure or premises and issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 5.090; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-3. - Disposition of animals biting or attacking persons. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d), any dog or cat which bites, injures or attacks any person shall be immediately impounded for a period of ten (10) days. The animal shall be impounded in Boone County, Missouri by the animal's owner with a veterinarian of the owner's choice or with a veterinarian in another location approved by the director or the director's designee. It shall be unlawful for the animal's owner to refuse to so impound the animal. If the animal's owner does not impound the animal, the animal control officer is authorized to impound the animal in the city pound. If, within the period of ten (10) days, the animal does not develop or manifest rabies, it may be redeemed by the owner upon the payment of the boarding fee and impoundment fee provided for in section 5-5 if the animal is in the custody of the city, or the payment of usual and customary fees if the animal has been in the custody of a veterinarian of the owner's choice. If the animal is not redeemed at the end of the ten-day period, it shall be humanely disposed of, as provided for in this chapter. If the animal develops signs of rabies, the animal control officer shall have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian. Any other warm-blooded animal that is suspected of having rabies or that bites, injures or attacks any person may, upon the order of the director, be impounded and humanely euthanized, and the brain or other structures may be submitted for rabies diagnosis subject to the provisions of article VII. 
(b)  Any trained dog maintained and utilized by the Columbia Police Department as a police dog which has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this Code and which while under the control or direction of the Columbia police bites or attacks any person shall be examined, impounded or tested as the director deems appropriate. 
(c)  If any dog or cat that has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter bites a veterinarian while the veterinarian is examining or treating the animal, the animal shall be examined, impounded and tested only to the extent the veterinarian deems appropriate. 
(d)  In lieu of the impoundment requirements of subsection (a), a dog or cat that bites, injures, or attacks any person may, at the discretion of an animal control officer, be impounded at its owner's place of residence, if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The animal has been vaccinated against rabies, as required by this chapter; 
(2)  The animal was properly licensed by the city at the time of the incident; 
(3)  Neither the animal nor any other animal kept at the owner's residence has a history of running at large; 
(4)  The animal does not have a history of causing injury to any person or animal; 
(5)  The animal's owner authorizes animal control officers to monitor the animal's condition for ten (10) days; 
(6)  The animal's owner agrees to have the animal examined by a veterinarian on the tenth day of impoundment; and 
(7)  No one is being charged with a violation of section 5-57 involving the animal to be impounded. 
(Code 1964, § 5.140; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 13168, § 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 14512, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11) 
Cross reference— Dangerous or aggressive animals generally, § 5-57.  
Sec. 5-4. - Animals running at large—Unlawful for owner to allow; impoundment authorized. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person responsible for any animal, fowl or reptile, except as otherwise herein provided, to allow such animal, fowl or reptile to run at large or loose upon any of the streets or public places of the city, and any such animal, fowl or reptile running at large or loose upon the streets or public places of the city shall be taken up by the animal control officer and impounded in the city pound, and shall be released to the owner thereof only upon payment to the animal control officer of the prescribed fee. 
(Code 1964, § 5.040; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 5-5. - Redemption; microchipping; neutering; payment of fees; disposition of unredeemed animals. 
(a)  The owner of any animal impounded for running at large that is not a dangerous exotic animal or a dangerous or aggressive animal may redeem the animal upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the animal control officer and upon paying a boarding fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day or part of day the animal has been impounded and an impoundment fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each impoundment. If the animal is a domestic dog or cat that has not been implanted with a readable identifying microchip, the animal shall be implanted with an identifying microchip before being released. The owner shall pay a microchip implantation fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus the cost of the microchip before the dog or cat is released. If the animal has previously been implanted with a microchip, the owner shall notify the department and any applicable national registry of any change in address or telephone number. Intact dogs and cats impounded for the third time shall be spayed or neutered before being released, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Dogs being used by law enforcement agencies for law enforcement activities or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director; 
(2)  Dogs that have been appropriately trained and are being used as service dogs such as a guide dog, hearing dog, assistance dog, seizure alert dog or social/therapy dog or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director; 
(3)  Dogs that have been appropriately trained and are being used by search and rescue agencies for search and rescue activities or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director; 
(4)  Dogs or cats certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being spayed or neutered; 
(5)  Dogs that have been appropriately trained and are being used for herding of other animals or as livestock guardian dogs, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director; 
(6)  Dogs or cats boarded in a licensed kennel or licensed business which boards such animals for professional training or resale. 
The owner shall pay a spay or neuter fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) before the dog or cat is released. 
(b)  In addition to paying the fees prescribed in subsection (a), if the animal is a domestic dog or cat, the owner may redeem the animal only upon proof satisfactory to the animal control officer that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian with a vaccine that will be effective during the full term for which the animal license is issued. If the owner cannot present satisfactory proof that the animal was vaccinated, the animal control officer shall not release the animal unless the officer is satisfied that the animal will be properly vaccinated. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of article VII, at the end of five (5) days, except as otherwise herein provided, if an animal impounded for running at large that is not a dangerous exotic animal or a dangerous or aggressive animal has not been redeemed, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal in any one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  Release of the animal to the local humane society or a local animal shelter at no charge. 
(2)  Humane destruction of the animal in a manner approved by the director. 
(3)  Release of the animal to any responsible person eighteen (18) or older who expresses a desire for any given animal after payment of the prescribed impoundment fees and completion of the release procedures. 
(4)  Release of the animal to an accredited school, college or university within the state which has a recognized research program and whose methods of animal care and use are approved by the director, upon payment of outstanding fees. 
(d)  All fees collected by the animal control officer shall be paid over to the director of finance. 
(e)  The director may waive all or a portion of the boarding fee and impoundment fee if the director determines that the animal is not vicious and that the owner of the animal is unable to pay the fees. 
(Code 1964, § 5.060; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 16591, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 20044, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18; Ord. No. 24008 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 5-6. - Animal abuse; unlawful impoundment; unlawful confinement; tethering. 
(a)  Animal abuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Cruelly overwork any domestic animal; 
(2)  Cruelly work any domestic animal that is unfit for labor; 
(3)  Abandon any domestic animal to die; 
(4)  Beat, ill-treat, torment or cause injury or unnecessary pain to any animal; or 
(5)  Carry or cause to be carried any animal in or on any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(b)  Unlawful impoundment. It shall be unlawful for any person to impound or confine any animal or cause any animal to be impounded or confined without supplying the following: 
(1)  A structurally sound, properly ventilated, sanitary, dry and weatherproof shelter suitable for the species, age and condition of the animal. The shelter must be free of litter and hazardous substances and objects and must have access to shade from direct sunlight and must allow regress from exposure to inclement weather conditions; 
(2)  Wholesome food suitable for the species which is provided at suitable intervals in a sanitary manner in quantities sufficient to maintain good health in the animal considering its age and condition; 
(3)  Constant access or access at suitable intervals to a supply of clean, potable, unfrozen water, provided in a sanitary manner and in sufficient amounts for the animal to maintain good health; and 
(4)  Normal and prudent attention to the needs of the animal, including all necessary immunizations, sufficient exercise and rest to maintain good health and the provision to each sick or injured animal of the necessary veterinary care or humane death. 
(c)  Unlawful confinement in vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to confine any animal or cause any animal to be confined in a vehicle under weather conditions that endanger the health of the animal. 
(d)  Tethering. It shall be unlawful to tether any animal except under the following restrictions: 
(1)  No animal may be tethered as the primary method of restraining an animal to any property. No animal may be tethered for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes unless it has also been provided with adequate food, water and shelter suitable for the species, age and condition of the animal; 
(2)  No animal may be tethered unless supervised by a competent person physically present on the property; 
(3)  The tether must be of a type and weight that allows for the free movement of the animal and shall be no less than three (3) times the animal's length or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater, free from any entanglements, and contain a swivel at both ends. At no time may any logging chain, tow chain or similar device be utilized as a tether; 
(4)  Animals must be tethered by a non-choke type collar or body harness constructed of either nylon or leather and no less than one (1) inch in width, unless the collar is a rolled leather collar; 
(5)  No dog under six (6) months in age may be tethered; 
(6)  Multiple animals must be tethered separately and in such a way that they may not become entangled with one another; and 
(7)  When tethered, an animal's maximum reach must be no closer than ten (10) feet from any sidewalk or property line. 
(e)  Defenses. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent persons from taking whatever action is necessary to defend themselves, other individuals or animals when endangered by an animal attack. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from performing any act permitted by section 578.007 RSMo or by any other Missouri or federal law. 
(f)  Removal of animals; impoundment. Each animal control officer may remove an animal from a private owner and place it in the custody of the department when the health or safety of the animal is in immediate danger or when the animal shows evidence of neglect or abuse. The department may retain custody of such animal until the threat to the health or safety of the animal has been removed. Except for exigent circumstances, if the owner of an animal that is neglected, abused or in danger does not consent to removal of the animal or if the owner of the property on which the animal is located does not consent to entry onto the property, the animal control officer shall enter the property and remove the animal only pursuant to a warrant issued by a judge. Any expense incurred in the impoundment of an animal under this section becomes a lien on the animal impounded and must be discharged before the animal is released from the custody of the director. Fees for dogs, cats and other small animals shall be consistent with section 5-5 of this article. In the case of large animals, private livestock haulers, stables, and other services may be used. The actual cost of the city for these services shall be charged in lieu of the costs set forth in section 5-5. An impounded animal may be humanely euthanized if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal is diseased or disabled beyond recovery. 
(g)  Disposal of unredeemed animals. Subject to the provisions of article VII, when the impounded animal is not claimed by its owner and all impoundment costs satisfied within five (5) days from the date of impoundment, the animal may be sold or transferred to a person capable of providing care consistent with this section. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to discharge the lien. If no purchaser is found, the animal may be disposed of in a manner consistent with section 5-5 of this article. 
(h)  Interfering with enforcing authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the director or the director's authorized representative in the performance of the duties set forth in this section. 
(Code 1964, § 5.095; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 14512, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 578.060.  
Sec. 5-7. - Refusal to deliver animal to animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to deliver up to the animal control officer any animal, fowl or reptile, when requested to do so under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 5.160; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 5-8. - Removing animals from custody of animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the custody of the animal control officer by force, deceit or otherwise, any animal which has been legally impounded by such officer, prior to obtaining the permission of the animal control officer to remove such animal. 
(Code 1964, § 5.161)  
Sec. 5-9. - Dangerous exotic animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep, harbor, own or knowingly allow to be in or upon the person's premises any dangerous exotic animal. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a properly maintained and licensed zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory or veterinary hospital. 
(b)  Any animal that is determined by an animal control officer to be a dangerous exotic animal shall be immediately impounded. Except for exigent circumstances, if the owner of the dangerous exotic animal does not consent to removal of the animal or if the owner of the property on which the animal is located does not consent to entry onto the property, the animal control officer shall enter the property and remove the animal only pursuant to a warrant issued by a judge. The dangerous exotic animal shall remain impounded until: 
(1)  The director determines that the animal is not an exotic dangerous animal; or 
(2)  The owner satisfies an animal control officer that the animal will be kept in a lawful manner; or 
(3)  The owner relinquishes ownership of the animal and the animal is either humanely destroyed or placed with a person who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner; or 
(4)  A person charged with a violation of this section has been found not guilty and the judge orders the animal released; or 
(5)  A court determines that the animal is not a dangerous exotic animal. 
(c)  The owner of the dangerous exotic animal shall pay the boarding fee and impoundment fee provided for in section 5-5 plus any additional cost incurred by the city in feeding and caring for the animal. The owner shall be billed periodically by the city for such fees and expenses. If the owner fails to pay such a bill within ten (10) days after it was mailed, ownership of the animal shall be deemed relinquished and, after the procedures of this section have been followed, the animal may either be humanely destroyed or placed with a person who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner. Bills for fees and costs under this section shall notify the animal owner that if the bill is not paid within ten (10) days, the animal will be destroyed or placed with some person who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner. The bill shall also state that the animal owner may meet with the director or the director's designee to dispute whether the animal is a dangerous exotic animal or the amount of the bill before the animal is destroyed or placed with another person. If the animal owner wishes to meet, the owner must request a meeting in writing. The request must be delivered to the director at the address given for this purpose on the bill. The request must be delivered before the deadline for disposition of the animal indicated on the bill. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-10. - Exotic animal restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall sell, or offer for sale, within the limits of the city, any exotic animal, as defined in section 5-1 of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall allow an exotic animal to be in any public place. This subsection shall not apply to: 
(1)  Animals owned by and properly confined in a properly maintained and licensed zoological park. 
(2)  Animals owned by a circus that are properly confined or under the control of an animal trainer or handler. 
(3)  Animals confined in a scientific or educational institution, research laboratory or veterinary hospital. 
(c)  No person shall keep, harbor, own or allow on the person's premises any exotic animal unless the animal is not a dangerous exotic animal and is registered with and permitted by the director. The registration shall contain the name and contact information of the person registering the exotic animal. The director may place reasonable conditions on approval of an exotic animal permit. The permit shall be in effect for one (1) year from the date it is issued. The director may deny or revoke a permit if the permit applicant or holder has violated any provision of this chapter or any condition of an exotic animal permit. The applicant or permit holder is entitled to a hearing under article VII to contest the denial or revocation. 
(Code 1964, §§ 5.051, 5.052; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-11. - Sale of reptiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a reptile to any person under the age of eighteen (18) unless the purchaser is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian of the purchaser. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pet store owner or employee to sell a reptile unless the seller gives the purchaser written information provided by the director describing the human health and safety risks associated with reptile ownership. The seller shall require the purchaser to sign a statement acknowledging receipt of such information. The seller shall retain the statement for at least one (1) year from the date of sale. 
(Ord. No. 15069, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11055, § 1, enacted May 19, 1986, repealed §§ 5-11—5-13, pertaining to migratory waterfowl, which derived from Code 1964, §§ 5.053—5.055 and Ord. No. 10427, § 1, enacted Jan. 21, 1985. Subsequently, Ord. No. 15069 added a new § 5-11.  
Sec. 5-13. - Responsibility of parent or guardian of minor. 
The parent or guardian of a minor child is responsible for the adequate care of any animal owned by, in the control of, or harbored by that minor child. 
(Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-14. - Avian nuisances—Abatement by director or designee. 
Whenever the director becomes aware that birds, not otherwise protected, regulated or controlled be federal or state law, rule or regulation, are congregating or flocking together in such numbers as to cause a health hazard or are interfering with the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of the inhabitants of the city, the director may take whatever steps are necessary to remove or disperse the congregation or flock. 
(Code 1964, § 5.056; Ord. No. 10427, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-15. - Same—Director may delegate certain powers. 
(a)  In order to remove or disperse congregations or flocks of birds constituting a nuisance as defined by ordinance, the director may delegate the implementation of a dispersal plan to any responsible citizen or citizens in the affected neighborhood by permit specifying the name of the permittee, date of issuance, date of expiration and details of the plan so delegated. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to empower the director to authorize any private citizen to discharge any firearm or to use any device which launches a projectile of any type. 
(Code 1964, § 5.057; Ord. No. 10427, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-16. - Penalties for chapter violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where no penalty is otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); or by confinement not to exceed thirty (30) days; or by both such fine and confinement. 
(Code 1964, § 5.190; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-17. - Expedited hearings. 
The municipal court, upon request of either party, shall expedite the trial or any hearing involving an impounded animal. 
(Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05)  
Secs. 5-18—5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-26. - City pound. 
The health officer shall, with the advice of the board of health, establish a city pound, under the supervision and direction of the animal control officer, for the reception and humane care of sick, injured, diseased or impounded animals, and establish rules and regulations therefor. The city may use the animal shelter operated by the Central Missouri Humane Society or other local animal shelter under terms of a contract or agreement to be approved by both parties. 
(Code 1964, § 5.030; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-27. - Animal control officer. 
It shall be the duty of all duly appointed animal control officers to enforce the provisions and carry out the duties prescribed by this chapter. Animal control officers shall have the powers of police officers insofar as may be reasonably necessary in carrying out the duties and functions of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 5.020; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 5-28. - Appointment of deputy license administrators for collection of animal license tax. 
Each licensed veterinarian engaged in such practice within the city shall, upon application to the business license administrator, be appointed by the business license administrator as a deputy business license administrator for the sole purpose of collecting the animal license tax and issuing a certificate and metallic tag, to be supplied by the business license administrator, evidencing payment of such tax. The deputies may charge a fee for providing this service. Such deputies shall be accountable to the business license administrator for such metallic tags and certificates received, and all license taxes collected. It shall be a misdemeanor for any deputy business license administrator to fail to pay over to the business license administrator the license tax herein provided to be paid to such business license administrator. In addition to penalties provided by law for misdemeanor, the business license administrator may revoke such deputy's appointment and remove the deputy business license administrator from office. 
(Code 1964, § 5.070; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21015, § 1, adopted July 5, 2011, repealed § 5-29, which pertained to dangerous exotic animals and derived from Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05.  
Sec. 5-30. - Ferrets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, or allow to remain on the person's premises, any ferret over four (4) months of age unless the ferret has received a rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian within the past twelve (12) months and the person exhibits proof of such vaccination upon the demand of an animal control officer. 
(b)  The provisions of section 5-3 pertaining to dogs shall apply to any ferret that bites, injures or attacks any person. 
(c)  The licensing provisions of article III shall apply to ferrets. 
(Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Secs. 5-31—5-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11203, § 1, enacted Sept. 15, 1986, repealed Div. 2, §§ 5-41, 5-42, pertaining to the board of animal control, which derived from Code 1964, §§ 5.010, 5.011. 
 
Secs. 5-41—5-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5-56. - Barking, annoying dogs. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which, by loud, continual or frequent barking, howling or yelping, shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood or any person, or which habitually barks at or chases pedestrians, or vehicles, whatsoever, to the annoyance of such pedestrian or drivers of such vehicles; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the city dog pound, veterinary offices and hospitals, or licensed kennels or pet shops. 
(Code 1964, § 5.120; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88) 
Cross reference— Noise regulations generally, § 16-256 et seq.  
Sec. 5-57. - Dangerous or aggressive animals. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, harbor or allow to be in or upon the person's premises any dangerous or aggressive animal unless it is confined in accordance with the provisions of this section. An animal is dangerous or aggressive: 
(1)  If it bites or otherwise injures any person or domestic animal or pet, or 
(2)  If it habitually snaps at, growls or otherwise manifests a disposition to bite, attack or injure any person or domestic animal or pet, or 
(3)  If it causes any person to have a reasonable fear of immediate serious physical injury. 
Any trained dog maintained and utilized by the Columbia Police Department as a police dog shall not be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal so long as it is maintained and utilized by the Columbia Police Department as a police dog. 
(b)  Dangerous or aggressive animals shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked kennel or cage. The kennel or cage shall be of a size appropriate to the size of the animal kept therein and shall provide adequate ventilation, shade from the sun and protection from the elements. In the event of a dispute over the appropriate size, the guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture shall apply. The kennel or cage must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. Such kennel or cage must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides or the sides must be embedded in the ground. The kennel or cage must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Any such kennel or cage must be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line and must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. Kennels for dangerous or aggressive dogs must be at least six (6) feet in height and, unless a secure bottom or floor is attached to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. 
(c)  When confined indoors, no dangerous or aggressive animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house, building or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. No such animal may be kept in a house, building or structure when the windows are open. No dangerous or aggressive dog may be kept in a house, building or structure when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(d)  No person shall permit a dangerous or aggressive animal to go outside its kennel, cage or secure structure unless that person has the animal securely leashed on a leash no longer than four (4) feet in length and that person has physical control of the leash. Such animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. Additionally, all such animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel, cage or secure structure must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting persons or other animals. 
(e)  A sign or signs shall be conspicuously posted upon the kennel or cage of any dangerous or aggressive animal with letters at least two (2) inches high containing a warning to beware of the dangerous or aggressive animal. 
(f)  Any dangerous or aggressive animal that is not confined in accordance with this section may be impounded by an animal control officer. Except for exigent circumstances, if the owner of a dangerous or aggressive animal does not consent to removal of the animal or if the owner of the property on which the animal is located does not consent to entry onto the property, the animal control officer shall enter the property and remove the animal only pursuant to a warrant issued by a judge. The dangerous or aggressive animal shall remain impounded until: 
(1)  The owner satisfies an animal control officer that the animal will be confined in accordance with this section; or 
(2)  The owner relinquishes ownership of the animal and the animal is either destroyed or placed with a person who will keep the animal in a lawful manner; or 
(3)  A person charged with a violation of this section has been found not guilty and the judge orders the animal released; or 
(4)  A court determines that the animal is not a dangerous or aggressive animal or that the animal has been confined in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  The owner of the dangerous or aggressive animal shall pay the boarding fee and impoundment fee provided for in section 5-5 plus any additional cost incurred by the city in feeding and caring for the animal. The owner shall be billed periodically by the city for such fees and expenses. If the owner fails to pay such a bill within ten (10) days after it was mailed, ownership of the animal shall be deemed relinquished and, after the procedures of this section have been followed, the animal may either be humanely destroyed or placed with a person who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner. Bills for fees and costs under this section shall notify the animal owner that if the bill is not paid within ten (10) days, the animal will be destroyed or placed with some person who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner. The bill shall also state that the animal owner may meet with the director or the director's designee to dispute whether the animal is a dangerous or aggressive animal or the amount of the bill before the animal is destroyed or placed with another person. If the animal owner wishes to meet, the owner must request a meeting in writing. The request must be delivered to the director at the address given for this purpose on the bill. The request must be delivered before the deadline for disposition of the animal indicated on the bill. 
(h)  All dangerous or aggressive animals shall be photographed and implanted with an identifying microchip at the owner's expense in accordance with rules established by the director. All dangerous or aggressive animals shall be spayed or neutered at the owner's expense. 
(i)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any dangerous or aggressive animal without a current annual dangerous or aggressive animal registration issued by the department of health. The annual fee for a dangerous or aggressive animal registration shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). A prorated portion of the fee shall be refunded if the dangerous or aggressive animal dies or has been permanently moved outside the city limits. 
(j)  Upon conviction of any person of a violation of this section, the municipal judge may, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, order the animal control officer to forthwith take up and put to death such dangerous or aggressive animal. 
(Code 1964, § 5.130; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 13168, § 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 15071, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18; Ord. No. 24008 , § 1, 9-16-19) 
Cross reference— Disposition of animals biting or attacking persons, § 5-3.  
Sec. 5-58. - Confinement of dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, harboring, owning or responsible for a dog to permit the dog to be off of the premises of the person keeping, harboring, owning or responsible for the dog unless the dog is held on a leash by a competent person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a dog in a vehicle being driven or parked upon a street if the dog is secured in a manner that prevents escape. For purposes of this section, the common areas, both indoors and outdoors, of an apartment building or other multiple unit residential structure shall not be considered part of the premises of the person keeping, harboring, owning or responsible for a dog. 
(b)  It is a defense to a charge of violating this section that the dog involved is a working dog trained to assist individuals with disabilities and that the dog is under the control of a competent person and obedient to the command of such person. 
(c)  It is a defense to a charge of violating this section that the dog involved was participating in an organized competition or that the dog involved was engaged in an organized training exercise under the supervision of a person competent to provide such training. 
(d)  It is a defense to a charge of violating this section that the dog involved is a trained police dog and that the dog is under the control of a competent person and obedient to the command of such person. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog in a dog running area established by this section; provided, that the dog is under the control of a competent person and obedient to the command of such person. The following areas are designated as dog running areas, except that the parks department may designate leash areas within the areas: 
(1)  Grindstone Nature Area, except parking area and trails. 
(2)  Bear Creek Nature Area. 
(3)  Garth Nature Area Dog Park. 
(4)  Twin Lakes Recreation Area Dog Park. 
(5)  Indian Hills Dog Park. 
(Ord. No. 15070, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 15228, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. 18576 , § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 22344 , § 1, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-59. - Tags, collar or harness required on dogs. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of any dog over the age of three (3) months shall allow or permit such dog to be in any place in the city at any time without a collar or harness having attached thereto the license tag required by sections 5-62 and 5-64; nor shall any resident or owner or keeper of any dog permit or allow such animal to wear any tag other than the identical tag issued by the business license administrator or the business license administrator's deputy for such animal. It shall be the duty of the police to report to the business license administrator, the business license administrator's deputy, or the animal control officer, the owner or keeper of any dog permitting such dog to be in any place in the city at any time without a collar or harness having attached thereto the tag as herein provided. Dogs not displaying the aforesaid tag shall be taken up and impounded by the animal control officer. 
(b)  No person shall remove or cause to be removed, the collar, harness or tag mentioned in paragraph (a) above, from any dog without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof. 
(Code 1964, §§ 5.170, 5.180; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-60. - Limitation upon number of dogs and cats kept. 
No person shall, at any time, keep, harbor or own, at one location within the city, more than a total of four (4) dogs or cats over the age of six (6) months. This provision shall not apply to a lawfully operated commercial kennel, a kennel maintained in connection with a small animal hospital, the city pound or persons in their role as registered caretakers of feral cats. 
(Code 1964, § 5.090; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-61. - Vaccination of domestic dogs and cats—Required. 
No person shall own, keep, harbor or permit to be or remain on or about such person's premises any dog or cat which, if over three (3) months of age, has not been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a vaccine approved and listed in the current rabies compendium which will, in the opinion of the director, be effective during the full term for which such license is issued. 
(Code 1964, § 5.050; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-62. - Same—Evidence prior to license issuance. 
Prior to issuing a license tax certificate and license tag, the deputy business license administrator shall require the owner to present satisfactory evidence that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies and that such vaccination, if any, will be effective during the full term for which such animal license is issued. If the owner cannot present such satisfactory evidence of such vaccination, the deputy shall, before issuing a license certificate, cause the animal to be vaccinated for rabies at the expense of the owner with a type of vaccine approved by the director. In evidence of such vaccination, the deputy shall issue to the owner an appropriate certificate of such vaccination bearing the date of vaccination, vaccination certificate number, and the name and address of the veterinarian. 
(Code 1964, § 5.072; Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-63. - Licensing of domestic dogs and cats—Required. 
No person shall own, keep, harbor or permit to be or remain on or about such person's premises any dog or cat over three (3) months of age which has not been licensed. 
(Code 1964, § 5.050; Ord. No. 13502, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 5-64. - Same—Tags and certificates. 
The business license administrator shall provide each deputy with a sufficient number of metallic tags of convenient size and shape, having cast thereon in sunken letters the number of the license and the year of issue, and take receipt therefor. The deputy shall furnish to all animal owners who pay the animal license fee or who show proof of working dog certification one of such tags and a certificate of license, the license number of the tag to correspond with that on the certificate. The license certificate shall consist of an original and two (2) duplicate originals. The certificate shall contain the number of license, date of issuance, the name and address of the owner, and a description of the licensed animal. It shall bear the facsimile signature of the business license administrator, and shall be countersigned by the business license administrator's deputy. The deputy shall deliver the original of such license certificate to the animal control officer and one duplicate original to the business license administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 5.071; Ord. No. 13502, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-65. - Same—License fee levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for each domestic cat or dog between the ages of three (3) months and twelve (12) months, and for each neutered domestic cat or dog of any age kept, harbored or owned within the city a license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for any period of time not to exceed one (1) year; and ten dollars ($10.00) for any period greater than one (1) year, but not exceeding two (2) years; and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for any period greater than two (2) years but not exceeding three (3) years. "Neutered" shall include both male and female animals irreversibly rendered incapable of reproduction by surgical or chemical procedure when such is verified in writing by the animal owner. 
(b)  There is hereby levied for each intact domestic cat or dog over the age of twelve (12) months kept, harbored or owned within the city a license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for any period of time not to exceed one (1) year; and thirty dollars ($30.00) for any period greater than one (1) year, but not exceeding two (2) years; and forty-five dollars ($45.00) for any period greater than two (2) years but not exceeding three (3) years. "Intact" shall include all dogs or cats not certified in writing by the owner to have been irreversibly chemically or surgically rendered incapable of reproduction. 
(c)  The licensing fees of this section shall not apply to any certified working dog trained to assist handicapped individuals. 
(d)  The licensing fees of this section shall not apply to any trained dog maintained and utilized by the Columbia Police Department so long as it is maintained and utilized as a police dog. 
(Code 1964, § 5.080; Ord. No. 11910, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 13502, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 14512, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 16591, § 1, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 5-66. - False certification of neutering; penalty. 
Any person owning, keeping or harboring any animal subject to the provisions of this article who shall falsely state or certify to any animal control officer or person issuing a license under the provisions of section 5-65, that such animal has been irreversibly chemically or surgically rendered incapable of reproduction, when in fact such animal is capable of reproduction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 5.082)  
Sec. 5-67. - Dog waste. 
(a)  No person owning or responsible for a dog shall permit the dog to defecate on any public property or right of way or on any private property other than property owned or leased by the person owning or responsible for the dog. 
(b)  It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the person charged immediately removed the excrement and properly disposed of it in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the dog involved is a certified working dog trained to assist individuals with disabilities and that the person charged has a disability which prevents the individual from removing the excrement and properly disposing of it in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 14881 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 14903, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-68. - Female dogs in heat. 
The owner or person responsible for a female dog in heat shall confine the animal within a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that the animal shall not be accessible to other dogs except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 18576, § 1, 7-5-05)  
Secs. 5-69—5-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 5-81. - Keeping within city restricted. 
(a)  No person shall keep livestock in an outdoor enclosure, outbuilding or pasture, the exterior boundary of which is within one hundred (100) feet of the dwelling house of another, or a church, school or place of business, without the consent in writing of the occupant of such dwelling house, trustees of such church or school, or owner of such place of business. 
(b)  No person shall keep livestock in an outdoor enclosure, outbuilding or pasture, unless such enclosure, outbuilding or pasture shall have an area of one-half acre for each of such animals and fowl; provided, that this area requirement shall not apply to the keeping of suckling offspring of a cow or mare. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any lawfully operated stockyard, slaughterhouse, or any university or college. 
(d)  No person shall keep more than four (4) weaned rabbits on any parcel of land less than one acre. 
(e)  Upon proper application, the director, in the director's discretion, may approve a variance from or a waiver to compliance with this section. The director may impose terms or conditions in association with the grant of a variance or waiver. Any act or conduct that is not in compliance with the terms and conditions of the variance or waiver shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 5.100; Ord. No. 13575, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 17381, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-82. - Confinement—Required. 
Every person owning land within the city upon which livestock is kept or permitted to be kept, by the landowner or otherwise, shall confine or restrict such livestock at all times to such property. Failure to so confine or restrict livestock kept or permitted to be kept within the city shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 5.105)  
Sec. 5-83. - Same—Requirement and maintenance of fences, corrals, etc. 
Every person owning land within the city upon which livestock is kept or permitted to be kept, by the landowner or otherwise, shall provide and maintain fences, corrals, tethers or similar devices to confine or restrict livestock to such property. Whenever it is determined by the animal control officer that the aforementioned devices are lacking, inadequate, or not in good repair, such animal control officer shall notify the landowner in writing that the landowner is not in compliance with this section and shall order the landowner to provide, replace, reinforce or repair such devices within ten (10) days. Failure to comply with such within ten (10) days shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 5.107; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-84. - Same—Impoundment of unconfined livestock; costs. 
(a)  Generally. Any livestock found upon property not owned or controlled by the livestock owner and not under the control of some competent person may be captured and impounded by the animal control officer, or any person designated by the animal control officer. The owner of impounded livestock shall be liable for all reasonable charges for capturing and impounding such livestock, including all charges incidental thereto. 
(b)  Sale of unclaimed, unpaid-for livestock. In the event that impounded livestock is not claimed or charges associated with the impoundment of livestock are not paid within fifteen (15) days, the director may direct that the livestock be sold at public auction, which shall occur no sooner than ten (10) days after notice of the time, date and place of sale, and a description of the livestock and location of capture has been posted in at least five (5) public places in the city. In case no bidders appear at such sale, the director may sell the livestock at private sale, securing the best possible price. From the proceeds of any sale held hereunder, the director shall first deduct the director's charges or expenses and pay the director's charges or expenses, and pay the balance into the city treasury, and such sums shall become a part of the general revenue fund. If at any time prior to the sale, the owner of such livestock shall exhibit satisfactory proof of ownership, the owner shall be entitled to redeem the livestock upon the payment of all fees and expenses. If, within six (6) months after the sale of the livestock, as above provided, the owner of any such livestock so sold shall exhibit to the council satisfactory proof of ownership, the proceeds coming into the city treasury from such sale, after deduction of all charges and expenses, shall be refunded to the owner. Should the proceeds of the sale be inadequate to meet the city expenses, the owner shall be billed for the unpaid balance. 
(Code 1964, § 5.108; Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 23568 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 5-85. - Loading, transporting, etc. 
Any person who shall, within the city, load, unload or transfer, from one vehicle to another vehicle, any hogs, sheep, cattle or other livestock in any public place, street or thoroughfare or on any private premises, and any person who shall park or stand any vehicle in which hogs, sheep, cattle or other livestock are loaded on any public place, street or thoroughfare or on any unenclosed private premises for a longer period than one hour shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit loading, unloading or transferring of hogs, sheep, cattle or other livestock at any established and maintained stockyard, slaughterhouse, stable, barns, or in any enclosed building. 
(Code 1964, § 5.110)  
Secs. 5-86—5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CHICKENS 
 
Sec. 5-91. - Number and type of chickens allowed. 
(a)  The maximum number of chickens allowed is six (6) per tract of land regardless of how many dwelling units are on the tract. 
(b)  Only female chickens are allowed. There is no restriction on chicken species. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any chickens kept as part of an educational course by public and private schools and educational institutions with fifty (50) or more students when the chickens are kept on school property that is one-half (½) acre or more in size. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 23840 , § 1, 4-15-19)  
Sec. 5-92. - Noncommercial use only. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-93. - Enclosures. 
(a)  Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times. Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non-daylight hours. 
(b)  Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must provide adequate ventilation and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats. 
(d)  Henhouses and chicken tractors. 
(1)  Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions for the chickens while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the neighborhood. 
a.  A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof wire of less than one-inch openings. 
b.  The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be well maintained. 
(2)  Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens shall only be located to the rear of the dwelling or other main structure and may be located in the rear yard required by chapter 29. 
(3)  Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must be located at least ten (10) feet from the property line and at least twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent residential dwelling, church, school or place of business. 
(e)  Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire or wooden fencing. The pen must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-94. - Odor and noise impacts. 
(a)  Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries. 
(b)  Perceptible noise from chickens shall not be loud enough at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-95. - Predators, rodents, insects and parasites. 
The chicken owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-96. - Feed and water. 
Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times. The feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-97. - Waste storage and removal. 
The chicken owner must provide for the storage and removal of chicken manure. All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire structure. No more than three (3) cubic feet of manure shall be stored. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor, chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-98. - Chickens at large. 
No dog or cat which kills a chicken will, for that reason alone, be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-99. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-100. - Nuisances. 
Any violation of this article that constitutes a health hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance abatement provisions of chapter 11. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 5-101. - Continuing violations. 
Each day that a violation of this article continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 20549, § 1, 2-1-10)  
Secs. 5-102—5-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FERAL CATS 
 
Sec. 5-111. - Feeding a feral cat colony without a permit. 
No person shall provide food, water or other forms of sustenance to a feral cat colony without a feral cat colony caretaker permit. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-112. - Feral cat colony caretaker permit. 
(a)  Any organization or individual over the age of eighteen (18) may submit an application to the department for a feral cat colony caretaker permit. The application shall be on a form provided by the department and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  A detailed description of the cats in the colony; 
(2)  Proof that the feral cats in the colony have been ear tipped and microchipped, neutered or spayed and vaccinated against rabies or are actively being trapped to perform the ear tipping, microchipping, neutering or spaying and vaccination against rabies; 
(3)  The address of the private property where the colony will be maintained; 
(4)  Written permission from the private property owner to maintain the colony at such address; and 
(5)  Contact information for the applicant and any other information that may be required by the department. 
(b)  Feral cat colony caretaker permits shall be issued for a period of two (2) years. 
(c)  An animal control officer may inspect the private property where the feral cat colony will be maintained. 
(d)  No feral cat colony caretaker permit shall be issued for a feral cat colony located on public property. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-113. - Requirements for care of feral cat colonies. 
Every person issued a feral cat colony caretaker permit shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Regularly feed the cat colony, including weekends and holidays. 
(2)  Annually trap each cat over the age of eight (8) weeks in order to comply with requirements (3) through (6). 
(3)  All cats must be spayed or neutered. 
(4)  All cats must be tested annually for feline leukemia and feline immune deficiency virus. Those cats testing positive must be humanely euthanized or isolated indoors. 
(5)  Identify all trapped cats by tipping their ears and insertion of a microchip. 
(6)  Have all cats vaccinated for rabies in addition to any other vaccinations or immunization requirement imposed by the state. 
(7)  Maintain records on the location and size of the colonies as well as the vaccination, microchipping, ear tipping and spay and neuter records of the colony cats. 
(8)  Take all reasonable steps to a) remove kittens from the colony after they have been weaned; b) place the kittens in homes or foster care; and c) capture and spay the mother cat. 
(9)  Obtain medical attention for any colony cat that exhibits illness, signs of rabies or unusual behavior and remove the cat from the colony to prevent disease or injury to other cats in the colony. 
(10)  If possible, report number of cats that died or otherwise ceased to be a part of the colony and the number of cats placed in animal shelters or permanent homes as companion cats. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-114. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The director may revoke the feral cat colony caretaker permit of any permit holder for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of any violation of this chapter or any other animal statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Failure of the permit holder or property owner to permit an animal control officer to inspect the property at which the feral cat colony is located. 
(3)  Failure or inability of the permit holder to provide care for the feral cat colony as required by section 5-113. 
(4)  The size of the feral cat colony has increased to such numbers that the colony is a health hazard or interferes with the peace or quiet of any Columbia resident. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days of the revocation of permit, the former permit holder shall relocate the colony to the care of one or more feral cat colony permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Secs. 5-115—5-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HEARINGS 
 
Sec. 5-121. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply whenever a person is entitled to a hearing to contest an action taken by the department or the director and whenever the department knows the identity of an impounded animal's owner and the department intends to euthanize the animal or release the animal to someone other than the animal's owner or the owner's agent. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-122. - Notice. 
The department shall give notice to the person entitled to a hearing to contest an action taken or proposed to be taken by the department or the director. The notice shall inform the owner of the right and manner of requesting a hearing to contest the action. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-123. - Service of notice. 
The department shall serve the notice on the person entitled to a hearing by first class mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under Missouri law. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-124. - Request for hearing. 
The person entitled to a hearing may request a hearing before the director to contest the action of the department or director. The request must be in writing and received by the director within five (5) days of the owner's receipt of the notice of the right to a hearing of the animal. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-125. - Notice of hearing. 
The director shall give at least five (5) days written notice of the hearing except in cases where the public health, safety or interest makes a shorter time reasonable. Notice shall be mailed to the address provided by the person requesting a hearing or personally served on the animal's owner in the same manner as legal process is served under Missouri law. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-126. - Hearing and decision. 
The director shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 536 RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-127. - Appeal. 
An appeal from the decision of the director may be made to the Circuit Court of Boone County in accordance with Chapter 536 RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Sec. 5-128. - Delegation. 
The director may delegate the authority and duties set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 21015, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil defense, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 9; franchise regulations, Ch. 10; noise regulations in regard to erection, repair and demolition of buildings, § 16-265; parks and recreation, Ch. 17; public works and improvements, Ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 27; Unified Development Code, Ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22824, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 6-16, 6-17, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 6-31 et seq.; plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; property maintenance code, § 6-71 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9-21; operating requirements for swimming pools adopted by reference, § 11-277. 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices C, E, F, I, J, and N, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Building Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22824, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 23997 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-17. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.2 Scope. Add the following exception: Where the adopted building code references means and methods of construction, that part shall be stricken. 
101.2.2: Appendices C, E, F, I, and N are hereby adopted as published. Appendix J is hereby adopted as amended. 
Appendix J section J106.1 Maximum slope; is hereby amended to read as: The slope of cut and fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (33 percent) unless the applicant furnishes a geotechnical report justifying a steeper slope. 
Exceptions: Number 1 is deleted in its entirety and exception number 2 will now be listed as exception number 1. 
Appendix J section J107.6 Maximum slope; is hereby amended to read as: The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (33 percent) shall be justified by a geotechnical report or engineering data. 
103.0 DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be the duty of the director of community development, who shall be referred to as the building official in this code. The building official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Division of Building and Site Development shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless such employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with such employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
104.7 Department records. An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the division specified in the provisions of this code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and according to reasonable rules to maintain the integrity and security of such records. 
104.8 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
104.8.1 Legal Defense. Delete in its entirety. 
104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. Delete in its entirety. 
105.5 Expiration. Add the following sentence after the last sentence: Building permit extension fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the building permit fee. 
107.1 General. Add the following sentence after exception paragraph: The application for the permit shall be accompanied by not less than two (2) sets of construction documents drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the nature and character of the work to be performed including general construction, special inspections, construction observation programs, structural, mechanical and electrical work and calculations. Each sheet of each set of plans, each set of specifications, calculations and other data shall be legally sealed by a registered design professional as required by the State of Missouri statutes. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional documents, information or calculations that are to be prepared by a registered design professional licensed in the State of Missouri. Legally sealed may include a "wet seal" with original signatures or other approved methods. 
Buildings or structures exempt from these requirements are: 
a.  One-family dwellings. 
b.  Two-family dwellings. 
c.  Commercial or industrial buildings not more than twelve hundred (1,200) square feet and which provide for the employment, sleeping, assembly, housing or feeding of less than ten (10) persons. 
d.  Any structure containing less than twenty thousand (20,000) cubic feet, except as provided in subsection b. or c. above. 
e.  A building or structure used exclusively for farm purposes. 
107.2.6 Site plan. There shall also be filed a site plan showing to scale the size and location of all the new construction and all existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey and certifying as to date survey was made. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size of all existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. No building or structure shall be permitted to be constructed across an existing lot line. 
107.2.6.1 Design flood elevations. Delete in its entirety. 
107.2.6.2 Private sewage disposal system. The site plan shall indicate the location of a private sewage disposal system where a public sewer is not available. All technical data and soil data required by the State of Missouri Regulation 19 CSR 20-3.060, Minimum Construction Standards for On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems, shall be submitted with the site plan. 
107.2.6.3 Location of utility easements to be shown on building permit applications. All applications for building permits shall clearly show the location of all utility easements and all structures, lines or pipes used by the utility and located within such utility easements. No building permit shall be issued with respect to a structure to be located on, over, under or within a utility easement unless and until such time as the city council: 
A.  Shall determine by ordinance that the structure as proposed contains adequate protection to insure: 
1.  Full ingress and egress to all portions of the easement insuring full and safe maintenance, construction and reconstruction of all utility structures located or which could be located within the easement; and 
2.  Full use of the easement for utility purposes without danger to public property and to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
B.  Shall receive adequate assurances in the form of a bond or a waiver of claim and indemnity agreement on a form approved by the city counselor sufficient to protect the city and its citizens from loss. 
Provided, however, that in lieu of the requirements of subparagraphs A and B above, an applicant shall have the option of relocating any and all utility improvements and utility easements at applicant's own expense and upon the written approval of the owner of the improvements and utility easements. 
108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is hereby authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure and to order the demolition of any such construction at the official's discretion, or as directed by a decision of the building construction codes commission. 
109.1 General. A permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in this section shall have been paid to the Division of Building and Site Development or other authorized agency of the jurisdiction, nor shall an amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee be approved until the additional fee shall have been paid. 
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule. Permit fees for new construction, alterations, and additions shall be based upon the value of the construction as determined by the Division of Building and Site Development using the latest August publication of the International Code Council Building Valuation Data which shall be effective as of October 1st of the year it is published. Fire systems trade permits and interior demolition shall be based upon the valuation as reported on the application. Remodeling, alterations and repair valuations shall be computed using fifty (50) percent of the value for new construction. Alternatively, the applicant provided valuation may be used when there are extenuating circumstances and the applicant has provided detailed estimates to justify the value of such construction to the building official. 
The values determined in accordance with the above is for determining the building permit fee and is not intended to determine actual construction costs. The building permit fee shall be: $2.25 per thousand dollars of value (minimum fee $35.00). 
All construction 
Footing & Foundation Only - The permit fee to do only footing and foundation for a building or structure shall be $54.00. This fee is in addition to the normal building permit fee and is not refundable or credited to the normal building permit fee. 
Plan Review Fee - Fifty (50) percent of building permit fee. This fee is imposed whenever plans are required. 
Failed Inspection Fee - $35.00 for each failed inspection 
$75.00 for each failed re-inspection 
Exemption: Residential storage structures under 120 square feet shall be exempt from permit fees. 
Building Permit Extension Fee - Fifty (50) percent of building permit fee to reinstate, if approved by the building official. 
109.2.1 Moving of buildings. The fee for a building permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be fifty (50) percent of the fee for new buildings with a minimum fee of $45.00. There shall also be an inspection fee of $25.00 prior to moving the building or structure. 
109.2.2 Demolition. The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be: 
Residential ..... $50.00 
Commercial ..... $100.00 
109.2.3 Signs. The fee for signs, billboards and other display structures for which permits are required under the provisions of the Sign Regulations shall be: 
Less than 50 square feet: $75.00 
Over fifty square feet: $75.00 + $0.25 for each Square Foot over Fifty 
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified above shall be doubled. If any person, firm or corporation commits a second offense by starting work without a permit, the person shall pay three times the customary fee in order to obtain the necessary permit. Any offense shall subject the offender to prosecution under Section 114 of this code. 
If any person, firm or corporation fails to obtain the necessary permit(s) within five (5) days after being notified in writing to do so by the building official, the person shall pay in addition to the fee as provided above, the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each day in excess of the five (5) days that pass before the person obtains the necessary permit. The payment of any or several of the above-stated fees shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor from any penalties prescribed herein. 
109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal, or demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit, shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, erection of signs and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant structures, or fees for inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or other privileges or requirements, both within and without the jurisdiction of the Community Development Department. 
109.6 Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
111.3 Temporary Occupancy. A bond must be provided to receive a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. The building official will establish a bond amount based on the work remaining for completion of the structure and the site. The building owner, contractor, or design professional in responsible charge shall provide information, including a completion date for all building and site work remaining for completion. The building official has the authority to approve or deny any request for a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. The building official has the authority to set the final amount of the bond, or the option to waive the bond upon receiving written request and documentation for file from the building owner, contractor, or design professional in responsible charge. 
SECTION 113 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION 
113.1 Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a building construction codes commission consisting of eleven (11) members and eleven (11) alternates. 
113.1.1 Membership of the commission. The commission shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed by the city council, who shall serve staggered three (3) year terms, or until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Upon original appointment, the terms shall be staggered such that, to the greatest extent possible, one-third (?) of the members' terms expire each year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. 
113.1.2 Qualifications of commission members: The commission shall be composed of individuals with the following qualifications: 
1.  Professional engineer (experience in electrical/mechanical) 
2.  Professional engineer (experience in structural/civil) 
3.  Master plumber 
4.  Licensed electrician or electrical contractor 
5.  Major contractor or superintendent 
6.  Minor contractor or home builder 
7.  Person experienced in fire prevention 
8.  Registered architect 
9.  Residential rental property owner 
10.  Person experienced in energy conservation 
11.  Layperson 
113.1.3 Alternates. Whenever possible, the city council shall appoint an alternate commissioner of equal qualifications for each regular commissioner appointed. The alternate shall serve a term contemporaneous to the term of the regular commissioner of equal qualifications. 
113.1.4 Commission chair. The board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and the building official shall designate a clerk from the department to serve as secretary to the board, who shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings on file in the Community Development Department. 
113.1.5 Meetings. Upon the request of any commissioner or whenever there is any business to transact before the commission, the commission shall meet once each month. 
113.1.6 Absence of commissioners. During the absence of a commissioner, the designated alternate shall sit on the commission. Any other alternate may sit on the commission for a member whose alternate is not present as directed by the chairman. The Secretary of the Board shall call alternates in accordance with the policies of the Board. While sitting on the commission, the alternate shall have the full power and authority of the regular commissioner. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. The city council, upon such notice, shall appoint a new commissioner with equal qualifications to fill the remainder of the original term. 
113.2 Application for appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or fire marshal may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant a modification, variance or waiver to the provisions of the Building, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire Prevention, One and Two Family Dwelling or Property Maintenance codes covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the construction, erection, alteration, or repair of a building or structure. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of the code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply, an equally good or better form of construction can be used, or undue hardship is created by strict compliance with the letter of the code but has no significant effect on the health, safety and welfare of the public or any individual. Applicants for a mechanical, electrical or plumbing certification who are denied or whose certification is revoked by the director of community development for any reason may also appeal that decision to the building construction codes commission. A fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) must be submitted with the application. The fee shall be refunded to the applicant if the applicant appears at the commission meeting at which the appeal is scheduled to be heard. An application for appeal must be requested and filed by the applicant within ninety (90) days following the date of the denial letter issued by the building official or fire marshal. 
113.2.1 Notice of meeting. The commission shall meet upon notice of the chairman within ten (10) days of filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work. 
113.2.2 Public hearing. All hearings and meetings of the commission shall be public. All hearings considering an appeal of a ruling of the building official or fire marshal shall be on the record and be recorded by a person qualified as a court reporter. At the appeal hearing, the appellant, and appellant's representative, the official of the jurisdiction and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given an opportunity to be heard. All testimony on matters on appeal shall be given under oath. 
113.2.3 Adjourned meeting. When eight (8) qualified commissioners are not present to consider a specific appeal, either the appellant, the building official or their representative may request a postponement of the hearing. 
113.2.4 Action of the commission. The commission shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the building official or fire marshal by a concurring vote of the majority of its members. Every action of the commission shall be by motion or resolution and the commission's decision shall be evidenced by certified copies which shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official. 
113.2.5 Exemption of members. A member of the commission shall not vote on any question in which that member is engaged as contractor, material dealer, or in the preparation of plans or specifications, or in which the board member has any personal interest. 
113.2.6 Determining vote. Failure to secure six (6) concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the building official except that the appellant shall be entitled to further hearing before a full commission if there were not eleven (11) qualified members present when the vote was taken. 
113.2.7 Enforcement of decision. The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
113.3 Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission may appeal to the circuit court as provided by Chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
113.4 Code revisions. The commission shall, at the request of the city council, review the Building and other codes periodically for updating and recommending changes. 
114.4 Violation penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(2)  Any person who demolishes a structure without first obtaining a permit to demolish the structure shall be punished by a fine of one dollar ($1.00) per gross above-ground square footage of the structure in addition to the penalties described in section 114.4(1). 
(3)  Any person who demolishes an historic resource, as defined in section 3303.7 without first obtaining a permit to demolish the structure shall be punished by a fine of two dollars ($2.00) per gross above-ground square footage of the structure in addition to the penalties described in section 114.4(1). 
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
305.2.3 Ten or fewer children in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having ten or fewer unrelated children receiving such day care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
308.6.4 Ten or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having ten or fewer unrelated persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
903.2.1.2 Group A-2: Item 2. The fire area has an occupant load of 200 or more; or 
905.11 Locking standpipe outlet caps. The fire code official is authorized to require Knox TM locking caps on the outlets on dry standpipes where the responding fire department carries key wrenches for the removal that are compatible with locking FDC connection caps. 
1030.1 Exception 4. Within individual dwelling and sleeping units in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4, where the building in equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3, sleeping rooms in basements shall not be required to have emergency escape and rescue openings provided that the basement has one of the following: 
1301.1.1 Criteria. Building shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), as amended. 
1604.1 General. Add the following to the end of the paragraph: The following minimum standard structural design criteria are established: 
1.  Roof Live Load, Minimum Unreduced = 20 psf. 
2.  Snow Load (Ground Snow Load) Pg = 20 psf. 
3.  Seismic Loading: 
a.  Site class D, default site class per 1613.3.2. 
b.  Mapped Spectral response accelerations. 
(1)  Ss = 0.167 or per USGS data 
(2)  S1 = 0.093 or per USGS data 
1803.2 Investigations required. Add the following sentence to the end of the first paragraph: A geotechnical investigation is not required for one story buildings 2500 sf or less in risk categories 1 and 2. 
1807.2.2 Design lateral and soil loads. Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: The geotechnical engineer must state either way if a global analysis is required. 
1809.5 Frost protection. Add the following to the end of 1. (Frost depth is thirty (30) inches.) 
3109.1. General. The design and construction of pools shall comply with Section 11-277 of the City Code adopting the 2015 edition of the "Swimming Pool Ordinance and Guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation." The "Swimming Pool Ordinance and Guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation" is attached to Ordinance Number 022439. 
3109.2 Barrier requirements. Barrier requirements must meet the standards of the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) Section 305. 
ISPSC 305. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. Where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with Sections ISPSC 305.2 through 305.7. 
ISPSC 305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Outdoor pools and spas and indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with Sections ISPSC 305.2.1 through 305.7. 
ISPSC 305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances. Barrier heights and clearances shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outside of the required barrier. 
2.  The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed 2 inches (51 mm) for grade surfaces that are not solid, such as grass or gravel, where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 
3.  The vertical clearance between a surface below the barrier to a solid surface, such as concrete, and the bottom of the required barrier shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm) where measured on the side of the required barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 
4.  Where the top of the pool or spa structure is above grade, the barrier shall be installed on grade or shall be mounted on top of the pool or spa structure. Where the barrier is mounted on the top of the pool or spa, the vertical clearance between the top of the pool or spa and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.2 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
ISPSC 305.2.3 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers that do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions that form handholds and footholds, except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
ISPSC 305.2.4 Mesh fence as a barrier. Mesh fences, other than chain link fences in accordance with Section ISPSC 305.2.7, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall comply with the following: 
1.  The bottom of the mesh fence shall be not more than 1 inch (25 mm) above the deck or installed surface or grade. 
2.  The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall not permit the fence to be lifted more than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking. 
3.  The fence shall be designed and constructed so that it does not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) sphere under any mesh panel. The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall be not greater than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking. 
4.  An attachment device shall attach each barrier section at a height not lower than 45 inches (1143 mm) above grade. Common attachment devices include, but are not limited to, devices that provide the security equal to or greater than that of a hook-and-eye-type latch incorporating a spring-actuated retaining lever such as a safety gate hook. 
5.  Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Section ISPSC 305.3. 
6.  Patio deck sleeves such as vertical post receptacles that are placed inside the patio surface shall be of a nonconductive material. 
7.  Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of onground residential pools. 
ISPSC 305.2.5 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the pool or spa side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm) in width. 
ISPSC 305.2.6 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, the interior width of the cutouts shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.7 Chain link dimensions. The maximum opening formed by a chain link fence shall be not more than 1¾ inches (44 mm). Where the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top and bottom that reduce the openings, such openings shall be not greater than 1¾ inches (44 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.8 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not greater than 1¾ inches (44 mm). The angle of diagonal members shall be not greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from vertical. 
ISPSC 305.2.9 Clear zone. There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) between the exterior of the barrier and any permanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the barrier. 
ISPSC 305.2.10 Poolside barrier setbacks. The pool or spa side of the required barrier shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) from the water's edge. 
ISPSC 305.3 Gates. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Sections ISPSC 305.3.1 through 305.3.3 and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool or spa, shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device. 
ISPSC 305.3.1 Utility or service gates. Gates not intended for pedestrian use, such as utility or service gates, shall remain locked when not in use. 
ISPSC 305.3.2 Double or multiple gates. Double gates or multiple gates shall have not fewer than one leaf secured in place and the adjacent leaf shall be secured with a self-latching device. The gate and barrier shall not have openings larger than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the latch release mechanism. The self-latching device shall comply with the requirements of Section 305.3.3. 
ISPSC 305.3.3 Latches. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from grade, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool or spa side of the gate not less than 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and the gate and barrier shall not have openings greater than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. 
ISPSC 305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through that wall, one of the following shall be required: 
1.  Operable windows having a sill height of less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the indoor finished floor and doors shall have an alarm that produces an audible warning when the window, door or their screens are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled as a water hazard entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. In dwellings or structures not required to be Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located 54 inches (1372 mm) or more above the finished floor. In dwellings or structures required to be Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located not greater than 54 inches (1372 mm) and not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the finished floor. 
2.  A safety cover that is listed and labeled in accordance with ASTM F1346 is installed for the pools and spas. 
3.  An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, is provided. Such means of protection shall provide a degree of protection that is not less than the protection afforded by Item 1 or 2. 
ISPSC 305.5 Onground residential pool structure as a barrier. An onground residential pool wall structure or a barrier mounted on top of an onground residential pool wall structure shall serve as a barrier where all of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Where only the pool wall serves as the barrier, the bottom of the wall is on grade, the top of the wall is not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool, the wall complies with the requirements of Section ISPSC 305.2 and the pool manufacturer allows the wall to serve as a barrier. 
2.  Where a barrier is mounted on top of the pool wall, the top of the barrier is not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool, and the wall and the barrier on top of the wall comply with the requirements of Section ISPSC 305.2. 
3.  Ladders or steps used as means of access to the pool are capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access except where the ladder or steps are surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Section ISPSC 305. 
4.  Openings created by the securing, locking or removal of ladders and steps do not allow the passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere. 
5.  Barriers that are mounted on top of onground residential pool walls are installed in accordance with the pool manufacturer's instructions. 
ISPSC 305.6 Natural barriers. In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge not less than 18 inches (457 mm), a barrier is not required between the natural body of water shoreline and the pool or spa. 
ISPSC 305.7 Natural topography. Natural topography that prevents direct access to the pool or spa area shall include but not be limited to mountains and natural rock formations. A natural barrier approved by the governing body shall be acceptable provided that the degree of protection is not less than the protection afforded by the requirements of Sections ISPSC 305.2 through 305.5. 
3201.3 Other laws . Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: All encroachments by balconies into the public rights-of-way shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of section 24-2(c) and section 29-4.2(d)(8) of the code of ordinances. 
3202.2.1 Steps. Delete in its entirety. 
3202.3.3 Encroachments 15 feet or more above grade. Delete in its entirety. 
3202.5 The regulations for awnings set forth in this code shall be modified for awnings on buildings within the boundaries of the Columbia Special Business District as follows: 
(1)  The following materials are prohibited: 
Wood 
Vinyl coated, high sheen cotton 
Translucent vinyl 
Opaque or semi-opaque awnings with back-lighted translucent graphics are permitted provided the graphics meet all sign requirements. 
(2)  Any valance on an awning shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) inches. 
(3)  Upper floor awnings should fit the height, width and shape of each window. Such awnings shall not be placed noticeably higher than the top of the window opening and trim. The bottom of the valance shall not extend lower than the midpoint of the window. Dome-type and curved awnings are only allowed on windows that have arched or curved openings. Upper floor awnings shall not span multiple windows unless the distance between glazed openings is less than eighteen (18) inches. 
(4)  Stanchions or columns that support awnings, marquees and signs are prohibited. 
(5)  The lower edge of awnings on the ground floor shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk and a maximum of ten (10) feet above the sidewalk. 
(6)  Awnings shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds of the width of the sidewalk measured from the building and shall not extend more than seven (7) feet from the building. 
(7)  Awnings that were lawful conforming awnings on February 19, 2007 but that do not conform with the provisions of section 6-17 shall be allowed to remain in place indefinitely as lawful nonconforming uses. 
(8)  Awnings shall be properly maintained. 
3303.4 Vacant lot. Where a structure has been demolished or removed, the vacant lot shall be filled, leveled and graded to provide proper drainage with no ponding of water. The lot shall be left in a natural buildable condition without hazards and mowable. There shall be sufficient vegetative cover to prevent erosion. The complete structure shall be removed and all accessory structures are to be removed at the time of demolition of the primary structure. Paved auto driveways, parking areas, and on grade building slabs may remain provided they are in acceptable condition. 
3303.6 Utility connections. Before a structure can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer, and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove shall not be issued until: 
(1)  A release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner; and 
(2)  A bond or other security deposited with the City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), guaranteeing that the building and debris are removed from the lot within ninety (90) days, the lot graded to comply with Section 3304 and required inspections are completed; and 
(3)  During demolition, sewer laterals connecting the building to the City sewer system are to be cut and capped in an approved manner at or near the property line. The cap must be inspected prior to backfill of the excavation. 
3303.8 Historic Preservation Commission review of demolition permits. An application for any permit that authorizes the demolition of an historic resource shall include notice of the application addressed to the Historic Preservation Commission. The notice shall be on a form provided by the building official. The building official, upon verification that the application is complete, shall promptly forward the notice to the Historic Preservation Commission in care of the Community Development Department. The building official shall not issue the permit authorizing the demolition until the lesser of thirty (30) calendar days after the notice has been sent to the Community Development Department or until the Historic Preservation Commission notifies the building official that the Commission has no objection to the immediate demolition of the structure. The thirty (30) day review period shall not begin until the application requesting demolition has been deemed to be complete. 
The building official shall post notice of the proposed demolition in a conspicuous place facing each street abutting the property on which the structure to be demolished is located. The sign face shall be at least five square feet. 
To allow for the thirty (30) day review period and no more than six (6) months to pass following notice to the public of the demolition, no more than seven (7) months shall elapse between making application for a demolition permit and the actual removal of a structure. Failure to remove an authorized structure within this timeframe shall require that a new application for demolition be filed. 
The following definitions apply to this section: 
"Demolition" means removal of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the exterior wall or walls facing a public street or removal of fifty percent (50%) of all exterior walls. 
"Historic resource" means any structure that: 
(1)  Is fifty (50) years old or older; or 
(2)  Is located in an historic resources survey area; or 
(3)  Is within an actual or proposed National Register of Historic Places district; or 
(4)  Has been recognized or nominated by the Historic Preservation Commission as a "most notable property." 
Exceptions: The following shall not be subject to the provisions of this subsection: 
(1)  A building or structure that has been determined to be a public nuisance and dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare under the Property Maintenance Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
(2)  A building or structure that the City, before December 1, 2008, has authorized to be demolished. 
(3)  Interior demolition. 
(4)  An accessory building or structure that is not contemporary with an historic resource. 
(5)  A building or structure for which the State Historic Preservation Office, Department of Natural Resources, has completed a Section 106 review and returned a finding of no historic significance. 
(6)  A building or structure that is subject to the certificate of appropriateness provisions of section 29-2.3(c) of the Code of Ordinances of Columbia, Missouri. 
( Ord. No. 22824, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22932 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23117 , §§ 4, 8, 3-20-17; Ord. No. 23369 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23997 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-18—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22825, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 6-31, 6-32, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Building code, § 6-16 et. seq.; plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; property maintenance code, § 6-71 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9-21 et seq.; operating requirements for swimming pools adopted by reference, § 11-277. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Adopted. 
The 2006 Edition of the International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions and the 2017 Edition of the National Electric Code NFPA 70, published by the National Fire Protection Association, one (1) copy of each of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in their entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2006 Edition of the International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions and one (1) copy of the 2017 Edition of the National Electric Code NFPA 70 shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22825, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 23998 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-32. - Amendments to the 2006 International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions. 
The 2006 International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. This section shall be known as the Electrical Code Administrative Provisions of the City of Columbia, Missouri and will be referred to as "this code." 
101.4 Conductors. Conductors normally used to carry current shall be of copper unless otherwise provided in this code. Where the conductor material is not specified, the material and the sizes given in this code shall apply to copper conductors. Where other materials are used, the size shall be changed accordingly. Aluminum and copper-clad aluminum will be approved as outside feeders of 100 amperes or larger and must terminate nearest the point of entrance of the feeder; or as designed and recommended by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
(FPN): For aluminum and copper-clad aluminum conductors, see Section 250.120(B), 310-14. 
SECTION 301 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
301.1 Administration and enforcement. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be the duty of the director of community development who shall be referred to as the code official or the authority having jurisdiction in this code. The code official or authority having jurisdiction is authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director, as may be necessary, to carry out the provisions of this code. 
301.2 Emergency power. In case of an emergency, the director is hereby empowered to cause the discontinuance of electrical service to any electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment found to be immediately dangerous to life or property until such wiring, devices, appliances and equipment have been made safe in accordance with the minimum requirements of this code. 
301.3 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Department of Community Development - Division of Building and Site Development shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless the employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
302.9 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
SECTION 304 ELECTRICAL CERTIFICATIONS 
304.1 Electrical certifications. The director of community development shall select examinations, and authorize testing for electricians' licenses and certificates, to approve or disapprove applications for electricians' licenses and certificates, and to issue or revoke electricians' licenses or certificates. Within thirty (30) days after an application for examination as an electrician has been filed, the director shall act to approve, disapprove or schedule testing for such applicant. Any application not acted upon within thirty (30) days shall be deemed denied. Applicants scheduled for examination shall be notified of the date, time and place of examination at least three (3) days prior to the date of examination. 
304.2 Certificate of competency. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power purposes; installation or additions to sound, audio visual or communication equipment in or on any building, structure, or premises within the corporate limits of the City of Columbia, Missouri, unless issued a certificate of competency by the director, except as provided by Section 401.4 Exception 2. This shall not be construed to cover cases where the connected electrical load is not increased or where no new electrical wiring is required. 
304.3 Types of certificates. The director is herein empowered to provide for the following types of certificates: 
1.  Electrical Contractor or Master Certificate (Type A) 
2.  Electrical Sign Contractor Certificate (Type B) 
3.  Journeyman Certificate, 8,000-Hrs (Type C-8 General) 
4.  Journeyman Certificate, 6,000-Hrs (Type C-6 General) 
5.  Sign Wireman Certificate (Type D) 
6.  Security-Fire Alarm Certificate (Type F) 
7.  Communication and Sound Certificate (Type G) 
8.  Maintenance Electrician Certificate (Type H) 
9.  Apprentice Electrician Certificate (Type E) 
304.3.1 Requirements. Certificates will be issued to applicants who meet the following requirements: 
Apprentice (Type E) Submit application stating name, address and telephone number and employer's signature. No fee required. 
Journeyman (Type C-8) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Prove 8,000 hours active employment as an apprentice electrician. Time in an appropriate electrical apprenticeship program or trade schools may be considered for credit toward 8,000 hours requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice electrician. 
4.  Successfully complete examination required by the director. 
Journeyman (Type C-6) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Prove 6,000 hours active employment as an apprentice electrician. Time in an appropriate electrical apprenticeship program or trade schools may be considered for credit toward 6,000 hours requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice electrician. 
4.  Successfully complete examination required by the director. 
Contractor or Master (Type A) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Prove 4,000 hours active employment as journeyman electrician C-8, 6,000 hours as journeyman electrician C-6 or be registered with the State of Missouri as a professional engineer or architect and be actively engaged in the business of electrical contracting. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice or journeyman electrician. 
4.  Successfully complete examination required by the director. 
General Security-Fire Alarm (Type F) Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested, along with a certificate or statement to install manufacture system. 
Communication and Sound (Type G) Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested, along with a certificate or statement to install manufacture system. 
(Type B, D, and H) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  List name, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant worked in a capacity similar to that covered by the requested certificate. 
3.  Successfully complete examination required by the director. 
304.4. Application for certificate. The director shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a certificate upon (1) the filing of the proper application, (2) completion of examination when required, (3) payment of the required fee. This section shall not apply to apprentice electricians. 
304.5 Type of examination required. The type of examination required will be determined by the director and will be selected from the standard examination list as prepared and published by Thomson Prometric, 1260 Energy Lane, St. Paul, MN 55108, or the ICC National Standardized Examinations Program, www.iccsafe.org/contractor (1-877-STD-Exam), or any state issued and approved exam. 
304.6 Reciprocity. The director shall grant reciprocity and issue a license to an applicant who meets the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. 
An electrician who meets the following requirements shall be granted a journeyman electrician license: 6,000 hours of electrical experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other electrical examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
An electrician who meets the following requirements shall be granted a master electrician license: 12,000 hours of electrical experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other electrical examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
304.7 Work authorized by type of certificate. The scope of work authorized by each type of certificate shall be as follows: 
1.  The Electrical Contractor or Masters Certificate (Type A) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting for the installation, repair, altering, and making additions to electrical wiring, heating devices, lights, motors, fixtures, conduits, generators, appliances and appurtenances and to supervise construction or installation of same. 
2.  An Electrical Sign Contractor Certificate (Type B) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting for the fabrication, installation, repair, alteration or making additions to electrical signs, and to make the electrical connections thereto within five (5) feet of the work authorized to be installed. Any electrical sign contractor personally performing electrical sign work shall be a certificated sign wireman. 
3.  An Electrical Journeyman, Type C-8 shall authorize the grantee to perform electrical work under persons or firms holding contractor license (Type A). 
4.  An Electrical Journeyman, Type C-6 shall authorize the grantee to perform electrical work under persons or firms holding contractor license (Type A). 
5.  A Sign Wireman Certificate (Type D) shall authorize the grantee to perform electrical work on any electrical sign and to make connections to or disconnections from the power source within five (5) feet of an electrical sign. 
6.  Security-Fire Alarm Certificate (Type F) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting and to install, repair and make alterations on burglar and fire alarm equipment and to make electrical connections thereto within five (5) feet of the equipment authorized to be installed. 
7.  Communication and Sound Certificate (Type G) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting and to install, repair and make alterations on communication and sound equipment and to make electrical connections thereto within five (5) feet of the equipment authorized to be installed. 
8.  A Maintenance Certificate (Type H) shall authorize the grantee to perform electrical routine maintenance only, on equipment applicable to grantee's trade and for a specified employer. In addition, with 6,000 hours the grantee shall be authorized to take the journeyman electric exam. 
9.  An Apprentice Electrical Certificate (Type E) shall authorize the grantee to perform electrical work only when under the immediate supervision of an electrician holding a Type C, D, G or H Certificate. The ratio shall not exceed three apprentices to one master or journeyman electrician. 
304.9 Insurance requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a Type A, B, F or G Certificate to engage in work authorized by such certificate in the corporate limits of the city without first having filed with the city business license administrator a certificate of comprehensive liability insurance with a minimum of $100,000 per claim bodily injury, $100,000 per claim property damage with $300,000 aggregate per occurrence. Such insurance shall insure the proper construction, erection, and maintenance of the electrical work in accordance with the provisions of this code and shall insure the city from any and all claims or demands for damages by reason of any negligence of the electrical contractor or contractor's agents, or by reason of defects in the construction, or damages resulting from any part thereof. The city requires a thirty (30) day cancellation notice from the insurance company. 
304.10 Work allowed under license. No person who has obtained an Electrical Contractor's Certificate (Type A) shall allow his/her name to be used by another person for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such license. Every person licensed shall notify the director of the address of licensee's place of business, if any, and the name under which such business is carried on, and shall give immediate notice to the board of any change in either. 
No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering electrical systems unless the electrical work performed in the course of such business is under the general supervision of a licensed master electrician, and under the direct supervision of a licensed master electrician or licensed journeyman electrician, employed on such installation or alteration full-time to assure proper and accurate work as prescribed by this code. 
304.11 Re-examination. Any person, who fails to pass the examination, as prescribed by the director, may apply for re-examination. 
304.12 License Fees. Electrical contractors with Type A, B, F or G Certificate shall pay annual business license fees to the city in an amount to be determined under the provisions of chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
304.13 Certificate Issuance. All applicants approved by the director for Journeyman certificate shall pay a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee prior to the issuance of the certificate. Master certificates shall require a payment of ninety dollars ($90.00) prior to the issuance of the certificate. Certificates issued in September, October, and November of the renewal year are not required to pay a renewal fee in December. 
304.14 Certificate Renewal. All certificated electricians holding Type A, B, C, D, F, G and H certificates shall renew their certificate every three (3) years and pay a renewal fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for a Journeyman certificate, and ninety dollars ($90.00) for a Master certificate. 
304.15 Expiration and revocation of certificate. All certificates of competency issued by the director shall be valid from the date of issuance until the renewal date as listed in section 304.14, or when revoked by the director. Business licenses required of electricians, contractors, and contracting master electricians shall expire annually in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
The director may revoke any certificate if obtained through non-disclosure, misstatement, or misrepresentation of a material fact, or if a penalty has been imposed upon a certificate holder under the provisions of this code. Before a certificate may be revoked, the certificate holder shall have notice in writing enumerating the charges against the certificate holder, and be entitled to a hearing by the director, not sooner than five (5) days from receipt of the notice. The certificate holder shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right to cross-examination. All testimony shall be given under oath. The director shall have the power to administer oaths. The decision of the director shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made a part of the record thereof. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may appeal to the circuit court as provided in chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. A person whose certificate has been revoked shall not be permitted to apply for renewal within one year of the date of revocation. 
401.4 Exceptions to work authorized. No permit to install or perform any work authorized by Type A, B, F, or G license shall be granted to any person other than a contractor, except as follows: All electrical permits may be issued to the general contractor on behalf of the master electrical contractor for new one and two family dwellings and building alteration or building additions for one and two family dwellings. All electrical work must be performed by an electrician licensed by the City of Columbia, or as allowed by ordinance. 
Exception No. 1. Electricians holding a Type C-6 or C-8 certificate who are regular employees of the firm or corporation for which the work is to be performed, may obtain a permit to do electrical work on the premises of the firm or corporation provided the work is not associated with work requiring a building permit. 
Exception No. 2. A permit may be issued to any person to do work in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such building, provided that the person is a bona fide owner of the dwelling, will occupy the dwelling for a period of not less than one year, will personally purchase all materials and perform all labor authorized by the permit, and that the applicant shall file an affidavit certifying that these conditions will be met before the issuance of the permit. Any person obtaining a permit under this section shall not be issued another permit within two (2) years. 
Work performed under any permit shall be subject to all applicable regulatory provisions of this code. 
404.2 The director of community development shall issue a permit for proposed work set forth in the application if in compliance with this and all other ordinances and regulations of the City of Columbia, Missouri, and upon payment of fees set forth hereinafter. In no case shall the fees for permits be less than the following: 
For alterations of or extensions to existing wiring, or any other electrical permit ..... $35.00 
For each service entrance panel 225 amperes or less ..... $35.00 
For each service entrance panel over 225 amperes ..... $0.175/Amp 
For each sub-panel ..... $25.00 
For each circuit (whether 2-wire, 3-wire or 3-phase) 
For first fifteen ..... $2.35 each 
For all over fifteen ..... $2.19 each 
For each connection of hot air or hot water heating plant ..... $7.00 each 
For installation of or addition to sound, audio-visual or communication equipment ..... $35.00 
Swimming pool ..... $75.00 
Re-inspection fees will be charged in accordance with the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
First failed inspection ..... $35.00 
Failed re-inspection of prior correction notice ..... $70.00 
In addition to persons authorized hereunder, an application for permit may be submitted by a general contractor or the owner of a new one- or two-family dwelling. Fees may be paid at the date of application or through billing by the finance department. Failure to pay any billed fee within thirty (30) days of billing shall nullify any permit for which billing was made and work shall cease until fees are actually received by the city. Permit revocation and work stoppage are remedial steps which may be taken in addition to any other remedy for collection authorized by law. 
1003.1 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
SECTION 1101 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION 
1101.1 Board of appeals established. Delete in its entirety. 
1101.3 Appeals. The applicant for an electrical permit, the holder of an electrical permit, or the owner or agent of a building or structure wherein electrical work is to be installed may appeal a decision of the code official or authority having jurisdiction refusing to grant modification of the provisions of the Electrical Code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation, to the building construction codes commission. The applicant for an electrical certification may appeal a decision of the director to deny or revoke certification to the building construction codes commission. Application for appeal shall be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
1102 Membership. Delete in its entirety. 
1103 Procedures. Delete in its entirety. 
1201.1.1 Adoption. Except as otherwise provided in this code, electrical systems and equipment shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most recent International Residential Code or National Electrical Code NFPA 70 adopted by the city, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 22825, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22886 , § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 22932 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23369 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23998 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-33. - Amendments to 2017 Edition of National Electric Code NFPA 70. 
The 2017 Edition of the National Electric Code NFPA 70 adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
90.2.1 Title. This section shall be known as the Electrical Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri and will be referred to as "this code." 
210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. (A) Dwelling Units, shall be amended as follows: 
"(2) Garages, and accessory buildings that have a floor located at or below grade level not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas, work areas, and areas of similar use" shall have the following exceptions added: 
Exception 1 to (2): Receptacles in locations that are not readily accessible (e.g., on the ceiling of a garage). 
Exception 2 to (2): A single receptacle or a duplex receptacle for two appliances located within dedicated space for each appliance that, in normal use, is not easily moved from one place to another and that is cord-and-plug connected in accordance with 400.7(A)(6), (A7), or (A8). 
"(3) Outdoors" shall have the following exception added: 
Exception 2 to (3): GFCI receptacles located in exterior soffits and used for seasonal decorative lighting are not required to be readily accessible. 
"(5) Unfinished portions or areas of the basement not intended as habitable rooms" shall have the following exception added: 
Exception 2 to (5): A single receptacle or a duplex receptacle for two appliances located within dedicated space for each appliance that, in normal use, is not easily moved from one place to another and that is cord-and-plug connected in accordance with 400.7(A)(6), (A7), or (A8). 
"(7) Sinks - where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft) from the top inside edge of the bowl of the sink" shall have the following exception added: 
Exception 1 to (7): Where the receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 feet) of the outside edge of the sink: 
(a)  Receptacles installed for specific appliances such as clothes washers, refrigerators, garbage disposals, dishwashers, and microwave ovens shall not be required to be GFCI protected where located within 6 feet of laundry, utility, kitchen or wet bar sink in a dwelling. 
(b)  A duplex receptacle may be used for a single appliance provided the duplex receptacle is located behind the appliance which, in normal use, is not easily moved and the receptacle is not readily accessible for the use of power tools. This receptacle must be marked "not GFCI protected". Receptacles installed under the exceptions to 210.8(A)(7) shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of 210.52(G). 
210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. (D) Kitchen Dishwasher Branch circuit. Delete this section. 
210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection. (A) Dwelling Units. The first sentence shall be amended to read as follows: All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch circuits supplying outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms and for smoke detectors shall be protected by a listed arc-fault circuit interrupter, combination-type, installed to provide protection of the branch circuit. 
210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection. (A) Dwelling Units. A second exception shall be added to the end of the section as follows: 
Exception: Arc-Fault circuit interrupter protection is not required in one- and two-family dwellings which are regulated by the International Residential Code. 
210.12(B) Dormitory Units. The following sentence shall be added to the end of the section: This requirement applies to sleeping units in fraternities and sororities. 
210.52 Dwelling unit receptacle outlets (C) Countertops and Work Surface (5) Receptacle outlet location shall be amended as follows: 
Exception to (5): To comply with the following conditions (1) and (2), receptacle outlets shall be permitted to be mounted not more than 300 mm (12 in.) below the countertop or work surface. Placement of the receptacle is allowed no more than 12 inches below the countertop, and anywhere the countertop extends beyond its support base. 
(1)  Construction for the physically impaired 
(2)  On island and peninsular countertops or work surface where the surface is flat across its entire surface (no backsplashes, dividers, etc.) and there are no means to mount a receptacle within 500 mm (20 in) above the countertop or work surface, such as an overhead cabinet 
210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. (E) Outdoor Outlets. (3) Balconies, Decks, and Porches. The following sentence shall be added at the end of the section: A receptacle is not required at an existing structure. 
210.63 Heating, Air-Conditioning, and Refrigeration Equipment Outlet. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception No. 2: A receptacle outlet shall not be required for rooftop and exterior equipment on one- and two-family dwellings. 
210.64 Electrical service areas. In other than 1- and 2-family dwellings, at least one 125-volt, single phase, 15- or 20-ampere-rated receptacle outlet shall be installed in an accessible location within 7.5 m (25 feet) of the indoor electrical service equipment. The required receptacle outlet shall be located within the same room or area as the service equipment. 
Part II. Branch Circuit Load Calculations. 220.14 Other Loads - All Occupancies. (J) Dwelling Occupancies. This section shall be amended to read as follows: 
In multi-family dwellings and in guest rooms or guest suites of hotels and motels, the outlets specified in (J)(1), (J)(2), and (J)(3) are included in the general lighting load calculations of 220.12. No additional load calculations shall be required for such outlets. 
(1)  All general-use receptacle outlets of 20-ampere rating or less, including receptacles connected to the circuits in 210.11(C)(3) 
(2)  The receptacle outlets specified in 210.52(E) and (G) 
(3)  The lighting outlets specified in 210.70(A) and (B) 
In one-family and two-family dwellings the requirements specified in (J)(4), (J)(5), (J)(6) shall be met. 
(4)  In one-family and two-family dwellings, a 15-amp rated general purpose circuit shall be limited to a maximum of eight receptacle outlets or openings, or eight lighting outlets or openings, or any combination of receptacle outlets and lighting outlets totaling not more than eight. 
(5)  In one-family and two-family dwellings, a 20-amp rated general purpose circuit shall be limited to a maximum of ten receptacle outlets or openings, or ten lighting outlets or openings, or any combination of receptacle outlets and lighting outlets totaling not more than ten. 
(6)  In one-family and two-family dwellings, the small appliance circuits serving the kitchen countertop and similar areas, shall be limited to not more than two receptacle outlets or openings for the first two such circuits; the third and succeeding small appliance circuits shall be limited to not more than three receptacle outlets or openings per circuit. 
(7)  In one-family and two-family dwellings, the microwave receptacle outlet shall be a dedicated 20-amp rated circuit, and shall share with no other outlets. 
230.50 Protection Against Physical Damage. (B) All Other Service-Entrance Conductors. (1) Service Entrance Cables. (3) "Schedule 80 PVC conduit" shall be deleted and "40 rigid nonmetallic conduit or equivalent" shall be inserted. 
250.52 Grounding Electrodes. (A) Electrodes Permitted for Grounding. (3) Concrete-Encased Electrode. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception 1 to (3): Buildings governed by the International Residential Code are exempt from the requirement that a concrete-encased electrode serve as part of the grounding electrode system. 
250.53. Grounding Electrode System Installation. (A) Rod, Pipe, and Plate Electrodes. (2) Supplemental Electrode Required. Delete in its entirety. 
300.5 Underground Installations. (D) Protection from Damage. (3) Service Conductors. Warning tape shall be installed a minimum of six (6) inches below grade and not less than twelve (12) inches above the electrical cables or conduit in all underground installations of 50 volts or more. 
300.5 Underground Installations. (D) Protection from Damage. (4) Enclosure and raceway Damage. Where the enclosure or raceway is subject to physical damage, the conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, RTRC-XW, Schedule 80 PVC conduit, or equivalent. 
300.11 Securing and Supporting. (B) Wiring Systems Installed Above Suspended Ceilings. (2) Non-Fire Rated Assemblies. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception: One ¾ inch raceway or smaller, with maximum conductor fill (for example, twelve #12 AWG), shall be permitted to be supported by the ceiling support wires. 
314.23 Supports. (B) Structural Mounting. (1) Nails and Screws: The following sentence shall be added to the end of the section: Screws may be installed through the interior sides of a nonmetallic box to mount or fasten the box in place regardless of its listing and labeling provided the heads of the screws are covered or coated with a nonmetallic material. 
334.12 Uses not permitted. (A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Item (2) in this subsection which reads "Exposed in dropped or suspended ceilings in other than one- and two-family and multi-family dwellings." shall be deleted in its entirety. 
334.12 Uses not permitted. (B) Types NM and NMS. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception 1 to (B): Type NMS cable shall be permitted in wet or damp locations. 
334.15 Exposed Work. (B) Protection from Physical Damage: Cable shall be protected from physical damage where necessary by rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing. Schedule 40 PVC conduit, or other approved means. Where passing through a floor, the cable shall be enclosed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, Schedule 40 PVC conduit, or other approved means extending at least 150 mm (6 inches) above the floor. 
334.80 Ampacity. The ampacity of Types NM, NMC and NMS cable shall be determined in accordance with 310.15. The ampacity shall be in accordance with the 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) conductor temperature rating. The 90 degree Celsius (194 degree Fahrenheit) rating shall be permitted to be used for ampacity derating purposes, provided the final derated ampacity does not exceed that for a 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) rated conductor. The ampacity of Types NM, NMC, and NMS cable installed in cable shall be determined in accordance with 392.11. 
Where more than two NM cables containing two or more current-carrying conductors are installed, without maintaining spacing between the cables, through the same opening in wood framing that is to be fire- or draft-stopped using thermal insulation, caulk, or sealing foam, the allowable ampacity of each conductor shall be adjusted in accordance with Table 310.15(B)(2)(a). 
338.10 Uses Permitted. (B) Branch Circuits or Feeders. (4) Installation Methods for Branch Circuits and Feeders. (a) Interior Installations. In addition the provisions of this article, Type SE service-entrance cable used for interior wiring shall comply with the installation requirements of Part II of Article 334, excluding 334.80. 
404.2. Switch Connections. (C) Switches Controlling Lighting Loads: Delete in its entirety. 
404.9 Provisions for General-Use Snap Switches. (B) Grounding: The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception No. 4 to (B): In one- and two-family dwellings, switches mounted to non-metallic boxes with non-metallic face plates shall not be required to be effectively grounded. 
404.10 Mounting of Snap Switches. (B) Box Mounted. The following sentence shall be added to the end of the section: The requirement for machine-threaded screws shall not apply to plastic outlet boxes. 
406.4 General Installation requirements. (D) Replacements. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception No. 1: Soffit receptacles and/or lighting. 
406.5 Receptacle Mounting. The following sentence shall be added to the end of the first paragraph: The requirement for machine-threaded screws shall not apply to plastic outlet boxes. 
406.9 Receptacles in Damp or Wet Locations. 
(A)  Damp Locations. A receptacle installed outdoors in a location protected from the weather or in other damp locations shall have an enclosure for the receptacle that is weatherproof when the receptacle is covered (attachment plug cap not inserted and receptacle covers closed). 
An installation suitable for wet locations shall also be considered suitable for damp locations. 
A receptacle shall be considered to be in a location protected from weather where located under roofed open porches, canopies, marquees, and the like, and will not be subjected to a beating rain or water runoff. 
(B)  Wet Locations. 
(1)  Receptacles of 15- and 20-amperes in a wet location. Receptacles of 15- and 20- ampere, 125- and 250-volt receptacles installed in a wet location shall have an enclosure that is weather-proof whether or not the attachment plug cap is inserted. Weatherproof "in-use or bubble" covers not required. 
406.12 Tamper-Resistant Receptacles. Item (1) "Dwelling units in all areas specified in 210.52 and 550.13" shall be deleted in its entirety. 
406.12 Tamper-Resistant Receptacles. Item (5) shall be amended to read as follows: Waiting rooms and the like in clinics, medical and dental offices and outpatient facilities. 
410.24 Connection of Electric-Discharge and LED Luminaires. (B) Access to Boxes. Delete in its entirety. 
422.16 Flexible Cords. (B) Specific Appliances. (2) Built-in Dishwashers and Trash Compactors. Item (6) shall be amended to read as follows: 
(6)  The receptacle for a built-in dishwasher shall be permitted in the space adjacent to the space occupied by the dishwasher. The receptacle serving a built-in dishwasher shall be permitted in the space occupied by the dishwasher unless manufacturer instructions require the plug to be in an adjacent cabinet. 
422.16 Flexible Cords. (B) Specific Appliances. A new subsection (5) shall be added as follows: 
(5)  Storage-Type Water heaters. Storage-type water heaters shall be permitted to be cord-and-plug connected with a flexible cord rated at 30 amperes. Cord will not be required to be listed for this use. 
440.14 Location. The following exception shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception No. 3: Cord-and-plug connected appliances. 
547.5 Wiring Methods. (F) Separate Equipment Grounding Conductor. The following sentence shall be added at the end of the section: Aluminum equipment grounding conductors shall not be permitted underground in agricultural buildings or areas. 
590.4 General. (D) Receptacles. (2) Receptacles in Wet Locations. Delete in its entirety. 
600.6 Disconnects. (A) Location. (1) At Point of Entry to a Sign: Disconnects for signs and for outline lighting shall be located at the point where the feeder or branch circuits(s) enters the sign enclosure or pole, and shall disconnect all ungrounded conductors where they enter the sign enclosure or pole. The disconnect shall open all ungrounded conductors where it enters the enclosure of the sign or pole. 
680.43 Indoor Installations. Exception No. 2 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
680.74 Bonding. Delete the last sentence of subsection (B). 
700.10 Wiring, Emergency System. (A) Identification. A new Item (3) shall be added to this section to read as follows: 
(3)  Examples: Components may be permanently marked "red" or "emergency system." 
(Ord. No. 23998 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-34—6-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22826, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 6-51, 6-52, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Building code, § 6-16 et seq.; electrical code, § 6-31 et seq.; property maintenance code, § 6-71 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9-21 et seq.; plumbing regulations for food service establishments, § 11-156(c); operating requirements for swimming pools adopted by reference § 11-277. 
 
Sec. 6-51. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22826, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 23999 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-52. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.5 License Required. 
(a)  No individual shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City of Columbia unless licensed as a master plumber under the provisions of this code. 
(b)  No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such business is under the general supervision of a licensed master plumber, and under the direct supervision of a licensed master plumber or licensed journeyman plumber employed on such installation or alteration full time to assure proper and accurate work as prescribed by this code. 
(c)  No person who has obtained a master plumber's license shall allow their name to be used by another person for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under this license. Every person licensed shall notify the director of community development of the address of licensee's place of business, if any, and the name under which such business is carried on, and shall give immediate notice to the director of any change in either. 
(d)  All work authorized by a plumbing permit shall be done under the direct supervision of a licensed master or journeyman plumber. 
(e)  A maximum 1:3, journeyman to apprentice plumber ratio is allowed. 
101.6 Examination and certification. The director shall establish standards and procedures for the qualifications, examination, and licensing of master plumbers, journeyman plumbers, residential plumbers and apprentice plumbers, and shall issue an appropriate certificate of competency to each person who meets the qualifications therefore and successfully passes the standard examination for master plumber or journeyman plumber as prepared and published by Thomson Prometric, ATTN: National Construction Program, 1260 Energy Lane, St. Paul, MN 55108 or the ICC National Standardized Examinations Program, www.iccsafe.org/contractor (1-877-783-3926) for Contractor Trades Testing. The director shall keep an official record of all transactions. 
101.6.1 Reciprocity. The director shall grant reciprocity and issue a license to an applicant who meets the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. 
A plumber who meets the following requirements shall be granted a journeyman plumber license: 8,000 hours of plumbing experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other plumbing examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
A plumber who meets the following requirements shall be granted a master plumbing license: 12,000 hours of plumbing experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other plumbing examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
101.7 Re-examinations. Any person, who fails to pass the examination, as prescribed by the director, may apply for re-examination after the expiration of thirty (30) days. 
101.8 Temporary permit. The director may issue a temporary license pending the examination, providing the applicant holds a similar license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall not be valid for more than sixty (60) days. 
101.9 Application. Any person desiring to be certified as a licensed plumber shall make written application to the director. 
101.10 Surety Bond. Before the issuance of a certificate of competency to a contracting master plumber or the registration of a plumbing contractor, the applicant shall file a surety bond for not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), subject to the approval of the city counselor, conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and keep harmless the City of Columbia from all liability, from any accident or damages arising from negligence or non-skillfulness in doing or protecting applicant's work, or for any unfaithful or inadequate work done in pursuance of the license, and that applicant will also restore the street, sidewalk, pavement or other public property or right-of-way, and fill all excavations to be made, so as to leave the sidewalk, street, pavement or other public property or right-of-way in as good shape or condition as applicant found them, and indemnify and keep the city harmless from any damage suffered by the failure to do and keep and maintain them in good repair in accordance with community development department standards and specifications of the City of Columbia, Missouri, for a period of one (1) year next thereafter, and that applicant will pay all fines imposed for the violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the city and in force during the term of the license and pay all fees set forth in this ordinance. 
101.11 Expiration and revocation of certificate. All certificates of competency issued by the director shall be valid from the date of issuance until the renewal date as listed in Section 101.13, or when revoked by the director. Business licenses required of plumbers, contractors, and contracting master plumbers shall expire annually in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
The director may revoke any certificate if obtained through non-disclosure, misstatement, or misrepresentation of a material fact, or if a penalty has been imposed upon a certificate holder under the provisions of this ordinance. Before a certificate can be revoked, the certificate holder shall have notice in writing enumerating the charges against the certificate holder, and be entitled to a hearing by the director, not sooner than five days from receipt of the notice. The certificate holder shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right to cross-examination. All testimony shall be given under oath. The director shall have the power to administer oaths. The decision of the director shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made a part of the record thereof. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may appeal to the circuit court as provided in chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. A person whose certificate has been revoked shall not be permitted to apply for renewal within one year of the date of revocation. 
101.12 License fees. A plumbing contractor or contracting master plumber shall pay annual business license fees to the City of Columbia in an amount to be determined under the provisions of chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. A master plumber, a journeyman plumber, and apprentice plumber employed by a licensed plumbing contractor shall pay no business license fees. 
101.12.1 Certificate fees. Certificate fees are as follows: 
City of Columbia Journeyman Certificate ..... $30.00 
City of Columbia Master Certificate ..... $90.00 
101.12.2 Certificate issuance. All applicants approved by the director for Journeyman certificate shall pay a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee prior to the issuance of the certificate. Master certificates shall require a payment of ninety dollars ($90.00) prior to the issuance of the certificate. Certificates issued in September, October, or November of the renewal year are not required to pay a renewal fee in December. 
101.13 Certificate renewal. A master plumber, journeyman plumber or a maintenance journeyman plumber certificate shall be renewed every three (3) years. The renewal fee is thirty dollars ($30.00) for a journeyman certificate, ninety dollars ($90.00) for a master certificate. 
101.14 Qualifications for examination. 
Master Plumber: Applicants for examination shall: 
1.  Submit completed application to the director of community development including name, address, telephone number, type of certificate requested, and other information as required. 
2.  Prove four thousand (4,000) hours of active employment under direct supervision of a master plumber, as a journeyman plumber or be registered with the State of Missouri as a licensed professional engineer and be actively engaged in the business of plumbing contracting. Time enrolled in an appropriate plumbing trade school or plumbing training program beyond the journeyman level may be considered by the director as partial fulfillment of this requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant has worked as an apprentice or journeyman plumber, including dates and years. Provide evidence of hours worked, employment records, time cards, etc. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
Journeyman Plumber: Applicants for examination shall: 
1.  Submit a completed application to the director of community development including name, address, telephone number, type of certificate requested, and other information as required. 
2.  Prove eight thousand (8,000) hours of active, on the job training only, during employment, under the supervision of a journeyman plumber, as an apprentice plumber. Time enrolled in an appropriate plumbing trade school or plumbing apprenticeship training program may be considered by the director as partial fulfillment of this requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant has worked as an apprentice including dates and years. Provide evidence of hours worked, employment records, time cards, etc. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
Maintenance Plumbers Certificate: Maintenance plumbers are authorized to perform routine plumbing maintenance on fixtures and equipment only for a specified employer. Applicants for examination shall: 
1.  Submit a completed application to the director of community development including name, address, telephone number, type of certificate requested, and other information as required. 
2.  Prove six thousand (6,000) hours of active employment as an apprentice plumber. Time enrolled in an appropriate plumbing trade school or apprenticeship training program may be considered by the director as partial fulfillment of this requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant has worked as an apprentice including dates and years. Provide evidence of hours worked. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
Residential Journeyman Plumber: (limited license for one- and two-family detached dwelling units only). Applicants for examination shall: 
1.  Submit completed application to the director of community development including name, address, telephone number, type of certificate requested, and other information as required. 
2.  Prove six thousand (6,000) hours of active employment as an apprentice plumber. Time enrolled in an appropriate plumbing trade school or apprenticeship program may be considered by the director as partial fulfillment of this requirement. 
3.  List names, address and telephone number of all previous employers under which applicant has worked as an apprentice including dates and years. Provide evidence of hours worked. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
Apprentice Plumber: Applicants for examination shall: 
1.  Submit completed application to the director of community development including name, address, telephone number, employer's name, signature of a licensed master plumber, and other information as required. 
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
103.4.1 Legal defense. Delete in its entirety. 
103.5 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Department of Community Development - Division of Building and Site Development shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless such employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with such employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
106.4 By whom application is made. Application for a permit shall be made by a licensed master plumber, except as provided herein. Plumbing permits may be issued to the general contractor, on behalf of the master plumber, for new one- and two-family dwellings and building alteration or building additions for one- and two-family dwellings to install all or part of any plumbing system. All plumbing work must be performed by a plumber licensed by the City of Columbia, or as allowed by ordinance. 
Any permit required by this code may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this code in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, provided the person is a bona fide owner of the dwelling, will occupy the dwelling, and will personally purchase all material and perform all labor authorized by the permit. Any person obtaining a permit under this section shall not be issued another permit within two (2) years. 
The applicant shall meet all qualifications established by rules promulgated with this code or by ordinance, resolution, or statute. The full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application. 
Exception: Plumbers holding a maintenance plumbers certificate who are regular employees of the firm or corporation for which the work is to be performed, may obtain a permit to do plumbing work on the premises of the firm or corporation provided the work is not associated with work requiring a building permit. 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. For the purpose of this code, any fixture, accessory, appliance or equipment of any nature requiring a permanent or rigid connection to any sewer or water line, will be classified as a fixture and the permit will be assessed as such. The plumbing permit fees shall be as follows with a thirty-five dollars ($35.00) minimum: 
For each tap or opening into any public sewer, or private sewer that is connected to a public sewer ..... $72.90 
Lateral/tap repair/replace WH ..... $35.00 
Per fixture for the first twenty-five fixtures ..... $5.67 
For each additional fixture or opening ..... $1.62 
For each floor drain, garage drain, or any other fixture, appliance, or waste line connecting directly with the drainage system of the building ..... $3.24 
Any required re-inspection will be charged in accordance with the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
In no case shall the fee for permits be less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for structures not previously plumbed or alterations of, or extensions to, existing plumbing. 
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
3.  Delete in its entirety. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment. 
108.4 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe, manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Section 109 Means of Appeal. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to petition the building construction codes commission regarding a decision of the code official to refuse to grant a modification of the provisions of this code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of a plumbing system. The applicant for a plumbing certification may appeal a decision of the director to deny or revoke certification to the building construction codes commission. Application for appeal shall be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 113 of the International Building Code as amended and adopted by the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
305.4.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers, including the portion of the building drain beyond the exterior wall, shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches below finished grade. The building official may approve a lesser depth of the building drain portion if there are extraordinary circumstances (e.g., bedrock). 
Table 308.5 Hanger Spacing. Footnote B shall be used for water distribution piping only. 
405.3.1. Water closets, urinals, lavatories, bidets. All water closets shall be spaced at least fifteen (15) inches from the centerline of the fixture to any wall or plumbing fixture except the centerline of the water closet may be spaced twelve (12) inches if located next to the bathtub. 
410.2 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains shall not be required for an occupant load of 15 or fewer. In business, mercantile, and storage occupancies where drinking fountains are required, the following exceptions are permitted to substitute for one hundred percent (100%) of the required drinking fountains if the required number is not greater than one (1): 
1.  A water cooler or bottled water dispenser; 
2.  Individual bottles of water; 
3.  A break room sink, bar sink, or kitchen sink provided all sinks have an approved standard faucet per IPC 424.1. 
602.3. Individual water supply. Add the following to the end of the first sentence: A potable public water supply system shall be considered available to a building when any portion of the property is located within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of the public water main. 
701.2 Sewer required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and every premises having drainage piping shall be connected to a public sewer, where available, or where a public sewer is not available, a private sewage disposal system shall be provided conforming to Chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances and the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
701.2.1 Public system available. A public sewer system shall be considered available to a building when any portion of the property is located within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of the public sewer. 
705.10.2 Solvent cementing. Delete exceptions. 
903.1 Roof extension. The number to be inserted in this section shall be twelve (12) inches (304.8 mm). 
( Ord. No. 22826, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22932 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23369 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23999 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-53—6-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22827, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 6-60, 6-61, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 6-60. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix A, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22827, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24000 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-61. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.5 Mechanical certifications. The director of community development shall be empowered to grant permission for applicants to sit for examinations associated with mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration licenses and certificates, to approve or disapprove applications for mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration licenses and certificates, and to issue or revoke mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration licenses or certificates. Applicants scheduled for examination shall be notified at least three (3) days prior to the date of examination; with date, time and place of examination. 
101.6 Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the installation, alteration or repair of heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration components or systems in or on any building, structure, or premises within the corporate limits of the City of Columbia, Missouri, unless issued a certificate of competency by the board of mechanical examiners, except as provided elsewhere in this code. 
101.7 Certificates. The director is herein empowered to provide for the following types of certificates: 
1.  Master mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. (Type A) 
2.  Journeyman mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. (Type B) 
3.  Maintenance journeyman mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. (Type B-1) 
4.  Apprentice mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. (Type C) 
5.  Chimney Sweep. (Type D) 
101.8 Certificate types. Certificates will be issued to applicants who meet the following requirements: 
Chimney Sweep (Type D) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Provide positive proof of twelve thousand (12,000) hours active employment as a journeyman mechanical HVACR (Type B) or apprentice mechanical HVACR or equivalent experience acceptable to the director. 
3.  List names, addresses and telephone numbers of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director, or provide proof of certification acceptable to the director. 
5.  All applicants approved by the director for chimney sweep certificates shall pay a ninety dollar ($90.00) fee prior to the issuance of the certificate. Certificate renewal shall be required every three (3) years. Certificates issued in September, October and November of the renewal year are not required to pay a renewal fee in December. 
Apprentice (Type C). Submit application stating name, address and telephone number and employer's signature. No fee required. 
Journeyman (Type B and Type B-1) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Provide positive proof of eight thousand (8,000) hours active employment as apprentice heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic, or such equivalent experience deemed acceptable by the director. 
3.  List names, addresses and telephone numbers of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
5.  All applicants approved by the director for journeyman certificates shall pay a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee prior to the issuance of the certificate. Certificate renewal shall be required every three (3) years. Certificates issued in September, October and November of the renewal year are not required to pay a renewal fee in December. 
Master (Type A) 
1.  Submit application to director of community development stating name, address, telephone number and type of certificate requested. 
2.  Provide positive proof of twelve thousand (12,000) hours active employment or equivalent as an apprentice and/or journeyman heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic, or such equivalent experience deemed acceptable by the director. At least four thousand (4,000) hours of the required time must be as a journeyman or equivalent experience acceptable to the director. 
3.  List names, addresses and telephone numbers of all previous employers under which applicant worked as an apprentice and/or journeyman heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. 
4.  Successfully complete examination as required by the director. 
5.  All applicants approved by the director for master certificates shall pay a ninety dollar ($90.00) fee prior to the issuance of the certificate. Certificate renewal shall be required every three (3) years. Certificates issued in September, October and November of the renewal year are not required to pay a renewal fee in December. 
101.8.1 Examination and certification. The director shall establish standards and procedures for the qualifications, examination, and licensing of master and journeyman mechanics; and chimney sweeps, and shall issue an appropriate certificate of competency to each person who meets the qualifications therefore and successfully passes the required examination. The standard examination for master mechanic shall be the mechanical contractor category or journeyman mechanic shall be the journeyman HARV category as prepared and published by Thomson Prometric, ATTN: National Construction Program, 1260 Energy Lane, St. Paul, MN 55108 or the ICC National Standardized Examinations Program, www.iccsafe.org/contractor (1-877-783-3926) for Contractor Trades Testing. Chimney sweeps shall provide proof of certification acceptable to the director as well as employment verification and proof of hours of active employment for the director to review. The director shall keep an official record of all transactions. 
101.8.2 Reciprocity. The director shall grant reciprocity and issue a license to an applicant who meets the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. 
A mechanic who meets the following requirements shall be granted a journeyman mechanical license: 8,000 hours of mechanical experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other mechanical examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
A mechanic who meets the following requirements shall be granted a master mechanical license: 12,000 hours of mechanical experience with certification of satisfactory completion of the Thomson Prometric, ICC, or other mechanical examination administered by a state of the United States of America. 
101.8.3 Expiration and revocation of certificate. All certificates of competency issued by the director shall be valid from the date of issuance until the renewal date as listed in the certificate type, or when revoked by the director. Business licenses required of mechanical contractors and contracting master mechanics shall expire annually in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
The director may revoke any certificate if obtained through non-disclosure, misstatement, or misrepresentation of a material fact, or if a penalty has been imposed upon a certificate holder under the provisions of this code. Before a certificate may be revoked, the certificate holder shall have notice in writing enumerating the charges against the certificate holder, and be entitled to a hearing by the director, not sooner than five (5) days from receipt of the notice. The certificate holder shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right to cross-examination. All testimony shall be given under oath. The director shall have the power to administer oaths. The decision of the director shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made a part of the record thereof. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may appeal to the circuit court as provided in chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. A person whose certificate has been revoked shall not be permitted to apply for renewal within one year of the date of revocation. 
101.9 Permit required. Application for a permit shall be made by a licensed master mechanical HVACR mechanic, except as provided herein, mechanical permits may be issued to the general contractor, on behalf of the master mechanic, for new one and two family dwellings and building alteration or building additions for one and two family dwellings to install all or part of any HVACR system. All mechanical work must be performed by a mechanic licensed by the City of Columbia, or as allowed by ordinance. A licensed chimney sweep (Type D) shall be permitted to make application for a permit to install all or part of any equipment as defined in Section 101.10, Scope of Work, and item 5. 
Any permit required by this code may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this code in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, provided the person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall personally purchase all material and perform all labor in connection therewith. Any person obtaining a permit under this section shall not be issued another permit within two years. 
Exception: Mechanics holding a maintenance journeyman mechanic certificate who are regular employees of the firm or corporation for which the work is to be performed, may obtain a permit to do mechanical work on the premises of the firm or corporation provided the work is not associated with work requiring a building permit. 
101.10 Scope of work. The scope of work authorized by each type of certificate shall be as follows: 
1.  The mechanical Masters Certificate (Type A) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting for the installation, repair, altering, and making additions to mechanical equipment and appurtenances; and to supervise construction or installation of same. 
2.  A mechanical Journeyman Certificate (Type B) shall authorize the grantee to perform mechanical work under persons or firms holding a mechanical Masters Certificate (Type A) or to perform mechanical work as a regular employee for, and on the premises of, a specified firm or corporation. 
3.  A mechanical maintenance Journeyman Certificate shall be authorized to perform mechanical work as a regular employee for, and on the premises of, a specified firm or corporation. 
4.  An apprentice Mechanical Certificate (Type C) shall authorize the grantee to perform mechanical work only when under the immediate supervision of a mechanic holding Type A or B Certificate. The ratio shall not exceed three apprentices to one mechanic. Immediate supervision is defined as being on the job site with the apprentice while work is being accomplished. 
5.  A Chimney Sweep Certificate (Type D) shall authorize the grantee to engage in the business of contracting for the installation, repair, altering, and making additions to Chimney equipment and appurtenances as defined by the current mechanical code, that are not regulated by the building code; and to supervise construction or installation of same. 
101.11 License required. 
(a)  No individual shall engage in the business of mechanical work in the city unless licensed as a master mechanic under the provisions of this code. 
(b)  No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering mechanical systems unless the mechanical work performed in the course of such business is under the general supervision of a licensed master mechanic, and under the direct supervision of a licensed master mechanic or licensed journeyman mechanic employed on such installation or alteration full time to assure proper and accurate work as prescribed by this code. 
(c)  No person who has obtained a master mechanic's license shall allow their name to be used by another person for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under this license. Every person licensed shall notify the director of the address of licensee's place of business, if any, and the name under which such business is carried on, and shall give immediate notice to the director of any change in either. 
101.12 License fees. A mechanical contractor or contracting master mechanic shall pay annual business license fees to the city in an amount to be determined under the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. A master mechanic, a journeyman mechanic and apprentice mechanic employed by a licensed mechanical contractor shall pay no business license fees. 
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
103.5 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Department of Community Development - Division of Building and Site Development shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless the employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
106.1 When required. An owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace a mechanical system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make application as required by Section 101.9 to the code official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Exception: Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day of the division of building and site development. 
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical and fuel gas work shall be as indicated in the following schedule: 
$0.00 to $1,000.00 	$35.00 
$1,000.01 to $5,000.00 	$25.00 plus $6.25 per thousand over $1,000.00 
$5,000.01 to $10,000.00 	$50.00 plus $5.00 per thousand over $5,000.00 
$10,000.01 to $20,000.00 	$75.00 plus $3.75 per thousand over $10,000.00 
Over $20,000.00 	$112.50 plus $2.50 per thousand over $20,000.00 
 
106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
3.  Delete in its entirety. 
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Section 109. Means of Appeal. Shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
109.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of the Mechanical Code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The applicant for a mechanical certification may appeal a decision of the director to deny or revoke certification to the building construction codes commission. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
504.8.2 Duct installation. Delete from the end of the last sentence the following words: "that protrude more than ? inch (3.2 mm) into the inside of the duct". 
( Ord. No. 22827, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22932 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23369 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 24000 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-62—6-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22828, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 6-65, 6-66, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 6-65. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A, B, C, E, F, G, H, K, N, Q, R, S and U one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22828, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22920 , § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 24001 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-66. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Columbia, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
R103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be the duty of the director of community development, who shall be referred to as the building official in this code. The building official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
R103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
R103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
R103.4 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Division of Building and Site Development shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless such employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with such employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
R104.7 Department records. An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the division specified in the provisions of this code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and according to reasonable rules to maintain the integrity and security of such records. 
R104.8 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
R104.8.1 Legal defense. Delete in its entirety. 
R104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas. Delete in its entirety. 
R105.1.1 License required. All building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas permits may be issued to the general contractor, on behalf of master electrical, master mechanical, and master plumbing contractors, for new one- and two-family dwellings and building alteration or building additions to one- and two-family dwellings. All electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fuel gas work must be performed by trade contractors licensed by the City of Columbia for the appropriate trade or as allowed by ordinance. 
R105.1.2 Vacant lots. Vacant lot areas left from demolition shall be filled, leveled and graded to prevent ponding. The lot shall be left in a natural buildable condition without hazards and mowable. There shall be sufficient vegetative cover to prevent erosion. The complete structure shall be removed and all accessory structures are to be removed at the time of demolition of the primary structure. All trash, vehicles, trailers, etc. must be removed from the lot. 
R106.2 Site plan or plat plan. Add paragraph: More than two (2) single family dwellings, multiple duplexes, and/or townhomes on one (1) lot shall require commercial civil/site documents per section 6-17 of the City Code amending IBC 107.2.6, sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri. 
R109.1.6.1 Elevation Documentation. Delete in its entirety. 
R110.3 Certificate issued. Delete subsection 3. relating to the requirement for owner's address. 
R112.1 General. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the building construction codes commission. Applications for appeal shall be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
R112.2.1 Determination of substantial improvements in areas prone to flood. Delete in its entirety. 
R112.2.2 Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to flooding. Delete in its entirety. 
R112.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety. 
R113.4 Violation penalties. Replace with the following: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
R202 Definitions. Accessory Structure. A structure not greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet (279m) in floor area, and not over three (3) stories or exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in height with separate means of egress, and shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the required rear yard, and shall not exceed the height of the main structure, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling(s) and which is located on the same lot. (See Unified Development Code Sec. 29-3.3(ii) for additional requirements.) 
R202 Structure. Add following exception: 
Exception: For existing decks being replaced, the same size will not be considered a structure for zoning purposes. 
Table 301.2(1). The following values shall be inserted into Table R301.2(1): 
Ground Snow Load - 20; Wind Speed (mph) - 115; Topographic Effects - No; Special Wind Region - No; Windborne Debris Zone - No; Seismic Design Category - B, Weathering - Yes Severe; Frost Line Depth - 30-inches; Termite - Moderate to Heavy; Winter Design Temperature - +4 Degrees Fahrenheit; Ice Barrier Underlayment Required - No; Flood Hazards - As regulated by City of Columbia Ordinance; Air Freezing Index - 0 to 1,500; Mean Annual Temperature - 55 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Elevation - 778; Latitude - 39 degrees; Winter Heating - 4 Degrees; Summer Cooling - 94 Degrees; Altitude Correction Factor - No; Indoor Design Temperature - 72 Degrees; Design Temperature Cooling - 75 Degrees; Heating Temperature Difference - 68 Degrees; Cooling Temperature Difference - 19 Degrees; Wind Velocity Heating - 25; Wind Velocity Cooling - 7.5; Coincident Wet Bulb - 78; Daily Range - Medium; Winter Humidity - 20; Summer Humidity - 60. 
Table R301.5. Add note g.4.: Must also include a vertical egress component. 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Delete from the last sentence: "equipped with a self-closing or automatic-closing device". 
R303.6 Outside opening protection. At the end of the paragraph, add the following: 
Exception: Bathroom exhaust fans may be exhausted into a soffit vent if composed of approved materials as determined by the building official. 
Figure 307.1 Water closet: All water closets shall be spaced at least fifteen (15) inches from the centerline of the fixture to any wall or plumbing fixture, except the centerline of the water closet may be spaced twelve (12) inches if located next to a bathtub/shower. 
R311.7.5.1 Risers. Change the first sentence to read: The riser height shall be not more than seven and seven-eighth (7 7/8 ) inches (200 mm). The remainder of the paragraph shall remain as written. 
R311.7.5.1 Risers. At the end of the section, add the following exception 3.: 
3.  Closed risers are not required on exterior stairs where the riser is less than 10' above grade. 
R312.1.1 Where Required. Guards shall be provided for those portions of open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, ramps and landings, that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically to the floor or grade below. Insect screening shall not be considered as a guard. Grassed or landscaped areas a minimum of three feet wide behind a retaining wall shall not be deemed a walking surface. 
R312.2 Window fall protection. Delete in its entirety. 
R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. Delete in its entirety. 
R313.2 One- and two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler systems. Delete in its entirety. 
R313.3 Automatic fire sprinkler systems. A builder of a single-family dwelling or residences or multi-unit dwellings of four (4) or fewer units shall offer to any purchaser, on or before the time of entering into the purchase contract, the option at the purchaser's cost to install or equip an automatic fire sprinkler system in the dwelling, residence or unit. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no purchaser of such a single-family dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling shall be denied the right to choose or decline to install an automatic fire sprinkler system in such dwelling or residence being purchased by any code, ordinance, rule, regulation, order or resolution by any county or other political subdivision. Pursuant to RSMo. § 67.281, the mandatory option for purchasers to have the right to choose and the requirement that the builders offer to purchasers the option to purchase an automatic fire sprinkler system in connection with the purchase of any single-family dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling of four (4) or fewer units is hereby incorporated into the code. 
R314.4 Interconnection. At the end of the section add: 
Exception: In alterations, smoke alarms shall not be required to be interconnected if the dwelling is no more than two (2) stories. 
R314.6 Power source. At the end of the section, add the following exception 3.: 
3.  Smoke alarms in alterations shall be permitted to be battery operated if the dwelling is no more than two (2) stories. 
R315.5. Interconnectivity. Add the following to the exception: Carbon monoxide alarms shall not be required to be interconnected if the dwelling is no more than two (2) stories. 
R315.6 Power source. At the end of the section, add the following exception: 3. Carbon monoxide alarms in alterations shall be permitted to be battery operated if the dwelling is no more than two (2) stories. 
R322 Flood Resistant Construction. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in a floodplain overlay district shall meet the requirements of section 29-2.3(d) of the Code of Ordinances. 
R326.1. General. The design and construction of pools shall comply with section 11-277 of the Code of Ordinances adopting the 2015 "Swimming Pool Ordinance and Guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation." The Swimming Pool Ordinance and guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation is attached to ordinance number 002439. 
R326.2 Barrier requirements. Barrier requirements must meet the standards of the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) Section 305. 
ISPSC 305. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. Where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with Sections ISPSC 305.2 through 305.7. 
ISPSC 305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Outdoor pools and spas and indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with Sections ISPSC 305.2.1 through 305.7. 
ISPSC 305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances. Barrier heights and clearances shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outside of the required barrier. 
2.  The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed 2 inches (51 mm) for grade surfaces that are not solid, such as grass or gravel, where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 
3.  The vertical clearance between a surface below the barrier to a solid surface, such as concrete, and the bottom of the required barrier shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm) where measured on the side of the required barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 
4.  Where the top of the pool or spa structure is above grade, the barrier shall be installed on grade or shall be mounted on top of the pool or spa structure. Where the barrier is mounted on the top of the pool or spa, the vertical clearance between the top of the pool or spa and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.2 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
ISPSC 305.2.3 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers that do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions that form handholds and footholds, except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
ISPSC 305.2.4 Mesh fence as a barrier. Mesh fences, other than chain link fences in accordance with Section ISPSC 305.2.7, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall comply with the following: 
1.  The bottom of the mesh fence shall be not more than 1 inch (25 mm) above the deck or installed surface or grade. 
2.  The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall not permit the fence to be lifted more than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking. 
3.  The fence shall be designed and constructed so that it does not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) sphere under any mesh panel. The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall be not greater than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking. 
4.  An attachment device shall attach each barrier section at a height not lower than 45 inches (1143 mm) above grade. Common attachment devices include, but are not limited to, devices that provide the security equal to or greater than that of a hook-and-eye-type latch incorporating a spring-actuated retaining lever such as a safety gate hook. 
5.  Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Section ISPSC 305.3. 
6.  Patio deck sleeves such as vertical post receptacles that are placed inside the patio surface shall be of a nonconductive material. 
7.  Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of onground residential pools. 
ISPSC 305.2.5 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the pool or spa side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm) in width. 
ISPSC 305.2.6 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, the interior width of the cutouts shall not exceed 1¾ inches (44 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.7 Chain link dimensions. The maximum opening formed by a chain link fence shall be not more than 1¾ inches (44 mm). Where the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top and bottom that reduce the openings, such openings shall be not greater than 1¾ inches (44 mm). 
ISPSC 305.2.8 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not greater than 1¾ inches (44 mm). The angle of diagonal members shall be not greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from vertical. 
ISPSC 305.2.9 Clear zone. There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) between the exterior of the barrier and any permanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the barrier. 
ISPSC 305.2.10 Poolside barrier setbacks. The pool or spa side of the required barrier shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) from the water's edge. 
ISPSC 305.3 Gates. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Sections ISPSC 305.3.1 through 305.3.3 and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool or spa, shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device. 
ISPSC 305.3.1 Utility or service gates. Gates not intended for pedestrian use, such as utility or service gates, shall remain locked when not in use. 
ISPSC 305.3.2 Double or multiple gates. Double gates or multiple gates shall have not fewer than one leaf secured in place and the adjacent leaf shall be secured with a self-latching device. The gate and barrier shall not have openings larger than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the latch release mechanism. The self-latching device shall comply with the requirements of Section 305.3.3. 
ISPSC 305.3.3 Latches. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from grade, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool or spa side of the gate not less than 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and the gate and barrier shall not have openings greater than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. 
ISPSC 305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through that wall, one of the following shall be required: 
1.  Operable windows having a sill height of less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the indoor finished floor and doors shall have an alarm that produces an audible warning when the window, door or their screens are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled as a water hazard entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. In dwellings or structures not required to be Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located 54 inches (1372 mm) or more above the finished floor. In dwellings or structures required to be Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located not greater than 54 inches (1372 mm) and not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the finished floor. 
2.  A safety cover that is listed and labeled in accordance with ASTM F1346 is installed for the pools and spas. 
3.  An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, is provided. Such means of protection shall provide a degree of protection that is not less than the protection afforded by Item 1 or 2. 
ISPSC 305.5 Onground residential pool structure as a barrier. An onground residential pool wall structure or a barrier mounted on top of an onground residential pool wall structure shall serve as a barrier where all of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Where only the pool wall serves as the barrier, the bottom of the wall is on grade, the top of the wall is not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool, the wall complies with the requirements of Section ISPSC 305.2 and the pool manufacturer allows the wall to serve as a barrier. 
2.  Where a barrier is mounted on top of the pool wall, the top of the barrier is not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool, and the wall and the barrier on top of the wall comply with the requirements of Section ISPSC 305.2. 
3.  Ladders or steps used as means of access to the pool are capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access except where the ladder or steps are surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Section ISPSC 305. 
4.  Openings created by the securing, locking or removal of ladders and steps do not allow the passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere. 
5.  Barriers that are mounted on top of onground residential pool walls are installed in accordance with the pool manufacturer's instructions. 
ISPSC 305.6 Natural barriers. In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge not less than 18 inches (457 mm), a barrier is not required between the natural body of water shoreline and the pool or spa. 
ISPSC 305.7 Natural topography. Natural topography that prevents direct access to the pool or spa area shall include but not be limited to mountains and natural rock formations. A natural barrier approved by the governing body shall be acceptable provided that the degree of protection is not less than the protection afforded by the requirements of Sections ISPSC 305.2 through 305.5. 
R401.1 Application. Add Exception: Foundation repairs for one- and two-family dwellings shall not require geotechnical evaluation or structural calculations. 
Table R401.4.1 PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF FOUNDATION MATERIALS: Load-Bearing pressure (pounds per square foot) column, change value for clay, sandy clay, silty clay, clayey silt, silt and sandy silt (CL, ML, MH, and CH) from 1,500 to 2,000 leaving footnote b. 
Figure R403.1(1) Concrete and Masonry foundation details. A slab on ground with turned down footings shall have the following: a #4 reinforcement bar spaced a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches on centers to provide connection of footing to slab. The vertical rods shall extend to within four (4) inches of the bottom of the footing and be turned to provide a horizontal leg that extends a minimum of twelve (12) inches into the slab. 
R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage. Add the following to the end of the section, prior to the Exceptions: The connection of the foundation walls to floors shall be per the alternatives labeled 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 2.1, 3.1, 3.2 or 4. 
NOTE: Drawings as stated above are on file in the office of the building official. 
R404.4 Retaining walls. Add the following to the end of the section: As an alternative, retaining walls may be built per Alternative 4 listed in the amendment of Section R403.1.6 with a six (6) foot dead man placed for lateral support at each end of the unsupported wall and at the spacing shown. The retaining wall must be drained per Figure 405.1 or equivalent. 
R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend at least one (1) foot (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing and six (6) inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material and shall include a drain tile pipe surrounded with an approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain as shown in figure R405.1. The drain pipe can be placed directly on top of the footing. The top of open joints of the drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be protected with strips of building paper, and the drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed directly on the top of the footing or placed on a minimum of two (2) inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or crushed rock at least one size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) of the same material. Foundation Drainage Figure R405.1 as adopted, shall be considered to satisfy the provisions of this subsection. 
NOTE: Foundation Figure R405.1 as stated above, is on file in the office of the building official. 
R602.3.1 Stud size, height and spacing. Amend Exception 2. as follows: 
2.  Where snow loads are less than or equal to twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot, and the ultimate design wind speed is less than or equal to 130 mph, two (2) inch by six (6) inch studs supporting a roof load with not more than six (6) feet of tributary length shall have a maximum height of eighteen (18) feet where spaced at sixteen (16) inches on center, or twenty (20) feet where spaced at twelve (12) inches on center. Studs shall be a minimum No. 2 grade lumber. Alternatively two (2) inch by six (6) inch No. 2 grade studs supporting a roof and floor load with not more than ten (10) foot of tributary length shall have a maximum stud height of fourteen (14) feet. 
R802.5.2.2 Rafter ties. At the end of the section, add the following sentence: Rafter ties shall be spaced not more than four (4) feet (1219 mm) on center. 
R802.11.1.3 Uplift connection strap. Where energy bands are used and the sheathing does not extend to the nailer above the energy band, an uplift connection strap shall be placed every four (4) feet. 
M1411.8 Locking access port caps. Delete in its entirety. 
M1501.1 Outdoor discharge. At the end of the section, add a second exception: 
Exception: Bathroom fan air may be exhausted into a soffit vent if composed of approved materials as determined by the building official. 
M1502.4.2 Duct installation. Delete the following words from the next to the last sentence: "…that protrude more than ? inch (3.2 mm) into the inside of the duct". 
M1505.2 Recirculation of air. At the end of the section, add the following: 
Exception: Bathroom fan air may be exhausted into a soffit vent if composed of approved materials as determined by the building official. 
G2414.5.3 Copper tubing. Replace the second paragraph with the following: Copper pipe and copper tubing shall not be allowed for fuel gas piping systems. 
G2415.14 Piping underground beneath buildings. At the end of the section, add the following: Any underground gas piping allowed by this section shall only be approved for gas that is less dense than the atmospheric pressure and shall be installed in accordance with G2415.12.1. 
G2415.14.2 Conduit with both ends terminating indoors. Delete in its entirety. 
G2417.4.1 Test pressure. Replace the first sentence of the section with the following: The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and one-half (1.5) times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than thirty (30) psig, irrespective of design pressure. 
G2419.4 Sediment trap. Replace "any length" with "3½" minimum length" in the second sentence. 
P2602.1.2 Availability. A potable public water supply system shall be considered available to a building when any portion of the property is located within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of the public water main. 
P2603.5 Freezing. A water, soil or waste pipe shall not be installed outside of a building, or concealed in outside walls, or in any place subjected to freezing temperature, unless adequate provision is made to protect such pipe from freezing by insulation, heat or both. Water pipes shall not be installed in an exterior wall cavity in one and two family dwellings. For purposes of this section exterior wall cavities shall mean all walls that rain can fall upon. Water service piping shall be installed below recorded frost penetration but not less than thirty (30) inches below grade. 
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers, including the portion of the building drain beyond the exterior wall, shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches below grade. The building official may approve a lesser depth of the building drain portion if there are extraordinary circumstances (e.g., bedrock). 
P2604.3 Backfilling. Replace the second sentence of the section with the following: Backfill shall be free from rocks, broken concrete and frozen chunks until the pipe is covered by not less than twelve (12) inches of tamped earth or granular material. 
TABLE P2605.1 Piping support. Footnote B to be used for water distribution piping only. 
P2705.1 General., 5. Water closets, lavatories and bidets. Amend first sentence to read: "All water closets shall be spaced fifteen (15) inches from the centerline of the fixture to any wall or plumbing fixture except the centerline of the water closet may be spaced twelve (12) inches is located next to the bathtub/shower." Remainder of the paragraph is unchanged. 
P2903.5 Water hammer. Add: Exception: A water-hammer arrestor is not needed in water distribution systems using PEX piping or systems using a combination of PEX and copper. 
P2906.9.1.3 CPVC/AL/CPVC pipe. Amend first sentence as follows: "Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture, and purple primer shall be applied." 
P2906.9.1.4 PVC plastic pipe. A primer that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied to PVC solvent-cemented joints. Purple primer shall be used below grade. Solvent cement for PVC plastic pipe conforming to ASTM D 2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. If purple primer is used, Section P2503 Inspections and Tests shall not be required. 
P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing. Delete exceptions. Add: If upon inspection the aboveground joints do not have purple primer, a water test shall be performed and inspected. 
P3103.1 Roof extension. Replace first sentence with the following: Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate not less than twelve (12) inches above the roof. 
P3113.1 Size of vents. Add sentence to paragraph: At least one (1) vent shall be three (3) inch unreduced in size extending from the main building drain through the roof. 
Chapters 34 through 43 of the 2018 International Residential Code are superseded by the requirements as stated in the 2017 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70-2017). 
Appendix F, Radon Control Methods, Section AF101 Scope, AF101.1 General: Is amended to read: This appendix contains requirements for new construction and shall apply without regard to zone designation in Figure AF101 and Table AF101(1). 
Appendix F, Radon Control Methods , is amended by deleting section AF103.4.2 Concrete joints in its entirety. 
Appendix F, Radon Control Methods , is amended by deleting section AF103.12 Power Source in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 22828, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 22920 , § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 23117 , § 4, 3-20-17; Ord. No. 24001 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-67—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22829, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 6-71, 6-72, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Building code, § 6-16 et seq.; electrical code, § 6-31 et seq.; plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9-21 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including all appendices, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22829, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24002 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-72. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.5 Appendix A is hereby adopted as published. 
102.3 Application of other codes. The last sentence shall be deleted and replaced with the following: Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of Chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances. All references to the International Zoning Code herein shall be deemed a reference to Chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
102.7 Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this code, listed in Chapter 8 and Appendix A shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. (Other codes shall not apply except individual regulations of such other codes that are specifically incorporated by reference into this code.) Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.1.1 The Division of Building and Site Development and Office of Neighborhood Services. The persons employed in these offices, may be appointed, by the Director, as assistants to the administration and enforcement of this ordinance and code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the enforcement of this code shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with interests of the department. 
103.4.1 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
103.5 Re-Inspection fees. A re-inspection fee under the Rental Unit Conservation Law, Section 22-188(a)(3) will not be charged when the only violation of "this code" is the failure of battery power for the smoke detector. 
104.3.1 Search warrant. 
(a)  If an application in writing is filed by the code official with the judge of the municipal court of the city, stating that there is probable cause to believe that a certain structure or premises, more particularly described therein, is or may be in violation of this code and is within the territorial jurisdiction of the city, and if such application is verified by the oath or affirmation stating evidential facts from which such judge determines the existence of probable cause, then such judge may issue a search warrant directed to the code official commanding the code official to search the structure or premises therein described. Such search warrant shall be executed and returned within ten (10) days after the date of its issuance. The code official shall make a return promptly after concluding the search, and such return shall contain an itemization of all violations of this code discovered pursuant to such search. The refusal to admit the code official to a structure or premises when the code official is in lawful possession of a search warrant commanding the code official to enter therein is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor. 
106.4 Penalty for noncompliance or delay. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this code shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less that twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or three (3) months in jail or both such fine and imprisonment; provided however, that each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail to comply with a notice of violation given under section 107.1 or order under section 107.7 or order under section 107.10 shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or three (3) months in jail or both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that in those cases involving failure to comply with a notice of violation given under section 107.1 every day that a violation continues after the expiration of the reasonable period of time for the completion of the work specified by the director shall be deemed a separate offense; and provided that every day that a violation continues in violation of an order under section 107.7 or 107.10 shall be deemed a separate offense. 
SECTION 107 DEMOLITION OR REPAIR OF STRUCTURES CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
107.1 Structures constituting a public nuisance. All structures which have any of the following defects are public nuisances: 
(1)  Those structures whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those structures which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent (33%) or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those structures which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonable safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to be dangerous to life, safety, health or welfare of the occupants or the residents of the city. 
(5)  Those structures which are so dilapidated or decayed that they are a danger to the life, safety, health or welfare of the occupants or the residents of the city. 
(6)  Those structures having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(7)  Those structures which have parts which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(8)  Those structures which exist in violation of any provision of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri or other ordinances of this city and which are a danger to the life, safety, health or welfare of the occupants or residents of the city. 
(9)  Those structures which, if occupied, would constitute a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the occupants because they lack maintenance, are in disrepair, are unsanitary, vermin infested or rodent infested, lack sanitary facilities or equipment or otherwise fail to comply with minimum provisions of this code. 
(10)  Those structures which have unsafe equipment including any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in disrepair or conditions that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
107.2 Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the building regulations supervisor determines a structure to be a public nuisance, a notice shall be given to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the structure or premises as shown by the land records of the county recorder of deeds who shall be parties to the action. Such notice shall be in writing and shall: 
(1)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification; 
(2)  Specify the violations of this code constituting a public nuisance; 
(3)  Specify if the property or any part of it is totally or partially vacated and, if so, the date; 
(4)  Specify if the property is to be repaired, reconditioned, remodeled, demolished, placed in a sanitary condition, or made to conform to the occupancy requirement of this code; 
(5)  State a time for the commencement of such work and a reasonable period of time for the completion of such work. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall be served either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If service cannot be obtained by either of these methods of service, then service may be had by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
107.3 Standards. The following standards should be followed by the building regulations supervisor and the director in ordering repair, reconditioning, remodeling, total or partial vacation, demolition, or cleaning of structures constituting a public nuisance. 
(1)  If the structure can be reasonably repaired, reconditioned or remodeled so that it will no longer exist in violation of this code, it shall be ordered repaired, reconditioned or remodeled. 
(2)  If the structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or any other person, it shall be ordered repaired, reconditioned, remodeled or demolished. 
(3)  In any case where the structure is fifty percent (50%) damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be vacated, repaired, reconditioned or remodeled and in all cases where the structure is not or cannot be repaired, reconditioned or remodeled so that it will no longer exist in violation of the requirements of this code, it shall be demolished. 
(4)  If the structure is a hazard to the safety, health or welfare of its occupants or of any person because it lacks sanitary facilities and equipment or is otherwise unsanitary because of an accumulation of garbage or trash or because of infestation, it shall either be placed in a clean and sanitary condition or demolished. 
(5)  Any structure determined to be unfit for human occupancy shall be totally or partially vacated within a reasonable period of time to be determined by the building regulations supervisor or director. No structure or its affected part, ordered vacated shall again be used or leased for human occupancy by any occupant or owner until written approval is secured from the building regulations supervisor. 
107.4 Failure to comply with notice of violation. Upon failure of the parties to the action to commence the work specified within the time specified by the notice of violation issued by the building regulations supervisor under Section 107.2 or upon failure to proceed continuously with the work without unnecessary delay in order to complete the work within the specified period of time, the director may call and have a full adequate hearing upon the matter. 
107.5 Notice of Hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the director calls a hearing under Section 107.4, the director shall give at least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing to the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the structure or premises as shown by the land records of the county recorder of deeds. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification; 
(2)  State the time, date and place of the hearing; 
(3)  State who shall preside at the hearing; 
(4)  State the notice is being given pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The notice of hearing shall be served either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If service cannot be obtained by either of these methods of service, then service may be had by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
107.6 Hearing procedure. The director shall preside over the hearing and shall cause the hearing to be suitably recorded and preserved. Any party may have a copy of all or any part of the record upon payment of a reasonable charge for reproduction. All parties must make oral entry of appearance for the benefit of the record. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Any party may be represented by counsel. All parties shall be given a full and adequate opportunity to be heard. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
107.7 Order of director. After a hearing under section 107.6, if the evidence supports a finding that the structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, the director shall make written and specific findings of fact based upon competent and substantial evidence, which show the structure to be a nuisance and detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, and the director shall order the structure to be repaired, reconditioned, remodeled, totally or partially vacated, demolished or placed in a sanitary condition. If the evidence does not support a finding that the structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, no order shall be issued. Immediately upon reaching a decision, the director shall give written notice of the director's decision by delivering or mailing to each party, or the party's attorney of record, a copy of the director's findings of fact and order, if any. If notice of the director's decision cannot be obtained by either of these two (2) modes of service, then service may be had by posting a copy of the director's findings of fact and order, if any upon the affected property. 
107.8 Appeals. An aggrieved party may appeal to the circuit court pursuant to the procedure established in Chapter 536, Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
107.9 Special tax bills. If the work or act ordered by the director under section 107.7 is not done within the time as stated in the order, and if no appeals of the order are pending, the director may certify such fact to the city council. The city council shall consider such certified facts and may order the city manager to have the work done either by city employees or bidding the work through the purchasing division. No person shall enter private property to perform such work unless the property owner or occupant has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. The actual cost of the performance including administrative costs, shall be submitted to the owner of the property. If the charge is not paid within thirty (30) days of receipt, the city manager shall certify the actual cost of performance, including administrative costs to the director of finance, who shall cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared and collected. At the request of the taxpayer the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten (10) years. If any installment is not paid when due, the balance of the tax bill shall be then due and payable in full, together with all accrued interest. The tax bill from date of issuance shall be a personal debt against the property owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. Tax bills issued pursuant to this section shall bear interest from the date of issuance at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum for the first two (2) years and twelve (12) percent per annum thereafter. 
107.10 Emergency power. Notwithstanding any other section of this code, in any case where, in the opinion of the director, it reasonably appears there is an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the director may take or order emergency action to vacate and repair or demolish any structure. The actual cost of performance shall be collected as provided by Section 107.9. 
107.11 Judicial actions authorized. In case any order under Section 107.7 or 107.10 is not immediately complied with, the director may request the city counselor to institute an appropriate judicial action to compel compliance with this code. 
107.12 Placarding. Any structure determined by the code official to be a public nuisance may be posted with a placard by the code official. The placard shall include the following information in the form prescribed by the director: Name of city; name and address of the director; section of this code violated; if required to be vacated, an order that the structure, or its affected part, must remain vacated until the violation are corrected and the order to vacate is withdrawn by the building inspector; date the placard is posted; and a statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the placard. 
107.13 Removal of placard. No person shall deface or remove any placard posted by the code official pursuant to Section 107.12 except by written authority from the code official. 
107.14 Prohibited occupancy. No person shall occupy a placarded premises in violation of an order that it be vacated and no owner or person responsible for the premises shall allow anyone to occupy such a placarded premises. 
107.15 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of the such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
108 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT: Delete in its entirety. 
109.1 Imminent danger. Delete in its entirety. 
109.2.1 Time limit. If an order is issued to board-up the openings of a structure out of compliance with this code, the structure shall be brought into compliance and the structure shall not remain boarded-up longer than ninety (90) days from the date of the notice. 
110 DEMOLITION: Delete in its entirety. 
111 MEANS OF APPEAL: Delete in its entirety. 
111.1 Application for appeal. Except for appeals from orders of the director under Sections 107.7 and 107.8, any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the building construction codes commission. Application for appeal must be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one dollar and/or more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. 
SECTION 202 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall be added to Section 202: 
Building regulations supervisor. The building regulations supervisor or the supervisor's designee. 
Director. The director of community development. 
Family. The definition of "family" in chapter 29 shall apply to this code. 
Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling. This definition shall also include the housing provided by fraternities and sororities organized for students of any college or university; however, a hotel, motor hotel or motel licensed under state statute shall not be deemed a rooming house for the purposes of this article. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. This definition shall include manufactured housing. 
302.4 Weeds. Delete in its entirety. 
302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, walls, and retaining walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
302.8 Motor and non-motorized vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises. No licensed or unlicensed utility trailers, boat trailers with or without a boat, motorized or pull type camping trailers or any similar type vehicles shall be parked, kept or stored on an unapproved surface on any premises, and no vehicle stated above shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a garage, structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
Exception: Lawn and yard vehicles motorized or non-motorized, utility trailers or similar type vehicles four (4) feet wide and eight (8) feet long or smaller and not licensed for street operation. 
303.2.1 Gate latches. All existing swimming pools shall have a self-latching, self-closing gate. The latches shall be a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches from the bottom of the gate. 
303.3 Drain cover. All existing swimming pools shall have an anti-vortex drain cover. 
Exception: Use groups R-3 and R-4. 
304.3 Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be in Arabic numerals at least four (4) inches high with one-half (½) inch stroke and of contrasting color. 
Exception: Existing two (2) inch high with one-half (½) inch stroke in Arabic numerals that are being maintained and are in good condition may remain until replaced. 
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rats. All cracks that permit the entry of water, insects, or rats or jeopardize the support of the structure shall be repaired. Small cracks that do not exhibit these problems and are three-eighths (?) of an inch or less shall not be required to be repaired. 
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to October 15, every door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of no less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception #1: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other types of openings which make screening impractical, provided other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed. 
Exception #2: Screening is not required for air-conditioned spaces. 
Exception #3: Screen doors are not required where there is at least one screened window in the room where the exterior door is located. 
304.18.1.1 Exception: Doors between dwelling units and fully enclosed attached, garages are not required to have dead bolt locks. All other swinging egress doors from structure are required to have a dead bolt. 
307.1.1 Guard standards. Guards may be constructed of slats in a horizontal, vertical or any other pattern and shall not allow passage of a six (6) inch diameter sphere through any opening. 
308.2.1.1 Exception: In one- and two-family residences which are not owner-occupied the owner may require the tenant to provide a leak proof, covered, outside rubbish container. However, nothing contained herein shall relieve the owner of responsibility for the proper disposal of rubbish in the event the tenant fails to comply with the requirements of this code. 
308.3.1.1 Exception: In one- and two-family residences which are not owner-occupied, the owner may require the tenant to shall provide a leak proof, covered, outside garbage container if there is no food waste grinder or incinerator. However, nothing contained herein shall relieve the owner of responsibility for the proper disposal of rubbish in the event the tenant fails to comply with the requirements of this code. 
309.4 Multiple occupancies. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. The following shall be added at the end of the section: 
Exception: Structures and premises that had a current certificate of compliance during the three (3) year inspection cycle prior to January 1, 1993, may have a mechanical ventilation system that exhausts air into the attic space provided the attic space has adequate ventilation. 
404.3.1 Exception: Structures and premises that had a current certificate of compliance during the three (3) year inspection cycle prior to January 1, 1993, shall have a minimum ceiling height of six feet, six inches (6'-6") for laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet room and corridors serving only these areas. 
502.2.1 Exception for Fraternity and Sorority Houses. Fraternity or sorority houses shall have at least one toilet, one lavatory basin, and one bathtub or shower, in good working condition and properly connected to water and sewer systems approved by the code official for each eight (8) persons residing within such fraternity or sorority. 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain the room temperatures specified in Section 602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees F. (16 degrees C.) during other hours. 
602.4 Nonresidential structures. Insert dates as follows: September 1 to June 1. 
702.4.1 Emergency escape. Every sleeping room located in a basement in occupancies of Use Group I-1 or R shall have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue; or shall have access to not less than two approved independent exits. Existing windows in a sleeping room shall not be eliminated. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic fire suppression system. 
2.  Structures that have previously received a certificate of compliance during the three (3) year inspection cycle prior to January 1, 1993 or a certificate of occupancy have been maintained accordingly and comply with the following: 
a.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in all shafts and corridors, on the ceiling or wall outside or within the vicinity of each separate bedroom and on each additional story of the dwelling, including the basements, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. 
b.  Smoke detectors described in paragraph a. of this exception shall receive their primary power from the building wiring and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection. 
c.  All smoke detectors shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all the alarms throughout the structure. This exception 2 shall not apply to structures that are renovated, remodeled or altered in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the current value of the structure. 
702.5 Number of exits. In nonresidential buildings, every occupied story more than six (6) stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two (2) independent exits. In residential buildings, every story exceeding two (2) stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two (2) independent exits. 
Exceptions: Where any structure has previously received a certificate of compliance during the three (3) year inspection cycle prior to January 1, 1993 or a certificate of occupancy, has been maintained accordingly and complies with one of the following: 
1.  Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic fire suppression system. 
2.  Structures that have previously received a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy have been maintained accordingly and comply with the following: 
a.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in all shafts and corridors, on the ceiling or wall outside or within the vicinity of each separate bedroom and on each additional story of the dwelling, including the basements, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. 
b.  Smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection. 
c.  All smoke detectors shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all the alarms throughout the structure. This exception 2 shall not apply to structures that are renovated, remodeled or altered in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the current value of the structure. 
702.6 Number of exits in manufactured housing. Every dwelling unit shall have not less than two (2) doors, or not less than one (1) door and one (1) unobstructed emergency exit. One (1) exit shall be located near the front of the dwelling unit and one (1) door shall be located near the rear of the dwelling unit. An emergency exit may be substituted for the rear door when the length of the dwelling unit does not permit or is not sufficient for the use of the two (2) doors. Each door or exit shall be supplied with a properly installed lock. 
702.7 Corridor enclosure. All corridors serving an occupant load greater than thirty (30) and the openings therein shall provide an effective barrier to resist the movement of smoke. All transoms, louver, doors, and other openings shall be closed or shall be self-closing. 
Exceptions: Where any structure has previously received a certificate of compliance during the three (3) year inspection cycle prior to January 1, 1993 or a certificate of occupancy, has been maintained accordingly and complies with following: 
1.  Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic fire suppression system. 
2.  Structures that have previously received a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy has been maintained accordingly and comply with the following: 
a.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in all shafts and corridors; on the ceiling or wall outside or within the vicinity of each separate bedroom and on each additional story of the dwelling, including the basements, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. 
b.  Smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection. 
c.  All smoke detectors shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all the alarms throughout the structure. This exception 2 shall not apply to structures that are renovated, remodeled or altered in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the current value of the structure. 
704.7 Single and multiple-station smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Smoke alarms that do not function shall be replaced. Smoke alarms installed in one- and two-family dwellings should be replaced not more than 10 years from the date of manufacture marked on the unit, or should be replaced if the date of manufacture cannot be determined. 
( Ord. No. 22829, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24002 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-73—6-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21578, § 1, adopted January 22, 2013, repealed § 6-226, which pertained to storm drainage standards. 
 
Secs. 6-226—6-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FUEL GAS CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22830, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 6-230, 6-231, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Building code § 6-16 et seq.; plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; mechanical code, § 6-71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-230. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A, B and C, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22830, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24003 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-231. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.3.1 Appendices A, B, and C are hereby adopted as published. 
101.6 Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the installation, alteration or repair of any gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment, gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories, appliances or components in or on any building, structure or premises within the corporate limits of the City of Columbia, Missouri, unless issued a certificate of competency by the board of mechanical examiners or the board of plumbing examiners. 
SECTION 103 DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
103.4.1 Legal defense. Delete in its entirety. 
103.5 Restrictions of employees. An employee connected with the division of building and site development shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the division. 
106.1.1 Permit required. Application for a permit shall be made by a licensed master mechanical HVACR mechanic, or a licensed master plumber, except as provided in section 106.2. Fuel gas permits may be issued to the general contractor on behalf of the master plumber or master mechanic for new one and two family dwellings and building alteration or building additions for one and two family dwellings. All fuel gas work must be performed by a plumber, or mechanic licensed by the City of Columbia, or as allowed by ordinance. Any permit required by this code may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this code in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, provided the person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall personally purchase all material and perform all labor in connection therewith. Any person obtaining a permit under this section shall not be issued another permit within two years. 
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical and fuel gas work shall be as indicated in the following schedule: 
$0.00 to $1,000.00 	$35.00 
$1,000.01 to $5,000.00 	$25.00 plus $6.25 per thousand over $1,000.00 
$5,000.01 to $10,000.00 	$50.00 plus $5.00 per thousand over $5,000.00 
$10,000.01 to $20,000.00 	$75.00 plus $3.75 per thousand over $10,000.00 
Over $20,000.00 	$112.50 plus $2.50 per thousand over $20,000.00 
 
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
3.  Delete in its entirety. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment. 
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Section 109 (IFGC) Means of appeal. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
109.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of this code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
403.5.3 Copper and brass tubing. Copper tubing shall comply with standard Type K of ASTM B 88 or ASTM B 280. 
Copper pipe and copper tubing shall not be allowed for fuel gas piping systems. 
404.14 Piping underground beneath buildings. Add last sentence to the end of the paragraph as follows: Any underground gas piping allowed by this section shall only be approved for gas that is less dense (e.g., natural gas) than the more dense atmospheric pressure (e.g., propane) and shall be installed in accordance with section 404.12.1 and shall always terminate or vent to the outside. 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Replace the last sentence as follows: Mechanical gauges used to measure test pressures shall have a range such that the highest end of the scale is not greater than 100 psi. 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and one-half (1½) times the proposed maximum working, but not less than 30 psig, irrespective of design pressure. 
408.4 Sediment trap. In the second sentence, change "any length" to "3½-inch minimum length". 
( Ord. No. 22830, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24003 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-232—6-234. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24004 , § 1, adopted September 3, 2019, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 6-235, 6-236, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 22831, § 1, 6-6-16, eff. 10-1-16; Ord. No. 22920, § 1, 9-6-16. 
 
Sec. 6-235. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices RA and CA (Solar-Ready Provisions, Residential and Commercial), one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Ord. No. 24004 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-236. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE - COMMERCIAL PROVISIONS 
C101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
C101.6 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
C101.7 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
C101.8 Restrictions of employees. An employee connected with the division of building and site development shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the division. 
C108.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
C108.5 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
C109.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of this code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113.0 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
C109.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety. 
C109.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety. 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE - RESIDENTIAL PROVISIONS 
R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
R101.6 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
R101.7 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
R101.8 Restrictions of employees. An employee connected with the division of building and site development shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the division. 
R108.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
R108.5 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
R109.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of this code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113.0 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
R109.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety. 
R109.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 24004 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 6-237—6-239. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24005 , § 1, adopted September 3, 2019, repealed the former Art. XI, §§ 6-240, 6-241, and enacted a new Art. XI as set out herein. The former Art. XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 22832, § 1, 6-6-16, eff. 10-1-16 . 
 
Sec. 6-240. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A, B and C, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Existing Building Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Ord. No. 24005 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 6-241. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.6.1 Appendices A, B and C are hereby adopted as published. 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development, who is designated the code official for purposes of this code. The code official is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Restrictions of employees. An employee connected with the division of building and site development shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the division. 
104.8 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
104.8.1 Legal defense. Delete in its entirety. 
112.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of this code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
112.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety. 
112.3. Qualifications. Delete in its entirety. 
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
114.4 Emergency. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
114.5 Penalty. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
1401.1.3 Permit to move. A permit to move a building or structure shall not be issued until a bond or other security is posted with the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), guaranteeing that the building or structure will be made to comply with IEBC Section 1301.2 within 180 days from date of issuance of permit. 
1401.4 Permit required to use public streets or right-of-way. No building or structure of any nature or description shall be moved over any street of the City of Columbia, Missouri, by any means whatsoever without first obtaining permission from the city manager. Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the city manager shall refer the same to the director of community development, who shall cause an inspection to be made to determine whether or not the building or structure is a public nuisance, as described in the Property Maintenance Code of Columbia, Missouri. Upon completion of the inspection, the director shall provide written findings to the city manager. At the same time the application for a permit is referred to the director of community development, the city manager shall direct the director of water and light to make an inspection of the route over which the building or structure is proposed to be moved, to determine whether or not any facilities of the water and light department could constitute an obstacle to such removal. Upon completion of the inspection, the director of water and light shall provide written findings to the city manager. After giving consideration to the reports, and to any other matter involved in such removal which might concern the safety or welfare of the public, or public or private property, the city manager may grant or deny the application for permit. 
1401.5 Not to stand on street longer than six (6) hours. No buildings or structures shall be allowed to stand in the streets of the city in one block for a longer period than six (6) hours, except for the period between sunset and sunrise, when such buildings or structures shall have flares set about them on every side. 
1401.6 Not to injure or take up pavement. No pavement shall be taken up or removed to assist in any way the moving of any building or structure, nor shall pegs, stakes, or poles be driven into paved streets for such purposes. 
1401.7 Bond required. Before any permit shall be issued by the city manager, the applicant shall furnish a good and sufficient bond with a corporate surety company as surety to be approved by the city manager, in a sum to be fixed by the city manager at not less than double the estimated damages, conditioned that the applicant will promptly and fully pay the owner for any public or private property injured or destroyed by applicant in the process of moving such building, and that applicant will reimburse the city for costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing water and light department facility obstacles from the route and restoring the same. 
(Ord. No. 24005 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Chapter 7 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; airport, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; emergency requirements of cable television system, § 10-109; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 21, public works and improvements, Ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definition. 
A "disaster" is an occurrence such as a tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, drought, blizzard, pestilence, famine, fire, explosion, building collapse, vehicle wreck, act of terrorism, enemy attack, sabotage or any other natural or man-made situation that causes human suffering or creates human needs that the victims cannot alleviate without assistance, and that requires an extraordinary commitment of governmental resources. This definition should not be applied rigidly to exclude situations not enumerated. 
(Code 1964, § 6.010; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-2. - Duties, powers and responsibilities of the city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may declare an emergency whenever a disaster is imminent or actually occurs within the city, and the safety and welfare of the inhabitants is jeopardized. 
(b)  The city manager shall as soon as possible report to the emergency operations center and assume control over the city's emergency response. 
(c)  Upon declaration of an emergency, the city manager shall have all powers granted to the executive officer of the city by chapter 44, RSMo and shall take all steps necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of all persons within the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 6.020; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Cross reference— City officers and employees, generally, § 2-121 et. seq.  
Sec. 7-3. - Line of succession in absence of city manager. 
(a)  If the city manager is absent or disabled, the person designated to be acting city manager under section 19 of the Charter shall assume the duties of the city manager. 
(b)  If the city manager is absent or disabled and no person designated as acting city manager under section 19 of the Charter is available and able to serve as acting city manager, the acting city manager shall be determined in accordance with a line of succession prepared by the city manager and attached as an appendix to the emergency operations plan. 
(Code 1964, § 6.030; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-4. - Emergency regulations. 
(a)  If a disaster occurs which requires the implementation of the city emergency operations plan or if an emergency occurs which does not require the immediate implementation of the city emergency operations plan but which requires the extraordinary management of city resources, the city manager is authorized to declare an emergency and establish temporary emergency regulations to ensure the health, safety and welfare of persons within the city. 
(1)  Regulations established by the city manager pursuant to this section shall contain a statement of the facts constituting the emergency and shall be narrowly drawn to address the stated emergency. 
(2)  Immediately after establishing regulations pursuant to this section, the city manager shall cause a copy of the regulations to be posted on the bulletin board in the fourth floor hallway of the Daniel Boone Building and shall cause copies of the regulations to be delivered to all members of the city council and distributed to local news media. 
(3)  Regulations established by the city manager pursuant to this section shall remain in effect for twenty-one (21) days unless sooner revoked by the city manager or by motion of the city council. The city manager shall not re-establish regulations pursuant to this section after they have expired or been revoked unless a change in circumstances creates a new emergency. 
(4)  At the next regular city council meeting after establishing emergency regulations or at a special council meeting held before the next regular council meeting, the city manager shall give a complete report on the emergency to the city council. If the city manager determines that the emergency regulations should remain in effect, a council bill shall be prepared and presented to the city council which would establish the regulations by ordinance. 
(b)  Regulations established under this section shall have the force of law. A person who violates the regulation established under this section after receiving notice of the regulation shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. All other persons violating a regulation established under this section shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 11947, § 1, 7-18-88; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-5. - Emergency water regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to declare a water use emergency under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  An equipment failure, large fire or water main break has caused or, unless emergency water conservation measures are taken, will cause inadequate water pressures and flows for fire protection. 
(2)  Water system pumping is reasonably estimated to reach the 24 million gallons per day level. 
(b)  After declaring a water use emergency, the city manager shall establish temporary emergency regulations. The procedures and penalties of section 7-4 shall apply to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16423, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Cross reference— Fire flow standards, § 27-58.  
Secs. 7-6—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17169, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, changed the title of Art. II of this chapter from "Disaster Preparedness Organization" to "Emergency Management Organization." 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Established; duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  In accordance with chapter 44, RSMo and pursuant to the authority of section 22 of the Charter, there is hereby created an administrative division of the city to be known as the office of emergency management. This office shall be responsible for the city's emergency management operations. 
(b)  The office of emergency management shall perform emergency management functions in cooperation with Boone County and the State of Missouri in accordance with the provisions of chapter 44 RSMo and a cooperative agreement with Boone County. 
(Code 1964, § 6.040; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-17. - Office and headquarters. 
The city manager shall designate space for emergency operations in any building owned or leased by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 6.070; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-18. - Administrator; designation and duties. 
The office of emergency management shall be headed by the emergency communications and management administrator. 
(1)  The administrator shall be appointed and subject to removal by the city manager. 
(2)  The administrator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operations of local emergency operations planning subject to the direction and control of the city manager. 
(3)  The administrator shall be responsible for maintaining records on use and disposal of all items of equipment placed under the jurisdiction of the office of emergency management. 
(4)  The administrator is authorized to submit all materials and sign all documents requested by the state emergency management agency, to qualify the city for participation in federal contributions. 
(5)  The administrator shall be responsible for all training required by chapter 44 RSMo. 
(Code 1964, § 6.050; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-19. - Powers of city manager and administrator. 
The city manager and the administrator, in accordance with chapter 44, RSMo, may: 
(1)  Expend funds; make contracts; obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for civil defense purposes; provide for the health and safety of persons, including emergency assistance to victims of an enemy attack; provide for the safety of property; and direct and coordinate the development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans of the federal and state disaster and emergency planning. 
(2)  Appoint and remove rescue teams and other emergency operations teams, units or personnel. 
(3)  Assign emergency missions to nongovernmental groups such as physicians and news media as necessary to develop a capability to augment government disaster response. 
(4)  In the event of declared national or local emergency waive the provisions of law requiring advertisements for bids for the performance of public works or entering into contracts. 
(5)  With the approval of the city council and consistent with the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan, enter into mutual-aid agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal emergency aid. 
(6)  Accept services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds granted or loaned by the federal government for disaster planning and operations purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 6.060; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq.  
Sec. 7-20. - Oath of personnel. 
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity with the office of emergency management who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the government of the United States or of the State of Missouri or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or has been convicted of or is under indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in the office shall, before entering upon the duties of the position, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in this state, which oath shall be substantially as follows: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Missouri against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am a member of the City of Columbia office of emergency management, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence. 
(Code 1964, § 6.080; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo § 44.115.  
Sec. 7-21. - Emergency operations plan. 
(a)  The administrator shall prepare a comprehensive emergency operations plan consisting of a basic plan, annex A covering direction and control of the emergency operations center and administrative annexes that implement the basic plan. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt the basic plan and annex A and any amendments to these documents. 
(c)  The city manager shall adopt administrative annexes to the plan that the manager considers necessary or desirable to implement the basic plan. The city manager shall adopt any amendments to these annexes that the manager considers necessary or desirable. 
(d)  The administrator shall review the emergency operations plan annually. If the administrator believes any changes to the plan are necessary or desirable, the administrator shall recommend such changes to the city manager for appropriate action. 
(Code 1964, § 6.090; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 7-22. - Testing and training. 
The office of emergency management shall conduct exercises, testing and training in accordance with the annual statement of work approved by the State of Missouri Emergency Management Agency (SEMA). 
(Code 1964, § 6.100; Ord. No. 10457, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Secs. 7-23—7-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE TO OTHER GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 
 
Sec. 7-35. - Emergency assistance to other governmental agencies; policies and procedures. 
(a)  The city manager or the manager's designee may authorize the police department, fire department, public works department, water and light department, public safety joint communications and office of emergency management to provide assistance to any governmental agency in Missouri or in a bordering state at the time of a significant emergency such as fire, earthquake, flood, tornado, storm, hazardous material incident or civil disturbance. 
(b)  Requests for emergency assistance shall be promptly communicated to the city manager or the manager's designee. 
(c)  Emergency assistance shall not be authorized if, in the opinion of the city manager or the manager's designee, the safety of the inhabitants of Columbia would be jeopardized if such assistance were provided. 
(d)  This section does not supersede any existing mutual aid agreement, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 14328 § 1, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 17169, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Nominations and elections, §§ 119—126; initiative, referendum and recall, §§ 127—141. 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21092, § 1, adopted September 19, 2011, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article I, §§ 8-1—8-13, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1964, § 8.010, 8.020, 8.030, 8.050—8.070, 8.110, 8.170, 8.180, 8.230, 8.250. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Time of elections. 
Elections for council members shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April in accordance with the City Charter. The city council may call special elections in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 21092, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 8-2. - Conduct of elections. 
All city elections shall be conducted in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 21092, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Secs. 8-3—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WARDS 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Ward boundaries established. 
The area embraced within the corporate limits of the city, as now or hereafter established, is hereby divided into six (6) wards, the boundaries of which, as set out in sections 8-32 through 8-37, are hereby established. 
(Code 1964, § 1.070)  
Sec. 8-32. - First Ward. 
The First Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of Paris Road and the centerline of Interstate 70; thence southward along the centerline of Paris Road to its intersection with Business Loop 70; thence westward along the centerline of Business Loop 70 to the centerline of College Avenue; thence southward along the centerline of College Avenue to its intersection with Stadium Boulevard; thence westward along the centerline of Stadium Boulevard to its intersection with Providence Road; thence northward along the centerline of Providence Road to the centerline of East Broadway; thence westward along the centerline of East Broadway and West Broadway to its intersection with Silvey Street; thence northward along the centerline of Silvey Street to its intersection with I-70 Drive Southwest; then eastward along the centerline of I-70 Drive Southwest to its intersection with Clinkscales Drive, thence northward to where the centerline of Interstate 70 crosses over the centerline of Clinkscales Drive; thence eastward along the centerline of Interstate 70 to its intersection with the centerline of Paris Road, the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 8-33. - Second Ward. 
The Second Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of Oakland Gravel Road and Highway 63; thence southward along the centerline of Oakland Gravel Road to its intersection with Vandiver Drive; thence eastward along the centerline of Vandiver Drive to its intersection of Paris Road; thence southwestward along the centerline of Paris Road to the centerline of Interstate 70; thence westward along the centerline of Interstate 70 to where the centerline of Interstate 70 crosses over the centerline of Clinkscales Drive; thence southward to the intersection of the centerline of Clinkscales Drive and I-70 Drive Southwest; thence westward along the centerline of I-70 Drive Southwest to its intersection with the centerline of Silvey Street; thence southward along the centerline of Silvey Street to the intersection with West Broadway; thence westward along the centerline of West Broadway to its intersection with Strawn Road; thence north along the centerline of Strawn Road to its intersection with West Broadway; thence westward along the centerline of West Broadway .4 of a mile; thence northward .25 of a mile; thence westward to the city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a clockwise direction along the city limits line, as now or hereafter established, to the point at which the city limits meet the centerline of Oakland Gravel Road, the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 8-34. - Third Ward. 
The Third Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of Oakland Gravel Road and the north city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a clockwise direction along the city limits line, as now or hereafter established, to its intersection with the centerline of East Broadway; thence westward along the centerline of East Broadway to the centerline of College Avenue; thence northward along the centerline of College Avenue to the centerline of Business Loop 70; thence eastward along the centerline of Business Loop 70 to the centerline of Paris Road; thence northeastward along the centerline of Paris Road to the centerline of Vandiver Drive; thence westward along the centerline of Vandiver Drive to its intersection with Oakland Gravel Road; thence northward along the centerline of Oakland Gravel Road to its intersection with the north city limits line, as now or hereafter established, the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 8-35. - Fourth Ward. 
The Fourth Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right of way and Scott Boulevard; thence eastward and northeastward along the centerline of the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right of way to the centerline of Providence Road; thence northward along the centerline of Providence Road to the centerline of East Broadway; thence westward along the centerline of East and West Broadway to West Broadway's intersection with Strawn Road; thence northward along the centerline of Strawn Road to its intersection with West Broadway; thence westward .4 miles along the centerline of West Broadway; thence northward .25 miles; thence westward to its intersection with the west city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a counterclockwise direction along the city limits line, as now or hereafter established, to the centerline of Scott Boulevard; thence southward along the centerline of Scott Boulevard to the intersection of Scott Boulevard and the centerline of the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right-of-way, the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 15657, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 15793, § 6, 11-2-98; Ord. No. 16222, § 6, 11-1-99; Ord. No. 16342, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 8-36. - Fifth Ward. 
The Fifth Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right-of-way and Scott Boulevard, thence eastward and northeastward along the centerline of the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right-of-way to the centerline of Providence Road; thence southward along the centerline of Providence Road to the intersection of Providence Road and the south city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a clockwise direction along the city limits line to the intersection of Scott Boulevard and the former Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad right-of-way; the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 8-37. - Sixth Ward. 
The Sixth Ward boundary shall begin at the intersection of the centerline of East Broadway and the east city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a counterclockwise direction along the city limits line, as now or hereafter established, thence westward along the centerline of East Broadway to the centerline of College Avenue; thence southward along the centerline of College Avenue to the centerline of Stadium Boulevard; thence westward along the centerline of Stadium Boulevard to its intersection with Providence Road; thence southward along the centerline of Providence Road to its intersection with the city limits line, as now or hereafter established; thence in a counterclockwise direction along the city limits line, as now or hereafter established, to its intersection with the centerline of East Broadway, the point of beginning of this ward boundary. 
(Ord. No. 13149, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 17075, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 21126, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-11)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; storage of flammable liquids prohibited under minimum properties standards code, § 6-166; civil defense, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; use of fireworks and explosives in parks restricted, § 17-112; public works and improvements, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 27; water service in connection with fire protection facilities on private property, § 27-59; Unified Development Code, Ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The fire chief may designate fire lanes on private and public property. Such area shall be designated by signs at each end of the lane which say "No Parking—Fire Lane." Fire lanes may be established on driveways and access roads required by the zoning ordinances applicable to the property in question, provided that fire lanes may not be established on property containing one-or two-family residential dwellings. 
(b)  Upon notice by the fire chief of designation of a fire lane, it shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or his agent, of the premises upon which the fire lane has been designated, to post proper signs and to maintain such signs in good condition. 
(c)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to provide any owner, occupant, or his agent, of any premises having a designated fire lane with such legally sufficient signs and sign standards as are necessary for the owner, occupant, or agent to properly post the designated fire lane. 
(d)  Written application for signs designating fire lanes shall be made to the traffic engineer specifying in detail the number of signs needed and the exact location of the fire lane as designated by the fire chief as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Signs shall be provided for a price not to exceed the cost to the city of obtaining such signs. 
(f)  All signs provided for in this section shall conform to the size requirements and posting rules and guidelines established by the fire chief. 
(Code 1964, §§ 9.1615(1), 9.1616, 9.1617; Ord. No. 10138, § 1, 4-2-84) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking of motor vehicles generally, § 14-281 et seq.  
Sec. 9-2. - Disorderly persons at fires. 
If any person at or near a fire shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to obey promptly any proper order of the fire chief or his assistants, or shall resist, obstruct, hinder or abuse any officer of the fire department, fire guard or any fireman, in the proper discharge of his duties, he may be arrested without warrant by any of the aforesaid officers. The power to make such arrest is hereby invested in the above-named officers. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1570) 
Cross reference— Offenses against public order, § 16-176 et seq.; offenses affecting government, § 16-221 et seq.; offenses against public safety, § 16-231 et seq.  
Sec. 9-3. - False fire alarms. 
Any person within the city who shall wilfully give, sound or make any false alarm of fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1600) 
Cross reference— Offenses against public order, § 16-176 et seq.; offenses affecting government, § 16-221 et seq.; offenses against public safety, § 16-231 et seq.  
Sec. 9-4. - Use of siren whistles limited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or for the owner thereof to permit to be used, any siren whistle which is not installed either on fire or police apparatus, or in some way pertaining to fire, without first obtaining permission from the fire chief. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1610) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles generally, § 14-16 et seq.  
Sec. 9-5. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment; tampering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1595)  
Sec. 9-6. - Private fire hydrants. 
All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumber yards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system, shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The fire official shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The fire official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire official. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1596) 
Cross reference— Water service, § 27-57 et seq.  
Sec. 9-7. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not less than one (1) day nor more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1629)  
Secs. 9-8—9-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22833, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016 , effective October 1, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 9-21, 9-22, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 9-21. - Adopted. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A, B, C, D and I, one copy of which has been on file with the city clerk for a period of ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Columbia, Missouri as fully as if set forth in its entirety. At least one (1) copy of the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
( Ord. No. 22833, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24006 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Sec. 9-22. - Amendments. 
The code adopted by this article is hereby amended by substituting the following sections in lieu of those sections with corresponding numbers in the code, or, where there is no corresponding section in the code, the following sections shall be enacted as additions to the code: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Columbia, Missouri, and hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.2.2 Appendices A, D and I are hereby adopted as published. Appendices B and C are hereby adopted as amended. 
Section 103.0 Fire Prevention: 
103.1 Director. The administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be the duty of the director of community development and the fire chief, who are designated as the code officials for purposes of this code. The code officials are hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or representatives of the director and the chief as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code. 
103.2 Appointment. Delete in its entirety. 
103.3 Deputies. Delete in its entirety. 
103.4 Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby render such individual liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act performed in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The officer or employee shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted pursuant to the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee acting within the scope of employment and in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the immunities and protection afforded to the city or officers and employees pursuant to state and federal law. 
103.4.1 Legal defense. Delete in its entirety. 
103.5 Restriction of employees. An employee connected with the Department of Community Development - Division of Building and Site Development - Division of Administration or Division of Enforcement and Inspections, or the Fire Department, shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefore, unless the employee is the owner of the building; nor shall such employee engage in any work which conflicts with employee's official duties or with the interest of the department. 
105.6.47 Temporary stage canopies and tents. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure, a temporary stage canopy or a tent having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m 2 ). 
Exceptions: All exceptions remain as written in the code. 
105.6.49 Fire performance art. An operational permit is required to use open flames defined as fire performance art under amended code section 316. 
105.7 Required construction permits. The building code official is authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.16. 
105.7.22 Stage canopy. A single construction permit is required to erect and take down a temporary stage canopy. 
109.1 Appeals. The owner of a building or structure or any person directly affected by a decision of the fire chief or code official may appeal to the building construction codes commission from a decision of the fire chief or code official refusing to grant modifications of the provisions of the Fire Code covering the manner of installation, or materials to be used in the installation. The procedure for appeal shall be governed by Section 113 of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri. 
109.2 Limitation on authority. Delete in its entirety. 
109.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety. 
110.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
112.4 Failure to comply. Delete in its entirety. 
SECTION 202 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Temporary special event structure. Delete in its entirety. 
Add the following definition: 
Temporary stage canopy. A temporary ground supported membrane-covered frame structure used to cover stage areas and support equipment in the production of outdoor entertainment events. 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burner and other open flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Apartment buildings and condominiums. 
3.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
Section 320 Fire Performance Art: 
320.1 General. Fire Performance Art shall be defined as any act (fire juggling, fire eating, etc.) in a public or private place, which utilizes fire for entertainment purposes, outside of a protective housing or in ways in which it travels through the air (by one person or multiple persons). These acts do not include pyrotechnics or other open flame devices as regulated by other code sections or permits. 
320.2 Permits. A permit in accordance with 105.6.32 shall be secured from the fire code official prior to the date of the fire performance art taking place. 
320.3 Space considerations. A ten (10) foot distance shall be maintained between the fire-involved item and any member of an audience, any combustible decoration, and any combustible item within the immediate performance area. A minimum ten (10) foot ceiling height is required. 
320.4 Extinguishing agents. At minimum, one (1) 2A-10BC multipurpose fire extinguisher shall be required for every five (5) performers at each performance. Additional fire extinguishers may be required by the code official based upon the unique circumstances of the performance and occupancy. 
320.4.1 One (1) wet towel for each active fire performer shall be provided to extinguish the fire implement. The towel shall be white in color to differentiate its use from other colors that may be used to clean up flammable or combustible liquid spills. Towels used for cleaning up flammable or combustible liquid spills shall be stored in a metal container with a tight fitting lid. 
320.4.2 One (1) listed fire blanket shall be provided for every five (5) performers. 
320.5 Personal safety. A five (5) gallon open-topped bucket of water will be provided for each fire performance area. 
320.5.1 Spotter. One (1) trained spotter shall be provided for each performance. The spotter shall be positioned between the active fire performer and the audience. Spotters should be trained in the proper use of fire extinguishers. The spotter may be a performer who is not engaged in the current performance. The fire code official may require additional spotters based on the unique circumstances of the performance and occupancy. 
320.6 Fuels. Approved common fuels used for fire performance art include: 
Denatured alcohol; 
Lamp oil (odorless and smokeless); 
Kerosene (for outdoor performances only); 
Stove fuel; 
"Shell Sol T" brand fuel; 
"Allume Fue" brand fuel; 
"Fire Water" brand fuel; 
Gasoline is prohibited under any circumstances. 
320.6.1 Fuel quantities and storage. All fuels shall be stored in their original container(s) with the caps in place when not in use. The maximum quantity of fuel on the site shall be one (1) U.S. gallon per performer. 
320.7 Wicks. Wick material shall consist of cotton wrapped in Kevlar to prevent the breakdown of the cotton as it burns. Synthetic wick material shall be avoided. 
320.8 Clothing. It is recommended that the clothing worn by the performers be made of fire resistive materials such as natural fibers or Nomex™/PBI. 
320.9 Smoking. Smoking is prohibited by within fifty (50) feet of the performance area and fuel storage. No smoking signs shall be posted accordingly. 
507.3 Fire flow. Delete in its entirety. 
507.5.1 Fire hydrant systems; where required. Delete in its entirety. 
604.6 Emergency lighting equipment. Delete in its entirety. 
607.3.5 Fire suppression systems. Existing fire suppression systems not meeting the UL 300 criteria shall be upgraded to UL 300 compliant systems within three (3) years of the adoption of this code. 
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout stories containing Group A-2 occupancies and throughout all stories from the A-2 occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge serving that occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet (465m2); 
2.  The fire area has an occupancy load of two hundred (200) or more; or 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
903.2.8.3 Fraternity and sorority houses. Each fraternity and sorority house and fraternity and sorority annex with sixteen (16) or more occupants existing on March 16, 2009 shall install at a minimum an automatic fire sprinkler system, designed and installed under the current edition of the National Fire Protection Association Standard 13R, in accordance with Section 903.3 of the 2006 International Fire Code, no later than June 1, 2016. 
New fraternity and sorority houses and fraternity and sorority annexes and such houses and annexes that undergo renovation of their space, shall install at a minimum an NFPA 13R fire sprinkler system. 
Existing fraternity and sorority houses and fraternity and sorority annexes that cannot be compliant by June 1, 2016 must submit to the fire chief, or the chief's designee, a plan to achieve compliance and receive approval of such plan prior to June 1, 2016. The fire chief, or the chief's designee, will review the plan, establish a benchmark, identify additional interim safety measures required and, if approved, establish a new deadline not to exceed three (3) years, or no later than June 1, 2019. Additional interim safety measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Occupancy restrictions, 
b.  Special event restrictions, 
c.  Alarm system enhancements, 
d.  Monthly fire alarm battery checks and certification by governing board president and secretary, or equivalent (adult governing board or advisor, not student leadership), 
e.  Fire watch, and/or 
f.  Temporary sprinkler system. 
Written quarterly reports to the fire chief, or the chief's designee, will be required to be submitted by any fraternity or sorority who receives an extension. 
If the fraternity or sorority disagrees with the determination of the fire chief, a written request for review and a variance from the requirements established by the fire chief may be requested by the fraternity or sorority from the city council. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall not be stayed pending review of the request by the city council. 
For purposes of this section, "fraternity and sorority house" means any building used as a dwelling and occupied by and maintained exclusively or primarily for college, university or professional school students who are affiliated with a social, honorary or professional organization recognized currently or in the past by a college, university or professional school. 
904.1.1 Certification of service personnel for fire-extinguishing equipment. Certification of service personnel shall include those who install and service water based fire protection systems. At least one person employed by the company providing the service shall possess either UL or NICET Level 1 certification for the system they are working on. 
912.4.1 Locking fire department connection caps. Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: Fire department connections (FDC) shall be a four (4) inch Storz™ connection and shall utilize a Knox™ locking FDC cap. 
1013.2 Floor level exit signs in groups A1, A2 over 5,000 square feet or greater than 200 occupants, and R-1. Illuminated exit signs in A1, A2 and R-1 use groups shall be placed above exit doors and to the side of exit doors eighteen (18) inches from the floor. The floor level exit signs shall be protected by a guard to prevent physical damage. This amendment shall not be retroactive in nature, and shall not apply to structures prior to January 1, 2007. 
1013.6.2 Exit sign illumination. Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: Internally illuminated exit signs shall not use incandescent light bulbs relying upon a filament for the source of illumination. This amendment shall be applicable under the following conditions: 
In all new and remodeled construction where illuminated exit signs are required or provided; and when exit signs are replaced or deemed inoperable by the jurisdiction having authority; and where an exit sign is installed in new locations in existing buildings, upon order of the City Fire Marshall. 
This amendment shall not be retroactive in nature, and shall not apply to structures constructed prior to January 1, 2003. 
1103.4.2 Three to five stories. Add exception 5. as follows: 
5.  Where any structure has previously received a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy, has been maintained accordingly and complies with the following: 
a.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in all shafts and corridors, if such exist. 
b.  Shaft and corridor smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection. 
c.  All smoke detectors in shafts and corridors, if such exist, shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all alarms in the shafts and corridors. 
d.  Existing windows in a sleeping room shall not be eliminated. 
1103.5.1 Group A-2. Delete in its entirety. 
1104.16.5 Materials and strength. Add the following exception: 
Exception: If the existing fire escape stairway does not serve an assembly occupancy and is less than or equal to 30 inches wide than it shall support a live load of 40 pounds per square foot and a concentrated load of 300 pounds as for catwalks in IBC Table 1607.1. 
1104.20 Common path of egress travel. Add the following exception: 
Exception: R-2 occupancies that meet the following: 
Where any structure has previously received a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy, has been maintained accordingly and complies with the following: 
a.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in all shafts and corridors, if such exist. 
b.  Shaft and corridor smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection. 
c.  All smoke detectors in shafts and corridors, if such exist, shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all alarms in the shafts and corridors. 
d.  Existing windows in a sleeping room shall not be eliminated. 
3103.2 Approval required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet (37 m2) shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the community development department and inspection from the fire code official. 
Exceptions to permit and inspection: 
1.  Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes. 
Exceptions to inspections (permit required): 
1.  Tents which comply with all of the following: 
1.1.  Individual tents having a maximum size of one thousand (1,000) square feet (92.9 m2) and erected for less than three (3) days. 
1.2.  The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of twelve (12) feet (3,658 mm), not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet (92.9 m2) total and erected for less than three (3) days. 
3103.8.2 Location. Delete in its entirety. 
3103.8.6 Fire break. An unobstructed fire break passageway or fire road not less than twelve (12) feet (3658 mm) wide and free from guy ropes or other obstructions shall be maintained on all sides of all tents and membrane structures where separation is required per Section 3103.8.2 unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
3103.12.7 Means of egress illumination. Add the following exception: 
Exception: Tents used during daylight hours and open on all sides are not required to provide means of egress illumination unless required by the fire code official. 
SECTION 3105 - TEMPORARY STAGE CANOPIES 
3105.1 General. A temporary stage canopy shall comply with Section 3104, Sections 3105.2 through 3105.9 and ANSI E1.21. 
3105.2 Approval. Temporary stage canopies in excess of 400 square feet (37 m 2 ) shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining approval and a permit from the fire code official and the building official. 
3105.4 Use period. Temporary stage canopies erected in accordance with ANSI E1.21 shall not be erected for a period of not more than six consecutive weeks. 
3105.5 Required documents. Subsection 2. is amended to read as follows: 
2.  Designation of responsible party: The owner of the temporary special event structure stage canopy shall designate in writing a person to have responsibility for the temporary special event structure stage canopy on the site. The designated person shall have sufficient knowledge of the construction documents, manufacturer's recommendations and operations plan to make judgements regarding the structure's safety and to coordinate with the fire code official. 
3105.6.1 Independent inspector. The owner of a temporary stage canopy shall employ a qualified, independent approved agency or individual to inspect the installation of the temporary stage canopy. 
3105.6.2 Inspection report. The inspecting agency or individual shall furnish an inspection report to the fire code official. The inspection report shall indicate that the temporary stage canopy was inspected and was or was not installed in accordance with the approved construction documents. Discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the installer for correction. Where any discrepancy is not corrected, it shall be brought to the attention of the fire code official and the designated responsible party. 
3105.7 Means of egress. The means of egress for temporary stage canopies shall comply with chapter 10. 
3105.8 Location. Temporary stage canopies shall be located a distance from property lines and buildings to accommodate distances indicated in the construction drawings for guide wires, cross bracing, ground anchors or ballast. Location shall not interfere with egress from a building or encroach on fire apparatus roads. 
5601.3 Prohibited explosives. Add the following prohibited explosive: 
11.  Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale and use of fireworks are prohibited, except where allowed under section 16-234 of the Code of Ordinances. 
B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings having a fire area which does not exceed three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet (344m2) shall be eight hundred (800) gallons per minute (3785L/min) for a minimum of four (4) hours. 
B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwelling units shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute for a minimum of four (4) hours. The code official may use table B105.1 to determine fire flows under special circumstances. 
C103.2 Average spacing. Fire hydrants shall have a maximum spacing of 500 feet in all R-1 (Single family) and R-2 (Duplex) developments and 300 feet in all other zoning districts. Fire hydrant spacing for buildings that are required by the 2018 edition of the International Fire Code to have a fire flow greater than or equal to 6,000 gallons per minute shall be regulated by Table C102.1. 
C103.4 Additional fire hydrant spacing requirement. A fire hydrant capable of flowing a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute for a minimum of four (4) hours shall be placed within one hundred (100) feet of any fire department connection (FDC). This hydrant shall be placed so that it does not impede access to the building or area by responding fire department equipment. 
( Ord. No. 22833, § 1, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 24006 , § 1, 9-3-19)  
Secs. 9-23—9-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of fire department officials, in regard to traffic, § 14-26; obedience to fire department officials, traffic directions, § 14-27; following fire apparatus prohibited, § 14-173; crossing fire hoses restricted, § 14-174; pension provisions for firefighters, § 18-16 et seq.; police department, § 21-16 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-36. - Department established; director designated. 
There is established a fire department for the city. The director of the fire department shall be the fire chief. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1540)  
Sec. 9-37. - Duties of fire chief, generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief to provide for the enforcement of all laws and of all ordinances of the city relating to fire limits and fire precautions and to public safety in case of fire or fire scare, not otherwise provided for by law. He shall have full power, control and command over all persons at fires, except police, and shall station the apparatus, and see to it that all persons belonging to the fire department perform the duties required of them by law and ordinance. It shall be the duty of the fire chief to direct at all fires all such measures as he shall deem advisable for the extinguishment and control of such fire. 
(b)  The fire chief, or his duly authorized representatives as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of his duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1550)  
Sec. 9-38. - Duty of fire chief to report violations. 
It shall be the duty of the fire chief and his subordinates to report to the city prosecutor all persons who shall violate any provision of this chapter, and all information and facts coming to his knowledge having reference thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1621)  
Sec. 9-39. - Authority of fire chief to issue summons. 
The fire chief or his duly authorized representatives shall have the authority and power to issue a summons for violations of this chapter that are committed in their presence; provided, however, that this section shall not be deemed to authorize the arrest of any person except as expressly provided within this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1622)  
Sec. 9-40. - Fire guard. 
At all fires the chief of police and members of the police department shall act as a fire guard. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1560)  
Sec. 9-41. - Injuring fire apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, injure, mar, deface or in any manner interfere with any fire alarm, signal box, fire hydrant or any other apparatus or appliance of the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1590)  
Sec. 9-42. - Unlawful boarding, tampering with emergency equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of fire department emergency equipment, to cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1585)  
Sec. 9-43. - Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  Removal by fire official. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the city treasury on certificate of the fire chief, and with the approval of the city manager the city counselor shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1586)  
Sec. 9-44. - Notifying fire department of street obstructions. 
Any person obstructing the streets by moving houses, digging ditches or otherwise, shall be required to notify the fire department by phone or otherwise of the location of same not later than the sundown of each day that such street is kept blocked. All persons granted permits in any way to obstruct a street shall be notified of the requirements of this section by the person issuing the permit. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1620)  
Chapter 10 - FRANCHISE ENTITY REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19672, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 17, 2007, repealed the former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-8, 10-18, 10-19, 10-26—10-29, 10-36—10-49, 10-59—10-64, 10-70—10-76, 10-86—10-91, 10-99—10-105, 10-126—10-128, 10-139, 10-146—10-153, 10-164—10-189, 10-195, 10-196, 10-232, 10-233, 10-244—10-246, 10-253, 10-259—10-263, 10-274—10-276, 10-292, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to franchise regulations and derived from Ord. No. 18917, § 2, 3-6-06. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - REGULATION OF VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in RSMo 67.2677 shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 19672, § 2, 9-17-07)  
Sec. 10-2. - Video service provider fee. 
(a)  As partial compensation for use of public rights-of-way, each video service provider providing video service in the city shall pay city a video service provider fee equal to three (3) per cent of its gross revenue from providing video service in the geographic area of the city. This subsection shall remain in effect until December 21, 2007. 
(b)  As partial compensation for use of public rights-of-way, each video service provider providing video service in the city shall pay city a video service provider fee equal to five (5) per cent of its gross revenues from providing video service in the geographic area of the city. This subsection shall be in effect on and after December 21, 2007. 
(c)  Video service provider fee payments shall be made as required by RSMo 67.2689. Late payments shall accrue interest due to the city compounded monthly at one and one-half (1½) per cent. 
(Ord. No. 19672, § 2, 9-17-07)  
Sec. 10-3. - Customer service standards. 
All video service providers providing service in the city shall adopt and comply with the minimum customer service requirements set forth in RSMo 67.2692. Receipt of a copy of this ordinance by the video service provider shall be deemed notice of the city invoking such customer service requirements. 
(Ord. No. 19672, § 2, 9-17-07)  
Sec. 10-4. - Public, educational and governmental channels. 
Each video service provider shall designate three (3) channels for noncommercial public, educational and governmental use consistent with RSMo 67.2703. 
(Ord. No. 19672, § 2, 9-17-07)  
Sec. 10-5. - Placement, screening and relocation of facilities. 
(a)  As used in this section, "facilities" means cabinets or other structures that are used in providing video services and that are more than fifty-four (54) inches in height or nine (9) square feet in area, exclusive of pads or bases. "Facilities" does not include utility poles. 
(b)  Facilities shall not be placed in any location that would create a safety hazard by blocking the line of sight of any person operating a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Facilities shall not be located where they will interfere with any public structures or with the use of public property. 
(d)  Video service providers, where feasible, shall screen all their facilities from view on all sides using plants, landscaping materials, ornamental fences, walls, or any combination of these screening methods. Screening shall be designed to achieve at least eighty (80) percent opacity at the time of installation or, where plants are used, within two (2) years of planting. Screening must be equally effective in winter and in summer. Video service providers shall be responsible for properly installing and maintaining the screening. 
(e)  Video service providers shall give notice to all property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site of a facility, at least forty-eight (48) hours before any installation, replacement or expansion of the facility. The notice shall include a detailed description of the work to be done, the exact location of the work and the time and duration when the work shall be done. 
(f)  Video service providers shall remove or relocate facilities at their expense when removal or relocation is necessary to accommodate construction, improvement or maintenance of streets or other public works, excluding minor beautification projects. 
(g)  To the extent consistent with federal and state law, video service providers shall be subject to all other applicable city ordinances and regulations pertaining to the installation of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19672, § 2, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 19757, § 1, 12-3-07)  
Secs. 10-6—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21467, § 2, adopted October 1, 2012, repealed §§ 10-31—10-37, which pertained to public communications resource advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 19853, § 1, 3-17-08; Ord. No. 20618, § 1, 5-3-10. 
 
Secs. 10-31—10-37. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; animals and fowl, Ch. 5; plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; minimum properties standard code, § 6-71 et seq.; civil defense, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; offenses against public safety, § 16-231 et seq.; noise regulations, § 16-256 et seq.; sanitation regulations for parks, § 17-66 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - When sewer connections required. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of any house or other building used or occupied by human beings, and abutting on a street having city water, and within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet, measured from the nearest property line, of a city sewer, to install upon such premises any standard type of flush water closet approved by the health officer, and to provide sewer and water laterals by means of which sufficient water is provided for flushing the sewer connection and permitting free passage of whatever enters such connection, and to connect such closet to the city sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 10.060; Ord. No. 13201 § 1, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 11-2. - Sanitary closet required where there is no sewer. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of any house or other building used or occupied by human beings and abutting on a street in which there is no city water, or which is not within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a city sewer, to provide on such premises a sanitary closet of any standard type approved by the health officer. The contractor, builder or other person having the management and control of construction work shall prevent the commission of any nuisance by the workers on the premises connected therewith, and if a temporary privy is located on the premises, it shall be properly screened and maintained in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1964, § 10.070)  
Sec. 11-3. - Cleanliness of privies or water closets. 
It is hereby made the duty of each owner or lessee to keep clean any privy or closet on premises owned, leased or controlled by him and to clean such closet within such time as shall be fixed by the health officer or his subordinates, and if the same shall not be cleaned within such time limit, the health officer or his subordinates shall cause the same to be cleaned and the expense incurred in cleaning such closet shall be paid by the owner, or lessee owning, leasing or controlling the property, and all disputes between lessees or owners shall be adjusted among themselves, but each, all or any of them shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by reason of such cleaning, which may be collected by suit or otherwise. 
(Code 1964, § 10.080)  
Secs. 11-4—11-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of health department in regard to swimming pools, § 11-282. 
 
DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-16. - Clinical treatment of indigent persons; registration. 
As may be required in the public interest and for the protection of the health of the community, the director of health services may maintain a clinic for the observation, care and medical treatment of indigent persons who are residents of the city. The director shall maintain a registration of all such persons receiving observation, care and treatment at such clinic. 
(Code 1964, § 10.050)  
Sec. 11-17. - Charges for health services. 
Patrons of the health department shall pay fees based on the current Medicaid invoice amount, with the exception of the services listed below, for personal health services. No one will be denied health services for inability to pay. 
Dental co-pay ..... $10.00 
Prescription eye glass co-pay ..... $10.00 
(Ord. No. 16592, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17019, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 18217, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18686, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19208, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20044, § 2, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20410, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21426, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 21800, § 1, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Secs. 11-18—11-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR OF HEALTH SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-31. - Appointment; qualifications. 
There shall be a director of health services appointed by the city manager. Such person shall be qualified by training and experience in public health work to the satisfaction of the city manager. Whenever the title "director" appears in this chapter, it shall mean and refer to the director of health services. 
(Code 1964, § 10.010)  
Sec. 11-32. - Powers and duties, generally. 
The director shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Exercise general supervision over the health and cleanliness of the city, and take all necessary measures for the preservation and promotion thereof. 
(2)  Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations relative to the preservation and improvement of the public health, including those providing for the prevention of disease, the suppression of unsanitary conditions, and the inspection and supervision of the production, processing, transportation, storage and sale of foodstuffs. 
(3)  Direct and supervise the inspection of all articles or commodities offered for sale within the city for human consumption, including the storage thereof, and including the inspection of places where the same are produced, handled, processed, stored or offered for sale or consumption. 
(4)  Promote cooperation and coordination between the several providers of health care within the city to ensure delivery of the highest possible level and quality of service to all residents. 
(5)  With consent of the city manager, appoint, supervise and direct the assistants, inspectors and all other employees of the city engaged in health and inspection work referred to in this chapter. 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, by ordinance or by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 10.020)  
Secs. 11-33—11-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF HEALTH[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— City administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 11-46. - Created; composition; compensation; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be an eleven (11) member board of health which shall be composed of at least one physician, one veterinarian, one nurse, one dentist, and one health care worker. The remaining members shall have an interest in public health. Seven (7) members shall be appointed by the city council. Four (4) members shall be appointed by the county commission. All members shall serve without compensation for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the board to promptly notify the city council or the county commission of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 10.030(A), (C); Ord. No. 9991, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 19742, § 1, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 11-47. - Officers; quorum. 
(a)  The board shall select its own chair, and the director of health services shall serve as secretary. 
(b)  A quorum for the transaction of business at meetings of the board shall be a majority of the duly appointed and acting members of such board. 
(Code 1964, § 10.030(A), (B); Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 11-48. - Duties, generally. 
The board of health shall act as an advisory board to the city manager, health officer and the city council on matters pertaining to public health and animal control and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 10.040; Ord. No. 11203, § 2, 9-15-86)  
Secs. 11-49—11-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRESCRIPTION DRUG MONITORING PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Establishment of a prescription drug monitoring program; authority to establish regulations. 
(a)  The director shall establish and maintain a prescription drug monitoring program for monitoring the prescribing and dispensing of controlled substances by professionals licensed to prescribe or dispense such controlled substances. The purpose of a prescription drug monitoring program is to assist healthcare providers improve treatment and health outcomes of individuals in the community, and assist in the identification and prevention of prescription drug misuse and abuse. 
(b)  The director is authorized to establish regulations for the prescription drug monitoring program. A regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be available in the director's office and on the City of Columbia, Missouri website. The program established and maintained by the director shall operate so as to be consistent with federal and state laws concerning the regulation of narcotics and with privacy of lawful users of narcotics. 
(Ord. No. 23115 , § 1, 3-6-17)  
Sec. 11-62. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V as set out in RSMo Ch. 195 or as set out in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 812. 
Dispenser means a person who delivers a Schedule II, III, or IV Controlled Substance to a patient. However, the term shall not include: 
(1)  A hospital as defined in RSMo § 197.020 that distributes such substances for the purpose of inpatient care or dispenses prescriptions for controlled substances at the time of discharge from such facility; or 
(2)  A practitioner or other authorized person who administers such a substance; or 
(3)  A wholesale distributor of a Schedule II, III or IV Controlled Substance; or 
(4)  A hospice as defined in RSMo § 197.250(5), that distributes such substances for the purpose of physical or psychological care for dying persons. 
Patient means a person who is the ultimate user of a drug for whom a prescription is issued or for whom a drug is dispensed, not including a hospice patient enrolled in a Medicare-certified hospice program who has controlled substances dispensed to him or her by such hospice program. 
Schedule II, III, or IV Controlled Substance means a controlled substance listed in Schedules II, III, or IV as set out in RSMo Ch. 195, or as set out in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 812. 
(Ord. No. 23115 , § 1, 3-6-17)  
Sec. 11-63. - Responsibilities of dispensers. 
(a)  Within seven (7) business days of having dispensed a Schedule II, III, or IV Controlled Substance, the dispenser shall submit to the director by electronic means, and in a format acceptable to the director, information regarding such dispensing. The information submitted for each dispensing shall at minimum include: 
(1)  The pharmacy's Drug Enforcement (DEA) number; 
(2)  The date of dispensation; 
(3)  If dispensed via a prescription: 
(i)  The prescription number or other unique identifier; 
(ii)  Whether the prescription is new or a re-fill; 
(iii)  The prescriber's Drug Enforcement (DEA) or National Provider Identifier (NPI) number; 
(iv)  The National Drug Code (NDC) of the drug dispensed; 
(v)  The quantity and dosage of the drug dispensed; 
(vi)  An identifier for the patient to whom the drug was dispensed, including but not limited to any one of the following: a driver's license number; the patient's government-issued identification number; the patient's insurance cardholder identification number; or the patient's name, address and date of birth. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a dispenser to knowingly fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a dispenser to knowingly fail to comply with a prescription drug monitoring program regulation established by the director. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a dispenser to knowingly provide false information to the prescription drug monitoring program. 
(e)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to controlled substances to be administered to an animal which are dispensed pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 23115 , § 1, 3-6-17)  
Sec. 11-64. - Access to prescription drug monitoring program records. 
Access to patient records, prescriptions, and other protected health information shall be in compliance with federal and state law. It shall be unlawful to provide protected health information to any person not authorized by state or federal law to view, access or receive the protected health information. It shall be unlawful for a person to access, view, or disclose a patient's protected health information without lawful authority. 
(Ord. No. 23115 , § 1, 3-6-17)  
Secs. 11-65—11-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISEASES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-81. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 10.240)  
Secs. 11-82—11-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICABLE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of city to promulgate regulations for the prevention of contagious diseases, RSMo. § 77.530. 
 
Sec. 11-96. - Reports of cases required. 
Every physician shall report in writing to the director every patient he may have in the city suffering from tuberculosis, smallpox, diphtheria, typhoid fever, scarlet fever, infantile paralysis or any other communicable disease that may be declared by the director to be dangerous to the public health, together with the precise locality where such patient may be found, within twenty-four (24) hours after diagnosis is made; and the director shall keep a record of every case so reported to him. 
(Code 1964, § 10.180)  
Sec. 11-97. - Authority of director to require medical examination. 
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the director to establish the true character of any disease which is supposed to be communicable, medical examination of the person infected by such disease may be made by the director. Any person who shall interfere with or refuse to permit such examination shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10.190)  
Sec. 11-98. - Powers and duties of director in event of epidemic. 
Whenever the director shall declare that any malignant, infectious or contagious disease is or may become epidemic in the city, or any part thereof, he shall immediately, or as soon thereafter as possible, give notice to that effect to the citizens of the city and the country surrounding the same, and shall also give notice of the rules and regulations adopted by him for the enforcement of quarantine within the city or portion thereof. He shall take such steps and adopt such measures as he may deem necessary to prevent the introduction and spreading of such disease, and to this end he shall have power to quarantine the city against persons coming into or leaving the city during the continuation of such epidemic. Whenever he shall deem it necessary, he shall have the power to forbid and prevent the assembling of congregations of persons within the city and to order and enforce the closing of places of business and amusements. 
(Code 1964, § 10.210)  
Sec. 11-99. - Isolation of patient; disinfection or destruction of belongings. 
In all cases where the health officer shall deem it necessary, persons with communicable diseases shall be isolated under such regulations and rules as the health officer shall prescribe, and belongings infected by germs of dangerous contagious diseases shall be disinfected as the health officer may direct, or destroyed when public health demands. 
(Code 1964, § 10.200)  
Sec. 11-100. - Leaving abode after notice of infection. 
No person shall leave his abode and be found going about the city or within five (5) miles of the city after he has been advised that he has a contagious or infectious disease of any character or kind. 
(Code 1964, § 10.220)  
Sec. 11-101. - Infected children not to attend school. 
No parent or guardian or any person having the legal custody, charge or control of any child shall send such child to any of the schools within the city, or within five (5) miles of the limits of the city, or permit him to enter or go to such schools after the parent, guardian or person having legal charge or control of such child has been advised that such child is affected with, or has been exposed to any such contagious or infectious disease. 
(Code 1964, § 10.230)  
Secs. 11-102—11-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED 
 
Sec. 11-111. - Declared dangerous to public health. 
The several sexually transmitted diseases, designated and listed by the director and on file at the health department, are hereby recognized and declared to be contagious, infectious, communicable and dangerous to the public health. 
(Code 1964, § 10.250)  
Sec. 11-112. - Reports of physicians and officers of institutions. 
It shall be the duty of every licensed physician and of every superintendent or manager of a hospital, dispensary or other institution devoted to the care of the sick in the city, to notify the director, on a card furnished by the director, of any case of sexually transmitted disease, in the infectious stage, under their supervision or care. Such card shall state the age, sex, color, social condition, number of children and occupation of such diseased person, the character and previous duration of such disease and the probable source of infection. Such report cards shall be mailed within three (3) days after the diagnosis has been made of such diseased person; provided, that except as hereinafter required, the name and address of such diseased person need not be reported to the director, but instead the person may be identified by a file number. Upon the receipt of a report card by the director where the name and address is not given, the card shall be stamped with the file number of the division and an acknowledgment card mailed to the physician bearing this file number, which shall be preserved by the physician for his future reference. 
(Code 1964, § 10.260)  
Sec. 11-113. - Reports to be confidential. 
All information and reports concerning persons infected with venereal diseases shall be confidential and shall be inaccessible to the public, except insofar as publicity may attend the performance of the duty imposed upon the director by this article or the laws of the state. 
(Code 1964, § 10.300)  
Sec. 11-114. - Powers and duties of director. 
It is hereby made the duty of the director, and he is hereby directed and empowered as follows: 
(1)  In all suspected cases of sexually transmitted disease in the infectious stage, owing to the prevalence of such diseases among prostitutes, all prostitutes may be considered as suspected persons. In such cases the director shall use every available means of determining whether the person suspected of being infected is suffering from such disease in the infectious state. Whenever such disease is found to exist, the director shall, whenever possible, ascertain the source of such infection. In such investigations the director is hereby vested with full powers of inspection, examination, isolation and treatment of all persons, places and things as provided in this article. 
(2)  Inasmuch as prostitution is a prolific source of sexually transmitted infection, the director and all other subordinate officers shall use every proper means of suppressing the same, and all such officers are hereby prohibited from issuing certificates or other evidences of freedom from sexually transmitted disease. 
(3)  Cases of gonococcus infection shall be regarded by the director as infectious until at least two (2) successive bacteriological examinations, taken not less than twenty-four (24) hours apart, fail to show gonococci. 
(4)  The director may isolate persons infected with any of such sexually transmitted diseases in a place provided by the city whenever and as long as isolation is necessary to protect the public health. 
(Code 1964, § 10.320)  
Sec. 11-115. - Disobeying order of director. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect or refuse to obey any order of the director authorized by this article or to interfere with or obstruct such director, or his subordinates, in the performance of the duties herein required. 
(Code 1964, § 10.380)  
Sec. 11-116. - Examinations of certain suspects; quarantine. 
When any person is arrested for being a prostitute, a keeper, inmate or frequenter of a house of ill fame, prostitution or assignation, or for lewd or lascivious conduct, such person shall be subjected to a physical examination by the health officer for the purpose of determining if such person is infected with a venereal disease in the infectious stage. If such examination should reveal that such person is suffering from and afflicted with a venereal disease in the infectious stage, such person shall be quarantined and detained in a place provided by the city until such time as such person is no longer capable of conveying such disease to others; provided, however, that any person so quarantined and detained may, at his option, be cared for at his own expense by his own physician. 
(Code 1964, § 10.330)  
Sec. 11-117. - Parents responsible for compliance of minors. 
When any minor has acquired a sexually transmitted disease and such minor is living with his parents or legal guardian, such parents or legal guardian shall be legally responsible for the compliance of such minor with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10.310)  
Secs. 11-118—11-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FOOD CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 11-131. - Food code adopted by reference. 
The "City of Columbia, Missouri Food Code," adopted by the city council on June 1, 2014, is made a part of this Code as fully as if set forth in its entirety. Copies of the food code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the director and shall be available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Ord. No. 16761, § 1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 22040, § 1, 4-21-14 )  
Sec. 11-132. - Fees. 
(a)  Food establishments shall pay an annual inspection fee based on their annual gross receipts according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Annual Gross Receipts less than $250,000.00 ..... $220.00 
(2)  Annual Gross Receipts of $250,000.00—$750,000.00 ..... 305.00 
(3)  Annual Gross Receipts more than $750,000.00 ..... 570.00 
(b)  The annual inspection fee shall be paid to the business license administrator when the application for business license or business license renewal is submitted. 
(c)  For food establishments other than convenience stores, the annual gross receipts used in determining the amount of the annual inspection fee shall be the same as the annual gross receipts submitted by the food establishment as part of its business license application. The annual gross receipts used in determining the amount of the annual inspection fee for a convenience store shall be the same as the annual gross receipts submitted by the convenience store as part of its business license application less gross receipts from fuel sales. 
(d)  Only one (1) annual inspection fee shall be charged for each food establishment, even if more than one operating permit is issued. 
(e)  Food establishments shall pay an administrative service fee of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per inspection for the second and subsequent reinspections required to correct violations noted during the inspection process. The administrative service fee shall be paid to the business license administrator when the next application for a business license renewal is submitted. 
(f)  Persons conducting a temporary food event (an event lasting less than fifteen (15) days) shall pay an inspection fee as follows: 
One—Three-day event ..... $40.00 
Four—Fourteen-day event ..... 70.00 
The temporary food event inspection fee shall be paid to the business license administrator prior to receipt of the operating permit. 
(g)  There shall be a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each new or renewed food manager's certificate and a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each duplicate food manager's certificate. 
(h)  There shall be a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each new or renewed food handler's certificate and a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each duplicate food handler's certificate. 
(i)  There shall be a food establishment plan review fee of: 
(1)  Facilities classified as low risk ..... $140.00 
(2)  Facilities classified as medium risk ..... 215.00 
(3)  Facilities classified as high risk ..... 430.00 
(Ord. No. 16761, § 1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 17019, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 19208, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20044, § 2, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20410, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21071, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21426, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 23298 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 24008 , § 2, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 11-133. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of the City of Columbia Food Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16761, § 1, 1-16-01)  
Sec. 11-134. - On-site storage and proper disposal of fats, oils and greases required. 
(a)  Food establishments, as defined in the City of Columbia, Missouri, Food Code, shall store fats, oils and greases on-site and shall properly and lawfully dispose of solid, semi-solid and liquid fats, oils and greases. Solid and semi-solid fats, oils and greases shall be placed into plastic refuse bags which are securely closed prior to disposal into a trash compactor or dumpster. It shall be unlawful to place liquid fats, oils and greases into a trash compactor, dumpster or recycling containers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person or food establishment to store fats, oils, greases and collection devices or containers for fats, oils and greases on any public street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, or in any other place, without the consent of the city or the underlying property owner. In addition to any other penalties prescribed, any such collection device or container found to be on public property or in the public right-of-way may be removed at the enforcement officer's discretion and all costs for removal and storage of such collection device or container shall be levied against the responsible party. 
(c)  Food establishments shall maintain detailed records of the lawful disposal of fats, oils and greases. Records required to be kept by this section shall be provided to the enforcement official during official's periodic inspections and upon request during the normal business hours of the food establishment. Records shall remain on file for at least one (1) year. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, fats, oils and greases are defined as animal fat, cooking oil, and other food-related fat, oil or grease substance used in, generated by, or for use in food preparation. 
(e)  A violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor as designated by this code and punishable under section 16-31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 23683 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Secs. 11-135—11-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Refuse collection generally, § 22-156 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-176. - Definitions. 
Except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Business premises or premises shall mean the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
Junk shall mean old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and any accumulation of wrecked, abandoned or dismantled motor vehicles no longer used as such, however obtained or accumulated, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts. "Junk" shall not include any objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business, except for wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles, or any materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes, or material collected to be utilized by charitable or eleemosynary institutions. 
Junk dealer shall mean a person who operates a junkyard, as herein defined, within the city, and shall not include charitable organizations or eleemosynary institutions. 
Junkyard shall mean a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk, as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale such junk, in whole units or by parts for a business or commercial purpose; except, that places used for the storage, use or distribution of materials gathered or utilized by charitable or eleemosynary institutions shall not be deemed "junkyards" within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10500; Ord. No. 10779, § 1, 11-4-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-177. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the director to enforce all provisions of this article, and for this purpose he or his representative or any police officer is empowered to enter upon any premises on which any business subject to the provisions of this article is located or about to be located, and inspect the same at any reasonable time. The director is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking any license provided for in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10520)  
Sec. 11-178. - General operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The license issued pursuant to this article shall be plainly displayed on the business premises. 
(2)  The junkyard, together with all things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  No property, space or area not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(4)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(5)  Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be kept at a height of not more than twelve (12) inches. 
(6)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk, as defined herein, and is in use in the licensed business. 
(7)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(8)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten (10) feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(9)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(10)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(11)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the fire prevention code and the building code and the Missouri Air Conservation Commission; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the city ordinances and the laws and regulations of the state. 
(12)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(13)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of ten (10) feet, measured from the ground level. Entrances and exits shall not be wider nor more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business; provided, however, that the board of adjustment may modify this requirement. 
(14)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by the director or his representative, or any police officer. 
(15)  No junk dealer licensed hereunder or his agent or employee shall purchase or receive any junk for use in the licensed business from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of a parent or guardian of such person. Such writing shall be held available for inspection by the director or his representative for a period of at least one year. 
(16)  Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by the director or his representative for a period of at least one year. 
(17)  No junk shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such a manner as to become injurious or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10580)  
Sec. 11-179. - Junkyard inspections. 
The director, or the director's duly authorized representative, shall inspect all junkyards licensed under this article at least once a year to determine whether such yards are being operated in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of law. 
Junkyards with annual gross sales of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less shall pay an annual inspection fee of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00). Junkyards with annual gross sales greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall pay an annual inspection fee of one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00). Inspection fees shall be paid to the business license administrator at the time of business license application or renewal. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10590; Ord. No. 16592, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 24008 , § 2, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 11-180. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of sections 11-176 through 11-179 and division 2 of this article in addition to the revocation or suspension of the license as provided in section 11-202 hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be imprisoned in jail for a period of time not exceeding three (3) months, or may be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished as such. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10610)  
Sec. 11-181. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of penalties prescribed in this article shall not preclude the city from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction of a junkyard, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises as a junkyard, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10620)  
Secs. 11-182—11-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 11-196. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person hereafter to construct, erect, enlarge, alter, repair, move, relocate, improve, remove, convert, equip, use, operate, or maintain any junkyard or to act as a junk dealer in the city, whether personally, by agents or employees, singly, or along with some other business or enterprise, without first having obtained a license therefor from the business license administrator, upon approval of the director. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10510)  
Sec. 11-197. - Application. 
An applicant for license under this article shall file with the director a written application signed by himself, if an individual, by all partners, if a partnership, or by the president or chief officer of a corporation or other organization, upon forms provided by the business license administrator, together with a fee as hereinafter prescribed. The application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and shall include the following information or material: 
(1)  Name, residence address and telephone number of each individual owner, partner, or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer and director. 
(2)  Trade names and addresses of the business on behalf of which application is made and its telephone number if assigned. 
(3)  Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is proposed to be carried on, plus a detailed drawing of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings and uses. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10530)  
Sec. 11-198. - Issuance; contents; record of applications. 
(a)  The director shall approve the application only if he finds that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(b)  The license as issued shall bear the following language on its face: 
"IMPORTANT—This license applies only to the premises indicated herein and authorizes the licensee to operate a junkyard in a lawful place and manner only; it is not a substitute for any certificate of occupancy, building permit, or other certificate or permit that might be required by law of the licensee, and it does not relieve the licensee of the responsibility to have all such required permits or certificates at all times and comply with all laws affecting the above described business." 
(c)  The business license administrator shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed and all licenses issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10540)  
Sec. 11-199. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee to be paid for a junk dealer's license or renewal license issued hereunder shall be based upon gross sales, as provided by section 13-27. 
(b)  All fees are due and payable upon, and computed as of the first day of business. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10560)  
Sec. 11-200. - Term; renewal. 
(a)  Any license or renewal license issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its issuance and shall expire the next June thirtieth. 
(b)  An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the director a written application upon forms provided by the business license administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10550)  
Sec. 11-201. - Non-transferability. 
No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, and no junk dealer's license shall be used at any location other than the one described in the application upon which it was issued. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10570)  
Sec. 11-202. - Revocation and suspension. 
When the director determines that the public interest so requires, he shall revoke or suspend the license of any junk dealer when he finds, after due investigation and hearing, if requested by the licensee, that: 
(1)  The junk dealer or any agent or officer of such dealer who takes part in the operation of the licensed business, is not of good character or reputation or is not capable of operating the licensed business or carrying on the licensed activity in a manner consistent with public health and safety; 
(2)  The junk dealer has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or any provision of law applicable to the premises, equipment or operation of the license business; 
(3)  The licensee has obtained his license through any fraud or misstatement; 
(4)  The licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, or is a nuisance, or is being operated or carried on in any unlawful manner; or 
(5)  The licensed business or activity is no longer being operated or carried on. 
(Code 1964, § 10.10600)  
Secs. 11-203—11-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NUISANCES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16982, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2001, repealed Art. VII of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. VII, §§ 11-221—11-239, 11-251—11-256, 11-258—11-260, pertained to nuisances and derived from the 1964 Code, §§ 10.4070, 10-4080, 10.4090, 10.5000, 10.5010, 10.5020, 10.5030, 10.5040, 10.5050, 10.5060, 10.5070, 10.5080, 10.5090, 10.5095, 10.6000, 10.6010, 10.6020, 10.6030, 10.6040, 10.6045, 10.6050, 10.6060, 10.6070, 10.6080, 10.7000, 10.7010, 10.7020, 10.7030, 10.7040; Ord. No. 10650, § 1, adopted July 15, 1985; and Ord. No. 11146, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 1986. Section 2 of Ord. No. 16982 added new provisions as Art. VII of this chapter to read as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-221. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this article: 
Debris includes, but is not limited to, weed cuttings, cut and fallen trees and shrubs, overgrown vegetation, rubbish and trash, lumber and firewood not piled neatly, parts of derelict cars or trucks, broken furniture, flammable material which may endanger public safety or material which is unhealthy or unsafe and declared to be a public nuisance. 
Enforcement official means any person designated by the director to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Hearing officer means the director or a person designated by the director to conduct hearings under this article. 
Private property means any property within the corporate limits of the city that is not owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-222. - Liability for nuisance. 
It is the duty of every owner of property within the city, as well as the owner's agent in charge of the property and every tenant and occupant of the property, to maintain the property free of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-223. - Unimproved public right-of-way. 
For purposes of this article, every owner of the fee interest underlying any public street right-of-way shall be responsible for maintaining all unimproved portions of the right-of-way free of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-224. - Inspecting private property. 
Except for exigent circumstances, enforcement officials shall not enter and inspect private property without the consent of an owner or occupant of the property or pursuant to a warrant issued by the municipal judge. A warrant, however, shall not be required to enter and inspect any place where the public is invited or to use normal means of public access to the doors of residences. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-225. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies set forth in this article are cumulative and not exclusive. The city may pursue any available civil remedies in addition to prosecuting violations in municipal court and following the abatement procedures of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Secs. 11-226—11-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NUISANCES ENUMERATED AND PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 11-230. - Nuisances enumerated. 
The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Any condition, substance or thing on public or private property that is injurious or dangerous to public health or safety. 
(2)  Any condition or thing defined as a nuisance in this Code or any code adopted by this Code. 
(3)  Any condition prohibited by article XI of this chapter (aesthetic regulations). 
(4)  A tree or any tree limb that is dead and that is a hazard to life or property. 
(5)  A tree or any tree limb that causes a safety hazard by obstructing the line of sight of a motor vehicle driver, bicyclist, motor propelled scooter, or pedestrian at a street intersection. 
(6)  A tree or any tree limb that could interfere with the passage of motor vehicles, bicycles, motor propelled scooters, or pedestrians on any public right-of-way. 
(7)  A tree that harbors insects or disease that constitutes a potential threat to other trees. 
(8)  Noxious fumes. 
(9)  Accumulations or deposits of garbage other than garbage temporarily stored for lawful disposal provided that the garbage is temporarily stored in a leak proof container designed for the storage of garbage. 
(10)  Any accumulation of trash or debris. 
(11)  Sewage or other human organic waste discharged or exposed on any land in a manner that makes it a potential instrument or medium for the breeding of flies and mosquitoes, the production of odors, or the transmission of disease, or which contaminates surface water or ground water. 
(12)  Any barn or other place where animal or fowl waste collects that is not kept in a clean and wholesome condition so that no odors offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities are allowed to escape the premises. 
(13)  Deposits of leaves, grass, dirt or other material that interfere with the proper functioning of any sewer inlet or fixture. 
(14)  Any accumulation of unwholesome, impure or stagnant water. 
(15)  Any accumulation of material that does or could afford harborage for rats, mice or snakes. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 23713 , § 1, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 11-231. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-232. - Defense. 
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of permitting, maintaining or allowing the creation or maintenance of a nuisance in violation of this division, that the defendant did not have the legal right to control the location where the alleged violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-233. - Continuing violation. 
Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Secs. 11-234—11-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 11-240. - Administrative procedure. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this division, other than the provision for emergency abatement, shall apply only to violations of this article that do not have specific abatement procedures. 
(b)  Abatement notice. When an enforcement official determines that a nuisance exists in violation of this article, the enforcement official may initiate a nuisance abatement procedure by serving an abatement notice on the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is believed to exist. The abatement notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the location and nature of the alleged nuisance, 
(2)  A statement of the acts necessary to abate the alleged nuisance, 
(3)  An order establishing the time for beginning and completing abatement of the alleged nuisance and requiring that abatement activities continue without unreasonable delay, 
(4)  Information on the right and manner of requesting a hearing to contest the enforcement official's abatement notice, and 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as ordered and if no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city may abate the alleged nuisance and assess the costs against the property owner and the property. 
(c)  Service of abatement notice. 
(1)  The enforcement official shall serve the abatement notice on the property owner by first class mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(2)  If the enforcement official is unable to obtain service by either of the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing the abatement notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by posting the abatement notice on the property where the alleged nuisance exists. Notice shall be considered given on the date the notice is published or the notice is posted, whichever is later. 
(d)  Request for hearing. The owner of property on which the nuisance is alleged to exist may contest the abatement notice by requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made in writing and received by the director within seven (7) days of service of the abatement notice. The request for hearing must be either hand-delivered to the office of the director or sent to the director by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(e)  Notice of hearing. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner except in cases where the public health, safety or interest shall make a shorter time reasonable. Notice shall be hand-delivered to the property owner or mailed to the address provided by the property owner in the request for hearing. Notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(f)  Hearing and decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of chapter 536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists as charged in the abatement notice, the hearing officer may enter an order of abatement directing that the nuisance be abated under such conditions and within such time as the hearing officer deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made to the circuit court of Boone County in accordance with chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-241. - Abatement by city. 
If the order of abatement is not complied with or if no hearing is requested and the abatement notice is not complied with, the director may have the nuisance abated by city employees or by persons under contract with the city. No person shall enter private property to abate a nuisance unless the owner or occupant has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-242. - Collection of abatement costs. 
(a)  The director shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk. The cost shall include administrative costs as well as the actual cost of abating the nuisance. The city clerk shall cause a special taxbill against the property to be prepared in the amount of the abatement costs. The taxbill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. No clerical error or informality in the taxbill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the taxbill shall be a defense in an action to collect the taxbill. Taxbills issued under this section, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) per cent per annum. 
(b)  The cost of abatement shall also constitute a personal obligation of the owner of the property and of any other person who caused the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-243. - Emergency abatement. 
(a)  The director may abate any nuisance without following the abatement procedures of this article if the nuisance presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of any inhabitant of the city. 
(b)  The director may assess the cost, including administrative costs, of abating a nuisance under this section against the property on which the nuisance was located. Before assessing costs, the director shall serve a bill of costs on the property owner. The bill of costs shall describe the nuisance that was abated, state the cost of abatement and inform the owner of the right and manner of requesting a hearing. 
(c)  The bill of costs shall be served on the property owner by first class mail, or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. If service is not able to be obtained by either of the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing notice of the bill of costs in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  The property owner may contest the assessment of costs by requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made in writing and received by the director within seven (7) days of service of the bill of costs or publication of notice of the bill of costs. The request for hearing must be either hand-delivered to the office of the director or sent to the director by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(e)  Notice of hearing. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner. Notice shall be hand-delivered to the property owner or mailed to the address provided by the property owner in the request for hearing. Notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(f)  Hearing and decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of chapter 536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that the abatement was justified under subsection (a), the hearing officer shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk for collection pursuant to the provisions of section 11-242. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made to the circuit court of Boone County in accordance with chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-244. - Nuisances on more than one property. 
If any nuisance abated by the director extended over more than one (1) parcel of land, the cost of abating the nuisance shall be assessed against each parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated in proportion to the amount of work and expense for each such parcel. Except in the case of an emergency abatement, however, no parcel of land shall be assessed unless an owner of the parcel was served with an abatement notice. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-245. - Nuisances attributable to neighboring property. 
If any nuisance abated by the director was caused in whole or in part by activities on neighboring property, the cost of abating the nuisance shall be assessed against each parcel of such neighboring property in proportion to the amount of damage attributable to each such parcel. Except in the case of an emergency abatement, however, no property shall be assessed unless an owner of the property was served with an abatement notice. The owner of such property shall be entitled to the same hearing and appeal rights as the owner of property on which a nuisance is alleged to exist. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Secs. 11-246—11-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, adopted February 4, 2019, amended division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 4, §§ 11-251—11-256, pertained to weeds. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 11-251. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms mean: 
Agricultural crops. Food crops or forage for livestock (i.e., hay or alfalfa) cultivated on a lot greater than two and one-half (2½) acres in size located within the Columbia city limits. 
Control. A method to minimize the growth and spread of a plant to eventually achieve eradication. 
Community garden. A single piece of land gardened collectively by a group of people that utilize either individual or shared plots on private or public land while producing fruits, vegetables, and/or plants that are grown for aesthetic purposes including, but not limited to, native and ornamental plants. 
Invasive plant. A vegetation species that grows aggressively in the State of Missouri and is designated as invasive by the Missouri Department of Conservation. 
Landscape. An alteration of surrounding grounds using ornamental and/or native vegetation including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, wildflowers and grasses. 
Managed landscape. A planned and designed yard or landscape that controls, directs and maintains the growth of vegetation including, but not limited to, ornamental flower gardens and native landscapes. 
Native landscape. A managed landscape that is designed to mimic the natural habitat types of Missouri by exclusively using native plants including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, wildflowers and grasses which are indigenous to the geographic area of the garden. 
Native plant. A vegetation species that is indigenous to a particular region, ecosystem, or habitat in Missouri as listed by the Missouri Department of Conservation including, but not limited to, certain wildflowers, shrubs, grasses and trees that are indigenous to the topographic area. 
Noxious weed. A vegetation species that is listed as a Missouri State Noxious Weed by the Missouri Department of Agriculture. 
Nuisance plant. A vegetation species known to cause death or severe allergic reactions among certain individuals including, but not limited to, poison hemlock (Conium maculatum), poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) and ragweeds (Ambrosia spp.). 
Ornamental plants. Non-native vegetation planted for aesthetic reasons. 
Turf grass. A type of ground cover comprised mainly of grasses including, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue and ryegrass blends. Turf grass must be maintained at a height of no more than twelve (12) inches and managed by mowing and trimming to maintain a uniform height. 
Turf weed. Broadleaf weeds and other annual and perennial grasses that invade or disrupt the uniformity of turf grass lawns. 
Urban agricultural crops. Food crops cultivated on a lot less than two and one-half (2½) acres in size located within the Columbia city limits. 
Vegetable garden. Food crops cultivated on residential or commercial property and/or is located in a neighborhood setting. 
Vermin harborage. A combination of dense vegetation, human infrastructure and refuse in an area that causes or could cause an overpopulation of rats or mice. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 11-252. - Landscape management requirements. 
(a)  The following requirements related to landscape management on residential and/or commercial properties apply to lawns, yards, gardens, community gardens, urban agricultural crops, agricultural crops, vegetable gardens, native and ornamental landscapes and shall be met to prevent a property from becoming a public nuisance: 
(1)  All turf grass and turf weeds must be mowed and trimmed to prevent these plants from attaining a height of more than twelve (12) inches. 
(2)  All properties must be maintained to prevent or mitigate against vermin harborage. 
(3)  All properties must be maintained to control nuisance plants or noxious weeds. 
(4)  All properties must be maintained to prevent the growth of vegetation that causes a safety hazard by obstructing the line of sight of a motor vehicle driver, bicyclist or pedestrian at a street intersection. 
(5)  All properties must be maintained to prevent the growth of vegetation which could interfere with the passage of a motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian on any public right-of-way. 
(6)  All properties must be maintained to prevent or mitigate the growth of vegetation from exceeding property boundaries. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Managed native landscapes which may or may not have gone to seed or developed to maturity are permitted provided that the native landscape meets all requirements in section 11-252(a) of this Code, non-native invasive plants are controlled, and dead native vegetation is removed annually by March 21st. 
(2)  All urban agricultural crops, agricultural crops, community gardens and vegetable gardens are permitted provided that they meet all requirements in section 11-252(a) of this Code and that all dead crops are removed after harvest. 
(3)  Ornamental plant landscapes are permitted provided that they meet all requirements in section 11-252(a) of this Code and that all dead ornamental plants are removed annually by November 1st. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 11-253. - Landscape management public nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of any growth of vegetation in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 11-254. - Defense. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense that the defendant did not have the legal right to control the location where a violation of this division occurred. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense that the growth of vegetation was part of a federal, state or city agricultural or conservation program. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 11-255. - Continuing violation. 
Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 11-256. - Landscape management abatement. 
(a)  Initiation of abatement procedure. When the hearing officer has reason to believe that vegetation has been allowed to grow on any property in violation of this article, the hearing officer may initiate an abatement procedure by calling a hearing to determine whether a violation exists. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. The owner of the property on which the violation of this article is believed to exist shall be given notice of the hearing at least four (4) days before the hearing. The notice shall describe the location and nature of the alleged violation and state the time and place of the hearing. When there is more than one (1) owner of the property, notice need be given to only one (1) of the owners. 
(c)  Service of notice. The notice shall be served by at least one of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service on the owner or the owner's agent; 
(2)  Service by mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or the owner's agent; 
(3)  Posting the notice on the property where the violation is alleged to exist. 
Notice shall be considered given on the date the notice is personally served, mailed or posted. 
(d)  Hearing and order. The hearing officer shall conduct an informal hearing at the time and place designated in the notice of hearing. If the hearing officer determines, after reviewing all evidence presented at the hearing, that vegetation has been allowed to grow on the subject property in violation of this article, the hearing officer may declare there to be a nuisance and order the public nuisance to be abated within five (5) business days. 
(e)  Abatement by city. If vegetation is not cut down and removed as ordered by the hearing officer, the hearing officer may have the vegetation cut down and removed by city employees or by persons under contract with the city. No person shall enter private property containing an occupied single-family residential structure to abate a public nuisance unless an owner or occupant of the property has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. 
(f)  Collection of abatement costs. The director shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk. The cost shall include administrative costs as well as the actual cost of cutting and removing the vegetation. The city clerk shall cause a special taxbill against the property to be prepared in the amount of the abatement cost. The taxbill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. No clerical error or informality in the taxbill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the taxbill shall be a defense in an action to collect the taxbill. Taxbills issued under this section, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum. The cost of abatement shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 23769 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Secs. 11-257—11-261. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - UNLICENSED, DISMANTLED, INOPERABLE AND JUNK-FILLED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 11-262. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this division: 
Dismantled vehicle means any vehicle missing significant body parts such as the hood, fender, cab, door or trunk lid. 
Inoperable vehicle means any vehicle that does not possess an engine, has one (1) or more flat or missing tires, or is otherwise incapable of being operated for lack of a major component of the vehicle. 
Junk means worn, scrap, salvage or discarded materials of any nature including, but not limited to metal, glass, paper, cardboard, wood, clothing, furniture, carpeting, vehicle parts, appliances, construction material, trash and refuse. 
Junk-filled vehicle means any vehicle used to store junk provided that the junk occupies more than one-half of the enclosed area of the vehicle, or junk is piled on the hood, roof or trunk of the vehicle, or if the vehicle is a truck, any junk in the bed of the vehicle extends higher than three (3) feet above the bed of the vehicle. 
Unlicensed vehicle means any vehicle that is not validly registered under the motor vehicle laws of the State of Missouri or the laws of any other jurisdiction and any vehicle that does not display a valid current license plate in conformance with the laws of the jurisdiction in which it is registered. 
Vehicle means any device designed for the motorized transportation of persons or property over public ways. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-263. - Nuisance declared; exceptions. 
(a)  The presence upon any private property within the city of an unlicensed, dismantled, inoperable or junk-filled vehicle is declared to be a public safety hazard and a nuisance. 
(b)  The declaration of nuisance in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any property that is the site of a lawful motor vehicle sales or service business, a lawful towing or storage facility or a lawful junkyard; 
(2)  Any vehicle that is kept or stored in a garage or similar fully enclosed structure; 
(3)  Any vehicle that is enclosed within a locked fenced area and is not clearly visible from adjacent public or private property; 
(4)  Any unlicensed vehicle that is kept or stored in a carport provided that the unlicensed vehicle is not also a dismantled or inoperable or junk-filled vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-264. - Nuisance vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of any nuisance in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-265. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of permitting, maintaining or allowing the creation or maintenance of a nuisance in violation of this division that the defendant did not have the legal right to control the location where the alleged violation occurred. 
(b)  In any prosecution or abatement action alleging that an unlicensed vehicle was unlawfully present within the city, it is an affirmative defense that the unlicensed vehicle had been licensed within ninety (90) days prior to the alleged violation. 
(c)  In any prosecution or abatement action alleging that an unlicensed vehicle was unlawfully present within the city, it is an affirmative defense that the unlicensed vehicle is used for racing or for display at automobile shows. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-266. - Continuing violation. 
Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-267. - Abatement procedure. 
(a)  Abatement notice. When an enforcement official determines that a nuisance exists in violation of this division, the enforcement official may initiate a nuisance abatement procedure by serving an abatement notice on the owner of the vehicle and on the occupant of the property upon which the nuisance is believed to exist. An abatement notice must be served on the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is believed to exist only if abatement costs are to be assessed against the property. The abatement notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the location and nature of the alleged nuisance; 
(2)  A statement of the acts necessary to abate the alleged nuisance; 
(3)  An order establishing a deadline for abating the alleged nuisance which shall be at least thirty (30) days after the abatement order is served; 
(4)  Information on the right and manner of requesting a hearing to contest the enforcement official's abatement notice; and 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as ordered and if no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city may abate the alleged nuisance by removing the vehicle and assess the costs against the owner of the vehicle, against the owner or occupant of the property and against the property. 
(b)  Service of abatement notice. 
(1)  The enforcement official shall serve the abatement notice on the owner of the vehicle and on the occupant of the property by posting the abatement notice in a prominent location on the vehicle or on some conspicuous place on the property where the vehicle is located. 
(2)  The enforcement official may serve the abatement notice on the property owner by first class mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(3)  If the enforcement official is unable to obtain service on the property owner by either of the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing the abatement notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall be considered given on the date the notice is published. 
(c)  Request for hearing. The owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is alleged to exist may contest the abatement notice by requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made in writing and received by the director within seven (7) days of service of the abatement notice. The request for hearing must be either hand-delivered to the office of the director or sent to the director by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person requesting the hearing except in cases where the public health, safety or interest shall make a shorter time reasonable. Notice shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the address provided in the request for hearing. Notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(e)  Hearing and decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of chapter 536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists as charged in the abatement notice, the hearing officer may enter an order of abatement directing that the vehicle be removed or the nuisance be otherwise abated under such conditions and within such time as the hearing officer deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(f)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made to the circuit court of Boone County in accordance with chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-268. - Abatement by city. 
If the order of abatement is not complied with or if no hearing is requested and the abatement notice is not complied with, the director may have the vehicle removed by city employees or by persons under contract with the city. No person shall enter private property to remove the vehicle unless the property owner or occupant has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Sec. 11-269. - Collection of abatement costs. 
(a)  If the owner of the property on which the unlicensed, dismantled, inoperable or junk-filled vehicle was located was served with an abatement notice, the cost of abatement may be assessed against the property in the following manner. The director shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk. The cost shall include administrative costs as well as the actual cost of removing the vehicle. The city clerk shall cause a special taxbill against the property to be prepared in the amount of the abatement cost. The taxbill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. No clerical error or informality in the taxbill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the taxbill shall be a defense in an action to collect the taxbill. Taxbills issued under this section, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of eight per cent (8%) per annum. The tax bill shall constitute a personal obligation of the owner of the property on which the vehicle was located. 
(b)  The cost of abatement shall also constitute a personal obligation of the owner of the vehicle and the occupant of the property on which the vehicle was located. 
(Ord. No. 16982, § 2, 8-6-01)  
Secs. 11-270—11-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16334, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2000, repealed former Art. VIII of this chapter in its entirety and enacted a new Art. VIII, §§ 11-276—11-281 as set out herein. Former Art. VIII, §§ 11-276—11-283, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 11-276. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Spa. A spa is a swimming pool designed for recreational or therapeutic use of heated water and not to be drained, cleaned, and refilled for each individual. A spa may include hydrojet circulation, mineral baths and an air induction system. A pool used under direct supervision of qualified medical personnel is not a spa. 
Swimming pool. Any artificial basin of water which has been wholly designed, modified, improved, constructed or installed solely for the purpose of swimming, wading or immersion. Swimming pools shall be divided into the following classes: 
(1)  Class A swimming pool is a swimming pool operated by the city or any other governmental agency. 
(2)  Class B swimming pool is a swimming pool operated by a hotel, motel, community association, apartment complex or similar entity which serves merely as an additional service for patrons or residents and which is not otherwise classified as class C. 
(3)  Class C swimming pool is a swimming pool that is maintained by a commercial establishment for which memberships or admissions are sold. 
(4)  Class D swimming pool is a private, residential swimming pool or spa. 
(5)  Class E swimming pool is a nonresidential spa. 
(6)  Class F swimming pool is a special purpose pool that has a special use or design such as a wave pool, wading pool, zero-depth entry pool and pool with a water slide. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00)  
Sec. 11-277. - Design and operation requirements adopted by reference. 
The "Swimming Pool Ordinance and Guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation," 2015 Edition, adopted by the city council on May 18, 2015, is made a part of this Code as fully as if set forth in its entirety. Copies of the guide shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the director and shall be available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 22439, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 11-278. - Operating permit required; revocation of permit; hearings and appeals. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating or maintaining a class A, B, C, E or F swimming pool in the City of Columbia shall be required to hold a valid operating permit from the health department. The permit will be issued annually upon application and after certification by the health department that all requirements of this article and the rules and regulations of the health department regarding safety and sanitation have been complied with. An annual inspection fee of two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) per pool or spa permit for pools requiring seasonal inspections shall be collected. An annual inspection fee of four hundred thirty dollars ($430.00) per pool or spa permit requiring annual inspections shall be collected. Such fees shall be collected by the business license administrator and are payable at the time that the permit is issued. 
(b)  If the application for an operating permit is denied, the health department shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial and of the right to appeal. The applicant, within ten (10) days of the denial of the permit, may appeal the denial by filing a written request for a hearing before the director. 
(c)  If the director determines that a violation of this article or a rule or regulation established under this article is a substantial health or safety hazard, the director may immediately revoke the operating permit and all use of the swimming pool shall be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately, but upon written petition to the director, shall be afforded a hearing on the revocation within five (5) days. 
(d)  Any person whose permit has been revoked, may, at any time, make application for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within five (5) business days following the receipt of a written request, the swimming pool shall be reinspected. If the swimming pool is in compliance with the requirements of this article and the rules and regulation established under this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(e)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the director in accordance with the requirements of RSMo ch. 536. Appeals may be made to the circuit court in accordance with the requirements of RSMo ch. 536. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 16592, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 20410, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 24008 , § 2, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 11-279. - Health and safety requirements. 
(a)  Removable ladders. A class D pool which is designed with a removable ladder shall have the ladder removed when the pool is unattended. A class D pool which has a safety ladder designed to swing upward and lock into place shall be locked into place when the pool is unattended. 
(b)  Closing inspection. All class A, B, C, E and F pools shall have a closing inspection for off season safety considerations. 
(c)  Lifeguard. Each class A, C and F swimming pool shall have at least one (1) lifeguard on duty. The total number of lifeguards shall be based on anticipated usage and design characteristics. Lifeguard requirements for class C pools shall not apply for lap swimming, athletic competition, organized classes and for other activities specified by the director which are supervised by appropriate staff members. Lifeguards shall have completed a nationally recognized lifeguarding course. All lifeguards or instructors on duty must be physically able and fit to rescue any bather in danger of drowning. Lifeguards shall be in the pool area when the pool is open to persons other than residents of a hotel, motel, apartment building or multiple-family dwelling. 
(d)  Rules of conduct. Each class A, B, C, E and F swimming pool shall have posted rules for the conduct of bathers to minimize danger of injury to persons using the pool. All such rules shall be approved by the health department. 
(e)  "Swim at Own Risk" sign. Each class B swimming pool shall, when a lifeguard is not on duty, have conspicuously posted at the entrances to the pool a sign with letters not less than two inches in height reading "No Lifeguard on Duty—Swim at Own Risk." 
(f)  Toilet and shower facilities. Each person owning or operating a class C pool shall provide toilet and shower facilities for nonresident swimming pool users. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00)  
Sec. 11-280. - Powers and duties of the director. 
(a)  The director of health services shall have the authority to make rules and regulations to ensure safe and sanitary operation of swimming pools. The health department shall inspect all class A, B, C, E and F swimming pools regularly. If a swimming pool owner or operator does not consent to a health department inspection of the swimming pool facilities, the health department code enforcement official shall make application for a warrant pursuant to chapter 15 of this Code. 
(b)  The director may permit other protective devices or structures to be used instead of the fencing, gates, doors and latches required by this article if the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the fence, gate, door and latch required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00)  
Sec. 11-281. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the "City of Columbia Guide for Swimming Pool Design and Operation" shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16334, § 1, 2-7-00)  
Secs. 11-282—11-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 
 
Sec. 11-290. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, the possession of lighted smoking materials and use of vapor products as defined in subsection (b) hereof is unlawful in any of the following places used by or open to the public or serving as a place of work: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment including, but not limited to, retail stores, banks, office buildings, offices, restaurants, and bars; 
(2)  Any public transportation vehicle including, but not limited to, buses, limousines for hire, and taxicabs; 
(3)  Restrooms; 
(4)  Libraries, educational facilities, day care facilities, museums, auditoriums, and art galleries; 
(5)  Any indoor public area of a health care facility, health clinic, or ambulatory care facility including, but not limited to, laboratories associated with the rendition of health care treatment, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, long-term care facilities and offices of health professionals; 
(6)  Any indoor place of entertainment or recreation including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, theatres, concert halls, bingo halls, arenas, and swimming pools; 
(7)  All public areas and waiting rooms of public transportation facilities including, but not limited to, bus and airport facilities; 
(8)  Any other enclosed areas serving as a place of work or used by the public including open office landscaping and shopping malls; 
(9)  Rooms in which meetings or hearings open to the public are held, except where such rooms are in a private residence; 
(10)  Anywhere in any building owned or managed by the city; 
(11)  Within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to any structure in which smoking or use of vapor products is prohibited or limited by this article. This subsection shall not apply to any person in a motor vehicle or to any person merely passing by an entrance to a structure; 
(12)  The seating areas and enclosed spaces of any stadium, outdoor arena or athletic field; 
(13)  The patio areas of any restaurant, bar or other commercial establishment except as provided in section 11-291(6). 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, "vapor product" shall mean any non-combustible product with or without nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, which can be used to produce vapor with or without nicotine in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a liquid solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include any alternative nicotine product or tobacco product. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 15928, § 1, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 22312, § 1, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 11-291. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), the restrictions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An entire room or hall which is used for private social functions, provided that the room or hall has a separate ventilation system or negative pressure vented to the outside and provided that no employees of the establishment are exposed to smoke or vapor products; 
(2)  A private, enclosed office that has a ventilation system that is not shared with non-smoking offices and that is occupied exclusively by smokers or users of vapor products. This exemption does not apply to offices that are visited by members of the public or by non-smoking employees of the business. This exemption shall not be construed to permit smoking or use of vapor products in the reception areas of lobbies or offices or in any building owned or managed by the city with the exception of airport buildings that are leased or owned by private commercial enterprises. This exemption does not permit individuals to smoke or use vapor products in hazardous areas that may exist within any building; 
(3)  Performers upon the stage, provided that the smoking or use of vapor products is part of a theatrical production; 
(4)  Retail stores which are used primarily to sell tobacco or vapor products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental; 
(5)  Membership associations that meet the following criteria: 
a.  The association is a private, not for profit organization formed before April 1, 2006; and 
b.  The association is organized primarily for the benefit of its members; and 
c.  Association members pay dues; and 
d.  The association is managed and operated by a board consisting entirely of its own members; and 
e.  The association is organized primarily as a recreational, fraternal, athletic, military veteran, religious or kindred association; and 
f.  The association is not primarily engaged in preparing and serving food or alcoholic beverages by the drink; and 
g.  All operational duties of the association, other than professional duties, are performed by members of the association who are not compensated for performing such duties. 
h.  This exemption shall not apply to any activities to which the general public is invited. 
(6)  Patio areas of any restaurant, bar or other commercial establishment designated by the owner or operator of the business as a smoking or vapor product use area; provided, that no more than fifty (50) percent of the patio area shall be designated as a smoking or vapor product use area and no area shall be designated as a smoking or vapor product use area if it must be crossed to obtain access to a nonsmoking or non-vapor product use area or a restroom. 
(b)  The proprietor or person having control of an area which is otherwise exempt from the provisions of this article may apply the provisions of this article to such area by posting a "No Smoking" sign or a sign with the international "No Smoking" symbol in the area in accordance with the provisions of section 11-293. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 12777, § 1, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 22312, § 1, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 11-292. - Hotels and motels. 
Hotels and motels shall designate non-smoking rooms, which shall include a prohibition of the use of vapor products. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 14822 § 1, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 22312, § 1, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 11-293. - Responsibility of proprietors. 
(a)  The proprietor or the other person having control of a place governed by this article shall prominently post the entrance thereof with "NO SMOKING" or "SMOKING IN DESIGNATED AREAS ONLY" signs, as applicable, in letters no less than one inch in height, and shall prominently post "SMOKING" or "NO SMOKING" signs, whichever is appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height, or the international "NO SMOKING" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a bar across it in every place where smoking is regulated by this article. All "No Smoking" signage shall apply to the use of vapor products. 
(b)  Every theatre owner, manager, or operator shall post signs conspicuously in the lobby stating that smoking or use of vapor products is prohibited. 
(c)  Every public portion of grocery stores and food markets is required to have posted "NO SMOKING" signs at specific locations throughout each market as follows: signs must be visible to people entering the market, people at meat and produce counters, and people in all checkout lanes. All "No Smoking" signage shall apply to the use of vapor products. 
(d)  The proprietor or other person having control of a place set out in this article upon observing a person smoking or using vapor products in violation of this article shall request that person stop smoking or using vapor products. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 12777, § 1, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 22312, § 1, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 11-294. - Public education. 
The director shall engage in a continuing program to inform and to educate the public regarding the health consequences of smoking and use of vapor products; shall clarify the purposes of this article to citizens affected by it; and shall guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 22312, § 1, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 11-295. - Penalty. 
Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06)  
Sec. 11-296. - Enforcement. 
The authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this article is vested in the director and the director's duly authorized representatives. 
(Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 14736 § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 19252, § 1, 10-9-06)  
Secs. 11-297—11-309. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SALE OF TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND VAPOR PRODUCTS; ESTABLISHING A TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, adopted February 18, 2019, amended article X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article X, § 11-311, pertained to sale of tobacco, alternative nicotine products and vapor products to minors. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 11-310. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings designated: 
(1)  Alternative nicotine product shall mean any non-combustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
(2)  Arm's length transaction shall mean a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two (2) informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this article is not an arm's length transaction. 
(3)  Person shall mean any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
(4)  Smokeless tobacco shall mean any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing, such as snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products or vapor products. 
(5)  Tobacco product paraphernalia shall mean any object used, intended for use, or designed for use in inhaling, ingesting or otherwise introducing tobacco products into the human body and shall include, but not be limited to, cigarette wrapping papers and pipes made for smoking tobacco products. 
(6)  Tobacco products shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, pipe tobacco and smokeless tobacco. "Smokeless tobacco" means any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing, such as snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products or vapor products. 
(7)  Tobacco retailer shall mean any person who sells, offers for sale, or offers to exchange for any form of consideration tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(8)  Tobacco retailer license shall mean the license issued pursuant to this article that authorizes the sale or exchange of tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products at a certain fixed location by a certain tobacco retailer. 
(9)  Tobacco retailing shall mean the doing of any business as a tobacco retailer. 
(10)  Vapor product shall mean any non-combustible product with or without nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, which can be used to produce vapor or aerosol with or without nicotine in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a liquid solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include any alternative nicotine product or tobacco product. Vapor product does not include drugs, devices or combination products authorized for sale as a cessation device by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. 
(11)  Vending machine shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses products. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-311. - Tobacco retailer license required; term; renewal. 
(a)  Tobacco retailer license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct business as a tobacco retailer or engage in tobacco retailing without first having obtained a license therefor as required by this article. 
(b)  Multiple places of business. Any person conducting business as a tobacco retailer or engaging in tobacco retailing at more than one location in the city shall obtain a separate, distinct tobacco retailer license for each individual location. 
(c)  Business license required. A valid business license issued pursuant to chapter 13, article II of this code shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a license under this article. 
(d)  Term. Any license, or renewal thereof, issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its issuance and shall expire the next June thirtieth. 
(e)  Renewal of license. The term of a renewed tobacco retailer license is one (1) year, commencing on July 1; provided however, if the business services administrator determines that there is good reason not to issue a license for the full one (1) year period, the business services administrator may issue a license for a shorter period of time. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal a tobacco retailer license no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the prior license. 
(f)  Expiration of license. A tobacco retailer license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To apply for reinstatement of a license not timely renewed, the person must: 
(1)  Submit the application renewal form; and 
(2)  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the applicant: 
(i)  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, vapor product or tobacco product paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; and 
(ii)  Has paid all outstanding fines and resolved any undisputed outstanding violations of these regulations before seeking renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-312. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Submittal. Any person desiring a license under this article shall apply to the business services administrator in writing and under oath. Such application shall be submitted in the name of the person and signed by an authorized agent thereof. If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners together with the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be actively engaged in the control and management of the premises for which the license is sought shall be included on the application. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and stockholders who hold ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock together with the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be actively engaged in the control and management of the premises for which the license is sought shall be included on the application. If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability company, the names and addresses of the members and managers together with the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be actively engaged in the control and management of the premises for which the license is sought shall be included on the application. 
(b)  Contents. An application for a tobacco retailer license shall be made upon a form provided by the business services administrator and shall require the disclosure of all information necessary to comply with the requirements of this article, including whether or not the applicant or any agent of the applicant has been found to have violated any of the requirements of this article within the previous five (5) years, together with any other information which the business services administrator shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article. 
(c)  Changes and corrections. An applicant or previously licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the business services administrator, in writing, of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer license within thirty (30) days of such change. Such requirement shall expressly apply to the name and address of the managing officer or employee who is to be actively engaged in the control and management of the premises for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-313. - Issuance of license. 
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer license, the business services administrator shall issue a license upon a finding that the requirements of this article have been met. The provision of incomplete, inaccurate, false or misleading information shall be grounds for denial or revocation. In the case of a renewal, failure to operate the business in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be grounds for denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-314. - License not transferable. 
(a)  A tobacco retailer license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer license is required whenever a tobacco retailer location has a change in ownership. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a prior violation or license revocation at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
(1)  The location has been transferred to a new person in an arm's length transaction; and 
(2)  The new person provides the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new person has acquired, or is acquiring, the location in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-315. - Denial of application; appeal. 
(a)  Denial. When a license under this article is denied, the business services administrator shall send a letter to the applicant stating why the license was denied and how to appeal the denial. The letter may be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. If mailed, the letter shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed, unless returned. 
(b)  Appeal by applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the tobacco retailer license review board by mailing or delivering a written notice of appeal to the director of finance and a copy to the business services administrator. The notice of appeal must be received by the director of finance no later than ten (10) days after the applicant received the letter of denial. The applicant may submit to the director of finance a position statement explaining why applicant believes the license should be granted. The business services administrator may also submit to the director a position statement explaining why the administrator believes the denial should be upheld. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-316. - Sale of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products and vapor products to persons under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(a)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to a person under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(b)  Warning signs. Warning signs concerning sales of the products set forth in this article to persons under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be plainly visible at every display from which such products are sold. Such signs shall: 
(1)  Contain in red lettering at least one-half inch high on a white background "IT IS A VIOLATION OF THE LAW FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO PRODUCT PARAPHERNALIA, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 21," and 
(2)  Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle. 
(c)  Vending machines; exceptions. It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products through vending machines except: 
(1)  In factories, businesses, offices or other places not open to the general public, and 
(2)  In places to which persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are not permitted access. 
(d)  Signs on vending machines. It shall be unlawful to offer tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products for sale through a vending machine unless the vending machine contains thereon the warning signs referred to in this section and the owner of the vending machine or person leasing the machine does not knowingly permit the sale of such products to persons under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-317. - Duties of licensed tobacco retailer. 
In conducting business on the licensed premises, a licensee and the licensee's agents and employees shall comply with the standards of conduct set forth in this section. In addition to any other enforcement mechanism or penalty for violation of the standards set forth herein, the standards of conduct may be considered in determining whether a license under this article should be renewed, suspended or revoked. 
(a)  Lawful business operation. A tobacco retailer shall not violate any local, state or federal law applicable to the sale of tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products or tobacco retailing while conducting business as a tobacco retailer. 
(b)  Display of license. A tobacco retailer shall prominently display, in a publicly visible location, a physical copy of its license at each licensed location. 
(c)  Positive identification required. A tobacco retailer shall not sell or transfer tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to any person who appears to be under the age of thirty (30) years without first examining the identification of the customer to confirm that the customer is at least the minimum age required to purchase tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products within the city. 
(d)  Cooperation with law enforcement. A tobacco retailer shall cooperate fully with law enforcement authorities during an investigation of an illegal or violent act committed on the premises. 
(e)  Display of advertising without a license. A tobacco retailer shall not display any advertising relating to tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products promoting the sale and distribution of such products that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products may be obtained at that location without possessing a valid license to engage in business as a tobacco retailer at the time such advertising is displayed. For purposes of this section, the display of such advertising without a valid license authorizing the sale thereof shall be deemed "false and misleading advertising." 
(f)  Display of products without a license. A tobacco retailer shall not display any tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products in the public view without possessing a valid license to engage in business as a tobacco retailer at the time such products are displayed. 
(g)  Inspection. A tobacco retailer shall permit all reasonable inspections of the business and examination of the business records by the business services administrator necessary or incidental to ensure compliance with the licensing requirements set forth in this article. 
(h)  Cease operations. A tobacco retailer shall refrain from sale of tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products after expiration of the license and during any period in which the license is revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-318. - Inspection and right of entry. 
To the greatest extent permissible by law, the city shall have the right to enter and inspect the areas of the tobacco retailer premises which are open to the public or utilized by customers for the purpose of ensuring compliance with these regulations. The city may enter and inspect non-public areas, provided that any such entry and inspection shall be conducted in a reasonable manner whenever there is reason to suspect a violation of any of the provisions of the tobacco retailer regulations and licensing requirements. If the licensee refuses permission to enter, inspect or investigate the establishment, the city may seek an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-319. - Public nuisance. 
It shall constitute a public nuisance for any person to operate a business in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-320. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. In addition to any other remedies allowed by law, the penalty for violation of the provisions of this section shall be not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-321. - Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. 
(a)  Suspension or revocation of license for violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer license may be suspended or revoked by the business services administrator upon a finding that the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this article. Evidence of any violation of state or federal law relating to the sale of tobacco products, tobacco product paraphernalia, alternative nicotine products or vapor products may be used as prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Appeal of suspension or revocation. An appeal of a decision of the business services administrator suspending or revoking a tobacco retailer license may be filed with the tobacco retailer license review board by mailing or delivering a written notice of appeal to the director of finance with a copy to the business services administrator. The notice of appeal must be received by the director of finance no later than ten (10) days after the applicant received the notice of suspension or revocation. The appellant may submit to the director of finance a position statement explaining why appellant believes the license should not be suspended or revoked. The business services administrator may also submit to the director a position statement explaining why the administrator believes the license should be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-322. - Tobacco retailer license review board. 
(a)  Establishment; composition of board. A three-member tobacco retailer license review board is hereby established consisting of the director of finance, the director of public health and human services and a citizen member appointed by the city council to serve a three-year term. The tobacco retailer license review board may adopt rules and procedures that are consistent with this code and state statutes. 
(b)  Review of license denial, suspension or revocation. The director of finance, after receiving an appeal from a license denial, suspension or revocation, shall schedule a meeting of the tobacco retailer license review board. Before the meeting, the board members shall be provided with copies of the letter of denial, suspension or revocation, the notice of appeal and any documentation and position statements provided by the business services administrator and the applicant pertaining to the action. The board may allow the business services administrator and the applicant or the applicant's representative to explain their positions to the board at the meeting. The board may either affirm the action taken by the business services administrator or direct the business services administrator to grant or reinstate the license. The license, in the board's discretion, may be for less than the full period of time ending on June 30. If the board affirms the action taken by the business services administrator, it shall set forth the grounds for denial, revocation or suspension in a letter to the applicant. The letter shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed letter shall be presumed received three (3) days after it was mailed. 
(c)  Judicial review. A decision of the tobacco retailer license review board may be appealed by the applicant by filing a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Circuit Court of Boone County within thirty (30) days of receiving the determination letter from the tobacco retailer license review board. The petition shall set forth with particularity the grounds for review. The court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the tobacco retailer license review board to review the record and decision of the board. The writ shall prescribe the time within which a return must be made and served upon the relator's attorney, which shall be at least ten (10) days from issuance of the writ and may be extended by the court. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 11-323. - Separate offense; cumulative remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of the tobacco retailer regulations or licensing requirements is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. In addition, each individual retail sale of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, alternative nicotine product and/or vapor product shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(b)  The remedies provided in these regulations shall be cumulative. Any administrative action hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 23792 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Secs. 11-324, 11-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - AESTHETIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-326. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Occupant means any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who lives in a residence. 
Residence means a structure designed for human habitation. "Residence" does not include a porch or a carport. 
Residential premises means a tract or parcel of land upon which a residence is located. 
(Ord. No. 13000, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 11-327. - Display of certain items prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any residential premises within the city to allow any of the following items to remain on such premises, for longer than 48 hours, in any location outside of the residence which can be viewed from a ground location off the premises: 
appliances, bedding, bottles, boxes, broken glass, cans, cardboard, cartons, furniture manufactured for indoor use only, household appliances, jars, lumber and building supply materials that are not neatly stacked, machine parts, motor vehicle parts, pallets, paper, plumbing fixtures, rags, scrap metal, tire rims, tires, water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 13000, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 11-328. - Defense. 
It is an affirmative defense that the defendant did not have the legal right to control the location where a violation of this article occurred. 
(Ord. No. 13000, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 11-329. - Continuing violations. 
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 13000, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Secs. 11-330—11-345. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16982, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2001, repealed Art. XII of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. XII, §§ 11-346—11-348, pertained to motor vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 14582, § 2, adopted Aug. 21, 1995; and Ord. No. 16153, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1999. 
 
Secs. 11-346—11-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-361. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Dermagraphic technician means a person trained in the technique of applying micro insertions of natural pigments to the dermal layer of the skin. 
Director means the director of health services or the designee of the director of health services. 
Operator means a dermagraphic technician or tattooist. 
Patron means a person being tattooed at a tattoo establishment. 
Tattoo establishment means a place or facility where tattooing is performed. 
Tattooing means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink, natural pigments or colors, by the aid of needles or instruments. 
Tattooist means a person who engages in tattooing. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 11-362. - Tattoo establishment permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo another person except at a tattoo establishment which has a current tattoo establishment permit issued by the director. 
(b)  Any person desiring a tattoo establishment permit shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the director. The application shall include the applicant's full name, address, telephone number, location of the proposed tattoo establishment and such other information as the director requires to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  After receipt of an application for a tattoo establishment permit, the director shall inspect the proposed tattoo establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. If applicable requirements of this article have been met, the director shall issue a tattoo establishment permit. 
(d)  An annual inspection fee of one hundred sixty-five dollars ($165.00) shall be collected by the business license administrator at the time the permit is issued. 
(e)  A permit for a tattoo establishment may be granted at any time during the year, but all such permits shall expire on the thirty-first day of the next succeeding December. Tattoo establishment permits shall not be transferrable. 
(f)  The tattoo establishment permit and all regulations of the director shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the tattoo establishment. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 16592, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 21426, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 24008 , § 2, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 11-363. - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
(a)  Tattoo establishment permits may be suspended by the director for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this article. Whenever the director finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a tattoo establishment which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, the director may issue a written notice to the permit holder citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If deemed a substantial hazard to the public health, such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended and all tattoo operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately, but upon written petition to the director, shall be afforded a hearing within five (5) days. 
(b)  Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within five (5) business days following the receipt of a written request, the health authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(c)  For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the director in the performance of the director's duties, the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the director. Prior to such action, the director shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the director, by the permit holder, within such ten-day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing on the revocation. Appeal from the action of the director may be made to the circuit court pursuant to Chapter 536, Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
(d)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the director in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 536, Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 11-364. - General regulations. 
Operators shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall be tattooed without parental consent. The operator shall obtain proof of age before the tattoo procedure is done. 
(2)  No patron shall be tattooed unless the patron has signed a cautionary notice advising the patron that the tattoo should be considered permanent, that it can be removed only with a surgical procedure, and that any effective removal may leave permanent scarring and disfigurement. The cautionary notice shall be retained on file at the tattoo establishment. 
(3)  The skin surface to be tattooed must be free of rash, pimples, infection or recent scar tissue. The patron must be in apparent good health, and the skin to be tattooed must be generally free of all appearances of pathological conditions. The skin must not appear jaundiced (yellowed). 
(4)  Tattoos shall not be administered to any person under the influence of drugs or alcohol. The operator is responsible for making reasonable observation and inquiry to assure himself that the patron is sober and not under the influence of drugs. 
(5)  An operator shall provide written instructions, approved by the director, regarding the proper care of the tattooed skin as a precaution against infections to each patron following a tattoo procedure. 
(6)  An operator shall not perform or attempt to perform any procedure intended to remove a tattoo. Any attempt by an operator to perform a tattoo removal procedure shall be grounds for revocation of the tattoo establishment permit. 
(7)  Operators shall have received the Hepatitis B vaccine. The health department may make this available to operators at cost. The director may waive this requirement for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 11-365. - Regulation of premises. 
Operators shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Tattoo establishments and equipment shall be maintained in a sanitary manner. This includes physical cleanliness as well as antiseptic precautions. 
(2)  Tattoo establishments shall be equipped with hot and cold running water. Adequate toilet facilities with soap and towels properly installed and in compliance with applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city shall be provided. 
(3)  The premises shall be kept clean and free of vermin at all times. There shall be no fly or mosquito breeding places or rodent harborages on the premises. Animals shall not be allowed in the tattooing room. Litter shall not be permitted to accumulate on the premises. 
(4)  Tattoo establishments shall be well lit with not less than fifty (50) foot-candles in all cleaning and working areas. 
(5)  Tattoo establishments shall have ventilation as required by applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(6)  Floors, walls and ceilings of tattoo establishments shall be clean and in good repair. 
(7)  Adequate equipment and facilities shall be provided for the disposition of cigarette butts and other disposable items. 
(8)  All tables and chairs used in the tattooing process shall be constructed of a material allowing easy and thorough cleaning and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  The director shall be permitted access to all areas of the premises and all records at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 11-366. - Regulation of tattoo equipment. 
Operators shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Nonreusable items such as needles, gauze and styptic pencils shall be treated as contaminated and be disposed of in appropriate isolation boxes in accordance with state and federal guidelines. 
(2)  Individual cups of ink or colors shall be used for each patron and shall be discarded after use. 
(3)  Needles and other instruments used in administering the tattoo, including hand pieces, needle bars and razor blade holders, must be thoroughly rinsed and sterilized after each use. All styptic pencils, gauze, gloves and similar items shall be used for one patron only and disposed of immediately after use. 
(4)  Sterilization of equipment shall be done by steam pressure sterilization (autoclave) for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes at two hundred seventy (270) degrees Fahrenheit, followed by a drying time of not less than fifteen (15) minutes. 
a.  To prepare for steam pressure sterilization, each needle shall be flushed with distilled water and left distinctly moist, immediately before the sterilization process is initiated. The tubes containing the needles shall rest on their sides in the sterilizer to facilitate the air removal and steam contact to each tube and needle. 
b.  When an autoclave procedure is used, indicator tape or other acceptable test method shall be used to check the effectiveness of sterilization. A daily log shall be kept of tests of equipment. 
c.  Records of methods of sterilization and temperature cycle for each sterilization process shall be kept on file for inspection by the director. 
d.  All instruments and needles shall be stored in a closed metal or glass container. 
e.  All acetate tattoo stencils shall be cleaned with seventy (70) per cent isopropyl alcohol between customers. Individual transfers of tattoo designs shall be used once and discarded. 
f.  All furniture or items splashed with blood or body fluid shall be cleaned with a bactericidal cleaner. 
g.  All tubes, hoses and reusable equipment shall be cleaned with soap and water or ultrasounded double wrapped in sterilizer paper or in peel pouches and appropriately sterilized. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 11-367. - Minimum aseptic technique. 
Operators shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Neither the patron or operator shall consume or bring food or drink into the tattooing area and shall not smoke during the procedure or in the room where the tattooing takes place. 
(2)  The operator must be free from communicable disease while tattooing and present no pustular lesions of the hands or arms. 
(3)  The operator's hands shall be thoroughly washed in hot water with soap, using a short-bristled brush, and dried with a disposable paper towel immediately before tattooing. If the operator interrupts the procedure to perform other duties, the operator's hands shall be washed again in the manner provided in this section before resuming the tattoo procedure. 
(4)  The operator shall wear a clean and easily cleanable smock and latex/rubber single use disposable gloves while tattooing. 
(5)  The operator while tattooing shall wear an effective hair restraint, shall have clean fingernails and shall be generally clean and free from offensive body odors. 
(6)  The skin surrounding the area where the tattoo is to be placed shall first be washed with a germicidal soap and then shaved with a disposable blade. 
(7)  Individual razor blades shall be used when the patron is shaved and disposed of in an isolation container. 
(8)  The tattoo shall be bandaged with a sterile non-stick type bandage when the procedure has been completed. 
(9)  All infections resulting from tattooing shall be reported within five (5) business days to the director by the person owning or operating the tattoo establishment. The operator shall advise the patron to seek appropriate medical treatment for the infection. 
(Ord. No. 15145, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Chapter 12 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boone County Community Service Advisory Commission, § 2-266 et seq.; community development commission, § 2-326 et seq.; environment and energy commission, § 2-346 et seq.; youth advisory commission, § 2-361 et seq.; office of community services, § 2-436 et seq.; offenses against morals, § 16-131 et seq.; offenses against the person, § 16-141 et seq.; offenses against public safety, § 16-231 et seq.; conduct regulations for use of public parks, § 17-41 et seq.; personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations, Ch. 19; planning, Ch. 20; police department, § 21-16 et seq. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 13194, adopted on December 16, 1991, repealed articles I and II of this chapter and section 2 of Ord. No. 13194 enacted new sections of said articles; section 3 of Ord. No. 13194 repealed sections 12-31 and 12-58 to 12-64 and section 2 of Ord. No. 13194 set out new material to read as herein set out. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Purposes of chapter. 
The purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prohibit discrimination in employment, housing and public accommodation based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, receipt of governmental assistance, alienage or citizenship status, status as a victim of sexual or domestic violence, or order of protection status. 
(2)  To prohibit discrimination in employment based on age as provided for in article III of this chapter. 
(3)  To prohibit discrimination in housing based on familial status as provided for in Article III of this chapter. 
(4)  To secure for all individuals within the city freedom from any discriminatory practice made unlawful by Article III of this chapter. 
(5)  To implement within the city the policies embodied in Missouri and Federal Human Rights Legislation, and to promote cooperation between the city and the state and federal agencies enforcing that legislation. 
(6)  To provide a city commission on human rights which is dedicated to the elimination of discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Secs. 12-2—12-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— City commission generally, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-16. - Commission created; membership; qualification; terms; vacancies. 
There is hereby established a commission on human rights. The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. All members shall be residents of the city. The members shall have demonstrated a strong commitment to human rights and a belief in the principles of equal opportunity embodied in this chapter. The council shall endeavor to appoint individuals to the commission from various protected categories that have historically been discriminated against. Of the seven (7) members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed for one (1) year, two (2) shall be appointed for two (2) years and two (2) shall be appointed for three (3) years. Thereafter, appointment shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 20788, § 1, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 22462, § 1, 6-1-15 )  
Sec. 12-17. - Officers; meeting and quorum; rules and procedures; compensation; attendance; training. 
(a)  The commission shall elect a chair, vice-chair, and secretary from among its members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of such elective officers shall be for one (1) year. 
(b)  The commission shall meet periodically as necessary. The chair shall preside at all meetings, but in the absence of the chair or such person's inability to preside at any meeting, the vice-chair shall preside. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt rules and procedures for the conduct and transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(d)  The members of the commission shall serve, without compensation, for the terms of their appointments and until their successors are appointed. 
(e)  The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the city council through the city clerk of such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 12-18. - Functions, powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following functions, powers and duties: 
(1)  To formulate and carry out educational programs designed to minimize or eliminate those discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this chapter. 
(2)  To receive complaints alleging any discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this chapter. 
(3)  To endeavor to eliminate discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this chapter by conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
(4)  To provide mediation services to resolve incidences of alleged discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this chapter. 
(5)  To cooperate with other organizations, private and public, to discourage discrimination. 
(6)  To encourage fair treatment for all persons regardless of age as it relates to employment, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, receipt of governmental assistance, alienage or citizenship status, status as a victim of sexual or domestic violence, or order of protection status, or familial status as it relates to housing. 
(7)  To advise the city council on human rights issues. 
(8)  To hold public hearings on the state of human rights and relations in the city and on specific human rights issues. 
(9)  To sponsor or initiate specifically targeted workshops and on-going programs to improve human relations and to decrease tensions in the city. 
(10)  To present informational programs on human rights to school, business, service and other organizations. 
(11)  To adopt rules, regulations and guidelines pertaining to the investigation and disposition of complaints consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(12)  To make recommendations to the city manager for funding human rights enhancement activities. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 20659, § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 21177, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 12-19. - Human rights enhancement program. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation of the commission, the city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with local organizations for human rights enhancement activities. 
(b)  No program shall receive more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in any fiscal year under this program and the program is limited to the availability of funds appropriated for the program. 
(Ord. No. 20659, § 1, 6-21-10)  
Secs. 12-20—12-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Discriminatory employment practices by cable television franchisees prohibited, § 10-186. 
State Law reference— Discriminatory practices, RSMo. Ch. 314; discriminatory employment practices, RSMo. Ch. 296. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-32. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Alienage or citizenship status. The status of a person, lawfully admitted and present in the United States of America, either for permanent residence, for temporary residence, as a refugee, or through the granting of asylum. 
Commission. The commission on human rights. 
Complainant. A person who has filed a complaint with the commission alleging that another person has engaged in a discriminatory practice. 
Complaint. A written charge of discrimination alleging that a person has engaged in a discriminatory practice. 
Disability. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of a person's major life activities, being regarded as having such an impairment, or a record of having such an impairment, which with or without reasonable accommodation does not interfere with performing the job, utilizing the place of public accommodation, or occupying the dwelling in question. However, a person may be considered to have a disability if that person: 
(a)  Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of, and is not currently addicted to, a controlled substance or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully and is no longer engaging in such use and is not currently addicted; 
(b)  Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or 
(c)  Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted to, a controlled substance. 
For purposes of this article, individuals with HIV infection, acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related complex (ARC) shall be deemed to have a disability; provided that such protection shall not include individuals who have a currently contagious disease or infection and who, by reason of such disease or infection, would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or who, by reason of the currently contagious disease or infection, are unable to perform the duties of their employment. 
Discriminatory practice. An act, practice, or course or conduct made unlawful by this article. 
Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, or occupied, designed or intended for occupancy by one (1) or more persons for commercial, professional or institutional purposes, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or leased for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Employer. The city or any department, board, commission, or agency thereof, or any person who employs one (1) or more individuals within the jurisdiction of city, exclusive of parents, spouse or children of such person, and any person acting directly in the interest of an employer. 
Employee. Any individual employed by an employer. 
Employment agency. This term includes any person or agency, public or private, regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes any person acting in the interest of such person. 
Familial status. One (1) or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any individual who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Family. This word includes a single individual. 
Gender identity or expression. The gender-related identity, appearance, expression, behavior or mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth. 
Housing for older persons. 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; or 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. 
Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this article if: 
(a)  The housing has significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; and 
(b)  At least eighty (80) percent of the units are occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and 
(c)  The owner or manager of the housing has published and adhered to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
Investigator. A city employee whose job duties include investigating complaints or any individual appointed under commission rules to investigate a complaint. 
Labor organization. This term includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or for other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment. 
Order of protection status. The status of applying for or obtaining an order of protection pursuant to RSMo Ch. 455 or comparable law. 
Person. One (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, fiduciaries, receivers, or other organized groups of persons. 
Protected category. Race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, receipt of governmental assistance, alienage or citizenship status, status as a victim of sexual or domestic violence, or order of protection status. For purposes of this definition, sex discrimination shall include, but not be limited to, discrimination because of or on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions. 
Public accommodation. All places or businesses offering or holding out to the general public, goods, services, privileges, facilities, advantages and accommodations for the peace, comfort, health, welfare and safety of the general public, and such public places providing food, shelter, recreation and amusement. 
Receipt of governmental assistance. The receipt of any form of financial contribution or assistance from the government. 
Rent. To lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy a dwelling not owned by the occupant. 
Respondent. A person against whom a complaint has been filed with the commission concerning a discriminatory practice. 
Sexual orientation. The preference or practice of homosexuality, heterosexuality, asexuality, and bisexuality, or some combination thereof, by consenting adults, or as perceived by others, but not including sexual preference or practice between an adult and a minor. 
Status as a victim of sexual or domestic violence. The status of being subjected to acts of domestic or sexual violence, including but not limited to the crimes of domestic assault, harassment, stalking, rape, sodomy, child molestation, sexual misconduct, sexual abuse, human trafficking as those crimes are defined under any state or federal law. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2010; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 13385, § 1, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 21177, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 21204, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23370 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 12-33. - Unlawful retaliation; false complaints. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, assisted or participated in any manner in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly make a false complaint under the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2160; Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 12-34. - Employment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For an employer, because of any individual's protected category or familial status: 
a.  To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to the individual's compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment. 
b.  To limit, segregate or classify employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the individual's status as an employee. 
(2)  For a labor organization, because of any individual's protected category or familial status: 
a.  To exclude or to expel such individual from its membership or to discriminate in any manner against any of its members or against any employer or any individual employed by an employer. 
b.  To limit, segregate or classify its membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual in any manner which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or would limit such opportunities or otherwise adversely affect such individual's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment. 
(3)  For any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training or retraining because of any individual's protected category or familial status. 
(4)  Because of any individual's protected category or familial status: 
a.  For any employer or employment agency to print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for employment or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification. 
b.  For an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against, or to classify or refer for employment, any individual. 
(5)  For any employer, labor organization or employment agency to discharge, expel or otherwise discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act, practice or course of conduct made unlawful by, or filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in, any proceeding under this article. 
(6)  For any person, whether an employer or employee or not, to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts made unlawful by this article, or to attempt to do so. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall not be unlawful for an employer to apply different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit system, or a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production or to employees in different locations; provided, that such differences or such systems are not the result of an intention or design to discriminate, and are not used to discriminate, because of any individual's protected category or familial status; nor shall it be unlawful for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test, provided that such test, its administration, or action upon the results thereof, is not designed, intended or used to discriminate because of any protected category or familial status. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee subject to this article to grant preferential treatment to any individual or to any group because of such individual's or group's protected category or familial status on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of individuals of any protected category or familial status employed by any employer, referred to or classified for employment by any employment agency or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization, or admitted to or employed in any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison with the total number or percentage of individuals of such protected category or familial status in the city, or in the available work force in the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall not be unlawful because of sex to differentiate in employment compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment between male and female employees if such differences are otherwise required or expressly permitted by the laws of the state, or by the provisions of Section 703 of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, or by the provisions of Section 6(d) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended; nor shall it be unlawful because of sex for an employer, pursuant to a pension, retirement, profit sharing, welfare or death benefit plan, to provide for the retirement of female employees at a younger age than male employees or to provide differences in annuity, death and survivors benefits between widows and widowers of employees. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall not be unlawful for any church or religious school or religious day care center to consider sexual orientation in any hiring or employment action. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall not be unlawful discrimination because of citizenship status that which is otherwise required in order to comply with law, regulation, or executive order, or required by federal, state, or local government contract, or which the United States Attorney General determines to be essential for an employer to do business with an agency or department of the federal, state, or local government. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2020; Ord. No. 13385, § 1, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 23370 , § 1, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 296.020.  
Sec. 12-35. - Places of public accommodation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any individual, or to attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any individual, any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, services, or privileges made available in any place of public accommodation as defined in this article, or to segregate or discriminate against any individual in the use thereof because of such individual's protected category; provided, that it shall not be unlawful discriminatory practice for any place of public accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious corporation, association or society to give preference in the use of such place to members of its own religious faith unless individuals are excluded from membership therein because of inclusion in a protected category other than religion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to aid, abet, incite, compel or force the doing of any acts prohibited by this section or to attempt to do so; or for any person to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any individual who has opposed any practice prohibited by this section; or because any individual has testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to or in consequence of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private club or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent the facilities of such establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of an establishment within the scope of "public accommodation" as defined in section 12-32 of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2030)  
Sec. 12-35.1. - Service animals in places of public accommodation. 
(a)  As used in this section, "service animal" means any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of public accommodation to prohibit the use of a service animal by an individual with a disability. 
(c)  A person owning or operating a place of public accommodation may ask an individual with a disability to remove a service animal from the premises if the animal is out of control and the animal's handler does not take effective action to control it or if the animal is not housebroken. If a service animal is properly excluded, the individual with a disability shall be given the opportunity to obtain goods, services and accommodations without having the service animal on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 21534, § 1, 12-3-12)  
Sec. 12-36. - Age discrimination—Practices prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an employer: 
(1)  To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because of such individual's age. 
(2)  To limit, segregate or classify employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect such individual's status as an employee, because of such individual's age. 
(3)  To reduce the wage rate of any employee in order to comply with this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of such individual's age, or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of such individual's age. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a labor organization: 
(1)  To exclude or to expel from its membership, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of such individual's age. 
(2)  To limit, segregate or classify its membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect such individual's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment, because or such individual's age. 
(3)  To cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in violation of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an employer to discriminate against any of such employer's employees or applicants for employment, for an employment agency to discriminate against any individual, or for a labor organization to discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for membership, because such individual, member or applicant for membership has opposed any practice made unlawful by this section, or because such individual, member or applicant for membership has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or litigation under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to print or publish, or cause to be printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to employment by such an employer or membership in or any classification or referral for employment by such a labor organization, or relating to any classification or referral for employment by such an employment agency, indicating any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination, based on age. 
(f)  The prohibitions in this section shall be limited to individuals who are at least forty (40) years of age but less than seventy (70) years of age. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2035)  
Sec. 12-37. - Same—Practices not prohibited. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision in section 12-36 it shall be not unlawful for an employer, employment agency or labor organization: 
(1)  To take any action otherwise prohibited under section 12-36 where age is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the particular business, or where the differentiation is based on reasonable factors other than age. 
(2)  To observe the terms of a bona fide seniority system or any bona fide employee benefit plan such as a retirement, pension or insurance plan, which is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of section 12-36, except that no such employee benefit plan shall excuse the failure to fire any individual, and no such seniority system or employee benefit plan shall require or permit the involuntary retirement of any individual because of the age of such individual. 
(3)  To discharge or otherwise discipline an individual for good cause. 
(b)  Nothing in section 12-36 shall be construed to prohibit compulsory retirement of any employee: 
(1)  Who has attained sixty-five (65) years of age but not seventy (70) years of age, and who, for the two-year period immediately before retirement, is employed in a bona fide executive or a high policymaking position, if such employee is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit sharing, savings, or deferred compensation plan, or any combination of such plans, of the employer of such employee, which equals, in the aggregate, at least twenty-seven thousand dollars ($27,000.00). In applying the retirement benefit test above, if any such retirement benefit is in the form other than a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits), or if employees contribute to any such plan or make rollover contributions, such benefit shall be adjusted in accordance with regulations prescribed by the secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, so that the benefit is the equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions are made. 
(2)  Who has attained sixty-five (65) years of age but not seventy (70) years of age, and who is serving under a contract of unlimited tenure (or similar arrangement providing for unlimited tenure) at an institution of higher education (as defined by section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965). 
(Code 1964, § 7.2037)  
Sec. 12-38. - Sale or rental of dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, or rent after receipt of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental, of a dwelling to any individual because of such individual's protected category or familial status; provided, however, that if previous bona fide offers to rent or buy have been made, the owner, lessor, or agent thereof may accept such offers without violating this section or article. 
(2)  To discriminate against any individual in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of any individual's protected category or familial status. 
(3)  To make, print, publish, or cause to made, printed, or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on any individual's protected category or familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any individual because of such individual's protected category or familial status that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any individual to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of an individual who is a member of a particular protected category or of an individual because of the individual's familial status. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2040; Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 12-39. - Real estate loans. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building or savings and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance, for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, because of the protected category or familial status of an individual applying therefor, or to discriminate against an individual in fixing the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such a loan or other financial assistance because of the protected category or familial status of such individual or any individual associated with such individual in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of any dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2050; Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 12-40. - Acceptance of membership in real estate sales organizations. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any individual access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate broker's organization, or other service organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or participation, because of such individual's protected category or familial status. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2060; Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 12-41. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed: 
(1)  To prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of any dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the same religion or from giving preferences to such individuals, unless individuals are excluded from membership therein because of inclusion in a protected category other than religion. 
(2)  To prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public which, as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides a residential housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such housing to its members, or from giving preference to its members, unless individuals are excluded from membership therein because of inclusion in a protected category other than religion. 
(3)  To apply to any dwelling occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living in units independent of each other, if the owner thereof occupies one (1) of such units as a residence. 
(4)  To prevent a person engaged in a business, defined as a place of public accommodation, from establishing a dress or appearance code. 
(5)  To limit the applicability of any reasonable local or state restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7.2070, 7.2195; Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12-42. - Exception to provisions prohibiting discrimination based on familial status. 
Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(Ord. No. 13657, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Secs. 12-43—12-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 12-56. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any individual who claims to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice may file with the commission a complaint in writing stating the name and address of the person alleged to have committed such practice, the particulars thereof, and such other information as may be required by the commission. 
(b)  Any complaint filed under this section in which affirmative relief is sought shall state what relief is sought or proposed. 
(c)  All such complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the alleged discriminatory practice. 
(d)  An individual who files a complaint with the commission shall be advised of the possibility of filing a complaint with the Missouri Commission on Human Rights or the appropriate federal agency. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2080; Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12-57. - Same—Investigation, resolution. 
(a)  Before investigating a complaint, the investigator shall determine if the complainant and respondent are willing to resolve the issues raised in the complaint through mediation or some other method of dispute resolution. If the complainant and respondent are willing, the investigator shall facilitate dispute resolution. The complainant and respondent may engage in dispute resolution at any stage in the process. If the complainant and respondent resolve the dispute prior to investigation, the case shall be closed. 
(b)  If the complainant and respondent are unwilling to attempt dispute resolution or are unsuccessful in such an attempt, the investigator shall promptly investigate the allegations of the complaint. 
(c)  After completing the investigation, the investigator shall report to the commission the results of the investigation and the investigator's opinion on whether there is probable cause to credit the allegations of the complaint. 
(d)  After receiving the investigator's report, the commission may direct further investigation. When the commission is satisfied that the complaint has been properly investigated, it shall determine whether there is probable cause to credit the allegations of the complaint. If the commission determines that there is no probable cause, it shall dismiss the complaint. If the commission determines that there is probable cause, it shall attempt to have the issue resolved through mediation or some other method of dispute resolution. If the respondent is unwilling to participate in dispute resolution, the commission may forward the matter to the city prosecutor. 
(e)  At any stage in the process, the commission may close the case for good administrative reasons. Such reasons shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The complainant has failed to cooperate with the commission. 
(2)  The commission is unable to locate the complainant or respondent. 
(3)  The complainant wishes to withdraw the complaint. 
(4)  The subject matter of the complaint has been satisfactorily investigated and resolved by another governmental agency. 
(5)  The complainant has filed a lawsuit against respondent involving the subject matter of the complaint. 
(Code 1964, § 7.2090; Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02)  
Sec. 12-58. - Prosecutions; time limitations. 
(a)  No prosecution for a violation of any provision of this article, other than section 12-33, shall be commenced unless a complaint shall have first been filed with the commission and efforts of the commission to eliminate the alleged violation have failed. 
(b)  The period of limitation for any violation of this article shall not run during any time while a complaint involving the alleged violation is pending before the commission. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 12-59. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 17127, § 1, 1-7-02)  
Secs. 12-60—12-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP REGISTRY 
 
Sec. 12-71. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Basic necessities of life means the cost of essential food, shelter and other fundamental needs. 
Department means the department of public health and human services. 
Dependent means a person who resides within the household of a registered domestic partnership and is: 
(1)  A biological, adopted, or foster child of a registered domestic partner; or 
(2)  A dependent as defined under United States Internal Revenue Service regulations; or 
(3)  A ward of a registered domestic partner as determined in a guardianship or other legal proceeding. 
Domestic partners means two (2) adults who share the same principal residence, and are jointly responsible for the basic necessities of life. The individuals need not contribute equally to the cost of these necessities, as long as they agree that both are responsible for the cost. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09)  
Sec. 12-72. - Establishment of domestic partnership registry. 
There is hereby created a domestic partnership registry which shall be maintained by the department. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12-73. - Requirements for domestic partnership. 
To establish a domestic partnership, two (2) individuals must file a joint declaration of domestic partnership with the department affirming that they: 
(1)  Have resided together for at least six (6) months; 
(2)  Each intends to reside with the other and share the common necessities of life; 
(3)  Are each eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(4)  Are mentally competent to contract; 
(5)  Are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the State of Missouri; 
(6)  Are not married to any person other than their domestic partner; and 
(7)  Are each other's sole domestic partner. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12-74. - Filing of declaration of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Filing location. Two (2) individuals seeking to become domestic partners must complete and file a declaration of domestic partnership at the department. 
(b)  Filing prohibition. No individual who has previously filed a declaration of domestic partnership in this city may file a new declaration of domestic partnership until a notice of termination of domestic partnership has been filed with the department. This prohibition shall not apply if the previous domestic partnership ended because one of the domestic partners is deceased. 
(c)  Filing fee. Individuals filing a declaration or termination of domestic partnership shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the city. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12-75. - Administration of registry. 
(a)  The declaration of domestic partnership form shall require each registrant to: 
(1)  Affirm that the registrant meets the requirements of section 12-73 of this article; 
(2)  Provide the mailing address of the common residence; and 
(3)  Sign the form attesting that all statements are true and correct. 
(b)  The city shall have declaration and termination forms available at the department. The department shall make available sample legal documents including durable power of attorney for medical decisions, and right of sepulcher designations domestic partnership may also want to consider. 
(c)  The declaration of domestic partnership form and the termination of domestic partnership form shall contain notice that false statements made on the form are punishable. 
(d)  Partnership registration. The city shall register the declaration of domestic partnership submitted by the partners in a registry and return a copy of the declaration to the domestic partners at the address provided as their common residence. 
(e)  The city shall register the notice of termination of domestic partnership pursuant to the requirements set forth in section 12-76. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 12-76. - Termination of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Termination. A domestic partnership ends when: 
(1)  One (1) of the domestic partners dies, marries a person other than their domestic partner, or enters into a civil union or registered domestic partnership with someone other than the person's registered domestic partner; or 
(2)  A notice of termination of domestic partnership has been filed by one (1) or both domestic partners with the city. 
(b)  Notice of termination. If the facts affirmed in the declaration of domestic partnership cease to be true, one (1) or both parties to a domestic partnership shall file a notice of termination of domestic partners with the department. Upon receipt, the city shall return a copy of the notice marked "filed" to each of the partners if jointly filed; or two (2) copies to the filing partner. Unless the partners jointly file the notice, the partner filing the notice shall, within five (5) days, send a copy of the filed notice to the other partner's last known address. However, this requirement shall not apply if the termination is due to the death of one (1) of the domestic partners. 
(c)  Effective termination date. Termination of a domestic partnership shall be effective upon filing of the notice of termination of domestic partnership with the department by one (1) or both partners, or on the date of the death of one (1) of the domestic partners. 
(d)  Notice to third parties. Following the termination of a domestic partnership, each former domestic partner who has received or qualified for any benefit or right based upon the existence of a domestic partnership and receipt of that benefit or enjoyment of that right has not otherwise terminated, shall give prompt notification to any third party who provides such benefit or right that the domestic partnership has terminated. 
(e)  Failure to give notice. Failure to provide notice to third parties as prescribed in the section shall not delay or prevent the termination of the domestic partnership. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21416, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 12-77. - Rights of registered domestic partnership. 
(a)  Use of and access to city facilities. All facilities owned and operated by the city, including but not limited to recreational facilities, shall allow the registered domestic partner of a user, and either partner's dependents, to be included in any rights and privileges accorded a spouse and children for purposes of use and access to city facilities. 
(b)  Employer benefit plans. Employers of registered domestic partners may use the registry as proof of relationship for their employee benefit plans. 
(c)  Health care visitation. Operators of health care facilities may use the registry as proof of relationship for their visitation policies. 
(d)  Nursing homes. Operators of nursing home facilities may use the registry as proof of relationship for their visitation policies. 
(Ord. No. 20230, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 23569 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR QUALIFIED APPLICANTS 
 
Sec. 12-90. - Criminal records in employment. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For an employer to inquire, question or otherwise seek information on an employment application as to whether an individual has ever been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any crime. 
(2)  For an employer to inquire, question or otherwise seek information as to whether an applicant has ever been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any crime until after the applicant has received a conditional offer of employment. 
(b)  The requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section do not apply for positions where: 
(1)  Employers are required to exclude applicants with certain criminal convictions from employment due to local, state or federal law or regulation; 
(2)  A standard fidelity bond or an equivalent bond is required and an applicant's conviction of one or more specified criminal offenses would disqualify the applicant from obtaining such a bond; in which case, an employer may include a question or otherwise inquire whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any of those offenses; or 
(3)  Employers employ individuals licensed under the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Systems Act. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit an employer from notifying applicants in writing of the specific offenses that will disqualify an applicant from employment in a particular position. 
(d)  Employers are encouraged to not automatically ban jobseekers with a criminal history. Employers may make final employment-related decisions based on all of the information available to them, including consideration of the frequency, recentness and severity of a criminal record as well as rehabilitation efforts against the duties and responsibilities of the position. 
( Ord. No. 22286, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Sec. 12-91. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any individual who claims to be aggrieved by a violation of this article may file with the commission a complaint in writing stating the name and address of the person alleged to have committed such practice, the particulars thereof, and such other information as may be required by the commission. If the alleged violation is that an employer is seeking criminal history information on an employment application, then any individual may file a complaint and that individual need not necessarily be aggrieved before filing a complaint. 
(b)  All such complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the alleged violation. 
( Ord. No. 22286, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Sec. 12-92. - Investigation, resolution. 
(a)  The investigator shall promptly investigate the allegations of the complaint. After completing the investigation, the investigator shall report to the commission the results of the investigation and the investigator's opinion on whether there is probable cause to credit the allegations of the complaint. 
(b)  After receiving the investigator's report, the commission may direct further investigation. When the commission is satisfied that the complaint has been properly investigated, it shall determine whether there is probable cause to credit the allegations of the complaint. If the commission determines that there is no probable cause, it shall dismiss the complaint. If the commission determines that there is probable cause, the commission may forward the matter to the city prosecutor. 
(c)  At any stage in the process, the commission may close the case for good administrative reasons. Such reasons shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The complainant has failed to cooperate with the commission. 
(2)  The commission is unable to locate the complainant or respondent. 
(3)  The complainant wishes to withdraw the complaint. 
( Ord. No. 22286, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Sec. 12-93. - Prosecutions; time limitations. 
(a)  No prosecution for a violation of any provision of this article shall be commenced unless a complaint shall have first been filed with the commission. 
(b)  The period of limitation for any violation of this article shall not run during any time while a complaint involving the alleged violation is pending before the commission. 
( Ord. No. 22286, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Sec. 12-94. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 22286, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Chapter 12A - LAND PRESERVATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12A-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Preservation Act of the City of Columbia, Missouri." 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety and property of the people of Columbia by regulating the disturbance of land surface areas by preserving trees, preventing erosion on disturbed areas, and controlling stormwater drainage. 
(2)  Assure that consideration is given to the preservation and restoration of natural features in the grading or development of public and private land. 
(3)  Assure that proper provisions are made regarding control of sediments resulting from rainfall on graded areas, and that adequate facilities are constructed for the management of stormwater. 
(4)  Assure the movement of emergency vehicles during storm periods. 
(5)  Protect the public from rapidly flowing water and flash floods. 
(6)  Minimize storm and flood losses resulting from uncontrolled runoff. 
(7)  Establish requirements for construction of stormwater management facilities in newly developed areas. 
(8)  Establish reasonable stormwater utility charges to enable the stormwater utility to develop and maintain a stormwater management system. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-3. - Limitation on liability related to stormwater management facilities. 
Floods from stormwater runoff may occur which exceed the capacity of storm drainage facilities constructed and maintained as a result of this chapter. This chapter does not guarantee that properties will always be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the city or any city officer or employee for any flood damage. Neither does this chapter purport to reduce the need or the necessity for obtaining flood insurance. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-4. - Conflicts. 
Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other law or regulation, whether state, federal or local, whichever is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard shall control. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-5. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given herein. 
Agricultural activity. Normal farming operations including improvements conducted under the auspices of the Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
Attached single-family residence. A building containing two (2) attached dwelling units that share a common wall at the lot line and that are on separate lots. 
Best management practices (BMP). Activities, practices and procedures which control soil loss and reduce or prevent water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxins, organics and sediment in the runoff. BMPs may either be structural (grass swales, terraces, retention and detention ponds, and others); or nonstructural (disconnection of impervious surfaces, directing downspouts onto grass surfaces and educational activities). 
Central business district. The area bounded by College Avenue on the east, Elm Street and Elm Street extended on the south, Garth Avenue on the west, and Park Avenue and Park Avenue extended on the north. 
City utility service customer. A purchaser of city water, electric, sewage or refuse collection utility service. 
Clean fill. Uncontaminated soil, rock, sand, gravel, concrete, asphaltic concrete, cinder-blocks, brick, minimal amounts of wood and metal, and inert solids which are approved by rule or policy of the State Department of Natural Resources for fill, reclamation or other beneficial use. 
Clear cutting. The practice of removing over half of the standing climax forest area on a site. 
Climax forest. Any woodland community of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet which is dominated by climax species such as oak, hickory, sugar maple or bottomland hardwoods such as river birch, basswood, sycamore and hornbeam and which includes an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a maximum aspect ratio of 4:1. 
Critical downstream location. A location within the drainage reach downstream of the subject site, consisting of a channel section, drainage swale, bridge, box culvert, storm sewer, or other conveyance facility or structure having a conveyance capacity which would be exceeded by stormwater runoff from a 10-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm under existing land use conditions; or an existing structure or building located downstream of the subject site which has its lowest floor elevation less than one (1) foot above the maximum elevation in an adjacent channel attained by the 100-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm, assuming existing land use conditions with the proposed ultimate development of the subject site in place. The conveyance capacity of a structure operating under inlet control conditions shall be determined with a maximum headwater to diameter ration (HW/D) of 1.25 or with a headwater elevation equal to the top of curb, whichever is less. 
dbh (diameter breast height). Trunk diameter at 4.5 feet about ground. 
Design year storm. The selected or established frequency or return period of rainfall time-duration for which drainage facilities are to be designed. 
Developed land. Real estate altered by the addition of impervious surface which changes the hydrology of the property from its natural state. 
Developer. A person whose intent or function is to bring about any change of land use or improvement on any parcel of land. 
Development. Any manmade changes to real estate, including, but not limited to, construction, filling, grading, paving or excavation. 
Director. The director of utilities or the director's designee. 
Drainage basin (or watershed). The catchment area from which stormwater is carried off by a watercourse or storm drainage system. The area served by a drainage system receiving storm and other surface-borne water. Drainage basin boundaries are a product of natural topography and drainage system configuration. 
Drainage facility. A man-made structure or natural watercourse for the conveyance of storm runoff. Examples are channels, pipes, ditches, swales, catch basins, and street gutters. 
Dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof, designed to house a family. 
Forest land. Forested land area with the aerial canopy dominated by trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter, measured four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. 
Forest parcel. An envelope of trees delineated by the boundaries of grading limits or land disturbances. 
Highly impervious surface site. A site development that: 
(1)  Is subdivided and designated as a highly impervious surface site by voluntary request of the developer through a note on the plat; and 
(2)  Before subdivision, is one (1) acre or more and has an impervious surface of more than fifty (50) percent of the site and the percent of impervious surface is verified by the director; and 
(3)  After subdivision, the developer shall implement a plan acceptable to the director that results in an impervious surface area that is equal to or less than the percent of impervious surface area before subdivision or that is otherwise required by law; 
(4)  Requires no variances for stormwater and subdivided sites created shall not be eligible for any stormwater variances. 
Impervious surface. A surface on real property where infiltration of stormwater into the earth has been virtually eliminated by the works of man. Impervious surfaces shall include, but not be limited to: Roofs, paved driveways, patio areas, sidewalks, parking lots, storage areas, and other oil or macadam surfaced areas which prevent percolation of stormwaters into the earth's surface. 
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Land disturbance. Any activity, including mechanized clearing, which removes the vegetative ground cover. 
Land disturbance permit. A permit issued by the City of Columbia that authorizes the commencement of land disturbance activities or logging. 
Logging. The removal of more than three (3) existing trees for commercial purposes on any tract of land larger than one (1) acre. 
Main floor area. The area within the perimeter of the exterior walls of a building excluding any attached garage. The main floor area does not include the area of decks, porches, patios or garages. 
Maximum aspect ratio of 4:1. A means of defining the configuration of an area of trees such that the measurement of length of the area shall not be more than four (4) times as long as the measurement of width of the area. 
Mechanized clearing. Clearing of land by tracked or wheeled vehicles which scrape, cultivate or scarify the surface of the ground exposing bare soil and uprooting vegetation. 
Multiple-family building. A building with more than one dwelling unit. 
Non-point source pollution. Pollution which is generated by various land use activities rather than from an identifiable or discrete source, and which is conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall, stormwater runoff, or ground water seepage and infiltration rather than through direct discharge. 
Nonresidential use. The use of developed land for any purpose other than for a single-family residence or a multiple-family building. 
Occupant. The person in possession or lawfully entitled to possession of a parcel of land. 
Owner. Any person having legal title to, or a proprietary interest in real property. Proprietary interest shall include, but not be limited to, estate administration, trusteeship, guardianship, and actions under a valid power of attorney. 
Peak runoff. The maximum rate at which stormwater travels across the surface of the ground. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, which may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; including but not limited to sediments, slurries and concrete rinsate and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Redevelopment. Development that: 
(1)  Expands or replaces any development; and 
(2)  Is on a site that has not been subdivided after September 4, 2012; and 
(3)  Is on a site that is either: 
a.  One (1) acre or more that has an impervious surface of more than twelve (12) percent of the site; or 
b.  Less than one (1) acre that has any impervious surface. 
Site. The total area of the parcel(s), tract(s), or lot(s) of land upon which development or land disturbance is proposed irrespective of the actual limits or size of the proposed development or land disturbance activity. 
Storm drain. A closed conduit or open ditch, natural or specifically constructed, for conducting or conveying collected stormwater. Conduits and paved open ditches are termed "improved"; unpaved ditches are termed "unimproved". 
Storm drainage system. All drainage facilities used for collecting and conducting stormwater to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet including, but not limited to, the following: Conduits and appurtenant features, canals, ditches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, streets, gutters, and pump stations. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation including snowmelt. 
Stormwater management and water quality manual. The manual described in section 12A-91. 
Stormwater management facilities. This term includes measures, primarily structural, which are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or non-point source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and subsequently into water bodies. These facilities are also used to control volume and peak rates of runoff from development and redevelopment sites. 
Stream channel. A naturally or artificially created water course with definite bed and banks which conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Subdivide. To divide land into smaller parts. 
Swale. A wide shallow ditch used to carry storm runoff. 
Total suspended solids. Matter suspended in stormwater excluding litter, debris, and other gross solids exceeding one (1) millimeter in diameter. 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk. 
Tree, existing. A tree which meets or exceeds the following size standards: Deciduous shade trees shall have a four (4) inch diameter, measured four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground and ornamental and evergreen species shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
Unimproved land. Land or property having little or no "impervious surface." 
Water quality volume. The storage needed to capture and treat ninety (90) percent of an average annual stormwater runoff volume. It is calculated by multiplying the water quality storm times the volumetric runoff coefficient and site area. 
Watercourse. A stream, usually flowing in a particular direction (though it need not flow continuously in a definite channel), having a bed or banks and usually discharging into some other stream or body of water. 
Watershed. All the land area which drains to a given body of water. 
(b)  This chapter shall be construed in conformity with the provisions of state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 14389, § 1, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 18164, § 1, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 19442, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 21473, § 1, 10-15-12; Ord. No. 22578, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 12A-6. - Administration and enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 22578, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 12A-7. - Revocation of permits. 
The director may revoke a land disturbance permit if the permit application or accompanying plan contains any false statement or misrepresentation of fact. The director may revoke a land disturbance permit or a building permit if the permit holder fails to comply with the permit or with any provision of this chapter. Permits revoked under this section shall not be reinstated until the cause for revocation has been corrected or until a mitigation plan for the property has been submitted by the former permit holder and approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-8. - Stop work orders. 
The director is authorized to issue a stop work order whenever he believes unlawful land disturbance activities are occurring. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved or to the owner's agent or to the person engaged in the land disturbance activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any land disturbance activity or to permit another person to engage in any land disturbance activity in violation of a stop work order. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12A-10. - Violations. 
Whenever any act is required by this chapter, it shall be unlawful to fail to do that act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this chapter, it shall be unlawful to do that act. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-11. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this chapter shall be punishable in the same manner as Class A misdemeanors under Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(b)  Every day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Every one thousand (1,000) square feet of climax forest removed, destroyed or damaged in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 18164, § 1, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 12A-12. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive. The city may pursue any available civil remedies in addition to prosecuting violations in municipal court and following the abatement procedures of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 1, 3-5-07)  
Secs. 12A-13—12A-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12A-32. - Permit required. 
A land disturbance permit is required for any land disturbance activity including streets and utilities construction on any site that results in a disturbed area one (1) acre or more in size. All applications for land disturbance permits shall be submitted on forms issued by the director and shall contain all information required by the director. The applicant for the permit shall be responsible for field verifying to the city the actual area being disturbed by staking the area to be disturbed prior to the disturbance. If the development requires the submission of site plans, the area to be disturbed shall be depicted on the site plan. Redevelopment of tracts less than one (1) acre does not exempt the developer from the provisions of this chapter if that activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 13258, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 17278, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12A-33. - Site development plan. 
(a)  Applications for land disturbance permits for any area of one (1) acre or more shall be accompanied by a detailed site development plan which shall include, a tree preservation plan, a landscaping plan, a soil erosion control plan, and a stormwater management plan conforming to the provisions of this chapter. Where practical, drawings may be combined to contain all of the required plans. 
(b)  No final plat shall be approved prior to approval of a site development plan encompassing the entire area being platted. No building permit shall be issued in a planned district prior to approval of a site development plan encompassing the entire area included in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 13258, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 17278, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 18164, § 1, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 18493, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12A-34. - Conformance with permit and plans. 
All land disturbance activity on property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued shall conform to the requirements of the permit and to the provisions of the approved site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A land disturbance permit shall not be required for sites less than one (1) acre or for individual lots in R-1 and R-2 zoned development except that erosion control provisions, grading limits, low floor elevation, and storm drainage work, including piping, swaling, and ditching, shall be shown on the plot plan and approved prior to issuance of a building permit. All land disturbance activity on such property shall conform to the provisions of the approved plot plan. 
(b)  Agricultural activities are exempted from the provisions of this chapter except that a land disturbance permit is required for the mechanized clearing or removal of trees on sites of one (1) acre or more. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 17278, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 18164, § 1, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12A-36. - Application fee. 
An application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The requirement of this section shall not apply to plot plan applications for sites one (1) acre or less or for individual lots in R-1 and R-2 zoned developments. 
(Ord. No. 18216, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Secs. 12A-37—12A-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23117, § 1, adopted March 20, 2017 , repealed the former Art. III, § 12A-49, which pertained to tree preservation and landscaping requirements. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 12A-49—12A-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EROSION CONTROL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12A-66. - Erosion control requirements. 
(a)  A soil erosion control plan shall accompany all applications for land disturbance permits. The purpose of the plan is to clearly establish what measures will be taken to prevent erosion and off site sedimentation during and after development. The erosion control plan shall consist of two parts, a site grading and drainage plan and a narrative report describing the nature and scope of the work. The plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Missouri. 
(b)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures must be designed to provide protection from the runoff from a 10-year return frequency, 24-hour duration storm. 
(c)  All surfaces must be stable and non-erosive within the lesser of thirty (30) working days or one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after completion of the work authorized by the land disturbance permit. When such work is associated with the construction of a building, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such surfaces are stable and non-erosive. If completion of the work or building is at such time of the year that stabilization with ground cover is not possible, a performance bond or other acceptable financial instrument for completion of the work may be accepted to allow the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-67. - Site grading and drainage plan. 
(a)  The site grading and drainage plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Existing features. 
a.  A drainage area map showing topography of the entire drainage basin(s) contributing to the site. The scale of the map shall be no smaller than 1 inch = 200 feet for drainage areas up to five hundred (500) acres. A topographic map of appropriate scale shall be provided for larger areas upstream from the design area. The drainage map is to show total acreage of the site and the acreage of all drainage areas contributing to the site. 
b.  A site plan having a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and existing contour intervals of not more than five (5) feet. The plan shall show topographic features such as highways, utilities, natural watercourses, existing drainage facilities and structures, adjacent property lines, north arrow, scale, and vicinity map. The site plan is to also show the limits of the adopted 100-year floodplain on the site and any critical environmental areas such as streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands. Area and geological types of predominant soils as well as the nature and extent of existing vegetation shall also be shown on the plan. 
(2)  Proposed alterations of the site. 
a.  A plan drawing that shows the limits of clearing and grading, cuts and fills, and final contours at not more than two (2) feet intervals. The plan shall identify the phasing of the grading, showing the area(s) to be denuded and the maximum time those areas will remain disturbed (not to exceed the lessor of thirty (30) working days or one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after completion of the work). The plan shall show areas to be used for storage of topsoil and excavated subsoil and plans for access to the site during wet weather. The requirements of section 12A-71 shall apply to stored stockpiles of soil. 
b.  A final site plan showing the location or relocation of all utilities, planned streets, roads, buildings, parking lots, and structures, and all permanent stormwater management facilities. 
(3)  Temporary erosion and sediment control measures during active construction. 
a.  Drawings shall be provided showing types of measures and facilities needed and the location of those measures and facilities with dimensional details. All permanent deviations in overland flow drainage patterns and the location of ingress and egress points with the planned protection provisions are to be indicated. 
(4)  Permanent erosion and sediment control measures for long term protection. 
a.  Drawings shall be provided showing types of measures and facilities needed and the location of those measures and facilities with dimensional details. All permanent deviations in overland flow drainage patterns are to be indicated. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 20802, § 1, 12-6-10) 
Cross reference— Grading and pavement permits, § 12A-69.  
Sec. 12A-68. - Narrative report to accompany plan. 
(a)  The narrative report describing the nature and scope of the work shall include the following: 
(1)  The report shall briefly describe the overall project and shall incorporate an explanation of existing significant drainage problems contributing to erosion and siltation problems, particularly those that will be intensified by the alteration to the construction site. 
(2)  The report shall explain how the project design insures that the project does not promote or aggravate an existing off-site erosion, siltation, or drainage problem. The narrative should include a description of the effect of land disturbance activities off-site. 
(3)  Runoff producing factors under existing conditions and the estimated changes after construction must be provided. 
(4)  For design of the erosion control measures and facilities, the report shall include calculations of the peak runoff from a 10-year return frequency, 24-hour duration storm. 
(5)  Long range management of the erosion and siltation control facilities must be addressed in the report. 
(6)  The phasing or staging of the land disturbing activity is to be described including information on the sequence of land clearing operations, specifying the maximum area and time span the area will be left denuded, the provisions for the removal, protection and stockpiling of soil, the types of major earth moving and grading activities, dust control measures, and the order of placement of control facility installations. 
(7)  Explanations for the selection of the erosion and siltation control measures utilized shall be provided. 
(8)  A schedule shall be provided for inspection and maintenance of the erosion and sediment control facilities to insure maximum effectiveness of the protective measures and to assure that preventive maintenance efforts will be carried out when needed. The report should also include a description of plans for resodding or reseeding of vegetated areas and repair of reconstruction of damaged structural measures, and the method and frequency of removal and disposal of waste materials removed from the control facilities or project area including the disposal of temporary structural measures after they have served their purpose. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-69. - Grading and pavement permits. 
No permit for grading or constructing any public street shall be issued until the temporary erosion control measures set forth in the site grading and drainage plan, or in the plot plan for a site exempt from land disturbance permit requirements, have been properly installed. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-70. - Temporary erosion control measures. 
The temporary erosion control measures described in the site grading and drainage plan, or in the plot plan for a site exempt from the land disturbance permit requirement, shall be properly installed prior to commencement of any land disturbance activity and shall be properly maintained at all times until all land surfaces on the property become stable and non-erosive. 
(Ord. No. 13859, § 1, 11-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-71. - Stockpiles of soil. 
(a)  A single stockpile of soil shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height or three (3) acres in area. 
(b)  The maximum allowed height of a stockpile of soil is determined by the minimum distance from each of the categories in the following chart: 
Stockpile Height 	Minimum Distance from a Permitted Structure 	Minimum Distance from an "Exterior"* Public Right-of-Way 	Minimum Distance from an "Exterior"* Lot Line 	Minimum Distance from Stream Buffer Outer Zone of Type I and II Streams 
=30 feet—40 feet 	300 feet 	200 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 
=20 feet <30 feet 	300 feet 	150 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 
=10 feet <20 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 
0 feet <10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
 
*"Exterior" refers to the perimeter of the subdivision or development. The minimum distances in the chart do not apply to the internal roads and lot lines within a subdivision or development. 
(c)  The side slope of a stockpile of soil shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio. 
(d)  Stockpiles of soil are not permitted in a stream buffer. 
(e)  Stockpiles of soil shall be temporarily seeded in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual issued by the director. The working face of the stockpile, however, need not be seeded. 
(f)  Stockpiles of soil that meet the requirements of this section may remain in place for up to three (3) years after issuance of a land disturbance permit. For good cause, the director may extend this time limit for intervals of up to three (3) years. At least sixty (60) days before the time limit expires, the applicant for such an extension must submit a letter to the director explaining the reason for the requested extension. The letter must be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all land within lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet from the boundaries of the property on which the stockpile is located. The applicant shall send a copy of the letter to each of the property owners. If the director grants an extension, the director shall notify each of the property owners of the decision and advise the property owners of their right to appeal the decision to the board of adjustment under article VI. 
(g)  When the time limit for a stockpile of soil has expired, and no extension has been granted, the property owner must either remove the stockpile or grade it to a slope of no greater than a 4:1 ratio and permanently seed it in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual issued by the director. 
(h)  Subsections (a) through (e) shall not apply to stockpiles of soil existing on November 1, 2010; provided that all such stockpiles must be removed no later than November 1, 2013 unless an extension is granted under subsection (f). 
(i)  This section shall not apply to soil stockpiled in connection with any street construction project. 
(Ord. No. 20802, § 1, 12-6-10)  
Secs. 12A-72—12A-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19442, § 2, adopted March 5, 2007, repealed former Art. V, in its entirety, and enacted provisions designated as a new Art. V to read as herein set out. Former Art. V was entitled, "Stormwater Management Requirements." See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
*Section 2 of Ordinance No. 21407, states for a six month period beginning on September 4, 2012, stormwater management shall be provided, at the option of the property owner, either under the provisions of this article then in effect or under the provisions of this article as they existed on September 3, 2012. 
 
Sec. 12A-85. - Legislative findings. 
The city council makes the following legislative findings: 
(1)  Land development projects increase impervious surfaces resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, sediment transport and deposition, and increased quantities of water-borne pollutants. 
(2)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and non-point source pollution can be most cost-effectively controlled and minimized through land use regulation and preventative measures aimed at reducing stormwater runoff from development sites. 
(3)  The regulations set forth in this article reasonably reduce the harm caused by land development projects and are in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-86. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety and welfare of the public. This article is intended to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and streambank erosion and stream channel degradation; 
(2)  Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-point source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-87. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all developments that alter the surface of the land with the exceptions and exemptions set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e). 
(b)  Attached and detached single-family residences, farmland and domestic gardens are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The following exceptions apply to this article when the development of the site results in a land disturbance of less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one (1) acre or more: 
(1)  Lots within an approved preliminary plat or final plat used for single-family and two-family residences and land disturbance on an individual residential building lot; 
(2)  Land disturbances of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet that do not create more than five hundred (500) square feet of additional impervious surface; 
(3)  Maintenance and repair of impervious surface, including gravel and stone impervious surfaces; and 
(4)  Redevelopment of a site less than one (1) acre. 
(d)  Redevelopment on a site of one (1) acre or more, or that is a highly impervious surface site, is eligible for partial exceptions from the requirements of this article, as set out in the stormwater manual, if the redevelopment, or highly impervious surface site: 
(1)  Does not have an adverse impact on any mapped critical downstream location; 
(2)  Incorporates water quality protection; and 
(3)  Does not reduce any BMPs or stormwater management controls that includes performance standards, effective level of service, and runoff rates and volumes; and 
(4)  Increases water quality and performance standards with each development over time. 
The director shall track, map, add and remove known critical downstream locations and make this information available to the public. The director shall set forth criteria in the stormwater manual that details the partial exemption under this subsection. 
(e)  Stormwater management shall be provided in accordance with the conceptual stormwater management plan in zoning districts PUD, O-P, C-P, M-R and M-P for which a conceptual stormwater management plan was approved before September 4, 2007, or land in any other zoning district for which a site plan was approved before September 4, 2007, unless a revision to the plan for the site is requested which adversely impacts the stormwater discharge from the site. An "adverse impact" is one that significantly increases the volume of stormwater discharge from the site, decreases the water quality of the stormwater discharge, or redirects the stormwater discharge in a manner that results in downstream stormwater drainage impacts that would not have occurred with the original plan. Approvals for stormwater plans approved before September 4, 2012 shall expire on January 1, 2016 for sites on which the planned work has not commenced. Approval of all stormwater plans approved on or after September 4, 2012 shall expire seven (7) years after the date of approval if the planned work has not commenced. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 21473, § 1, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 12A-88. - Stormwater management plan required. 
(a)  A stormwater management plan is required for all development and redevelopment projects subject to this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted and approved by the director before issuance of a land disturbance permit and before approval of a final plat or a development plan. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must show all components of the storm drainage system including street curbs, inlets and piping, junction boxes, engineered and natural channels and stormwater management facilities (for example, retention and detention ponds, bioswales, bioretention areas, etc.). The stormwater management plan may be prepared in conjunction with or separate from the soil erosion plan. 
(d)  It is recommended that a preliminary stormwater management plan be submitted early in the review process to allow time for city staff to discuss plan concepts with the developer. The stormwater management plan will be discussed as part of the concept review for any proposed development. 
(e)  The stormwater management plan must comply with all requirements of the city's current Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual. 
(f)  The following information must be submitted with a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Worksheets. All calculations and worksheets used in plan preparation and BMP selection. 
(2)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development for the design conditions specified in the Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual. These calculations shall include: description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil curve numbers; peak runoff rates and total volumes for the watershed area; infiltration rates where applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual; and, documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(3)  Soils information. When a stormwater management facility relies on the hydrologic properties of the soils (such as an infiltration basin) the developer shall submit a soils report. The soils report shall be based on onsite boring logs or pit profiles. The number and location of required soil boring or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the facility. 
(4)  Landscaping information. The developer must include a detailed landscaping and vegetative restoration plan as part of the stormwater management plan. Details on maintenance of the vegetation shall be included in the operation and maintenance plan. The landscaping plan component must be prepared by an individual who can demonstrate knowledge of landscape design or by Missouri Department of Conservation personnel. 
(g)  The stormwater management plan must include a written operation and maintenance manual for the permanent stormwater management facilities, including landscaping and vegetative cover, proposed as part of the development. This is required whether the facilities are to be publicly or privately maintained. Approval of the operation and maintenance manual is a part of the overall plan approval process. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-89. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan required. 
If a proposed development includes activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, the director may require the developer to submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan. The director should be consulted before plan preparation if the developer suspects additional stormwater management requirements would be necessary in order to address specific pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-90. - Stormwater management performance standards. 
The following general performance standards shall be followed in the preparation of stormwater management plans: 
(1)  BMP's shall be used to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and to reduce the generation of stormwater runoff. These practices must use pervious areas to treat stormwater and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, roof tops and parking lots to the maximum extent practicable in order to improve water quality and reduce the quantity of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained to the maximum extent practicable, by promoting infiltration by the use of structural and nonstructural methods. Annual recharge from the post-development sites should mimic the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions. 
(3)  Structural stormwater facilities shall remove eighty (80) percent of the annual post-development total suspended solids load. It is presumed that facilities comply with this performance standard if they are: 
a.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume; 
b.  Designed in accordance with the specific requirements and level of service criteria set out in the Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual; and 
c.  Constructed properly and maintained regularly. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-91. - Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual. 
(a)  The city council approves the Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual prepared by the public works department dated January, 2007. The director is authorized to revise the Water Quality Manual periodically as advances in stormwater control practices evolve. All such revisions must be consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The director is authorized to allow alternate and equivalent best management practices when using the level of service method outlined in the Water Quality Manual. The director shall consider alternate designs of best management practices when it is fully demonstrated that the alternate designs are equal to or better than designs contained in the Water Quality Manual. 
(c)  Any person who constructs, reconstructs, alters or repairs a stormwater management facility for which a permit is required shall conduct such work in accordance with the Water Quality Manual. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 22578, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 12A-92. - As built drawings. 
As built construction drawings that show the final design specifications and are certified by a professional engineer are required on all permanent stormwater management facilities. The as built drawings must be submitted before city approval or acceptance of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-93. - Permit required. 
No portion of a storm drainage system including stormwater management facilities may be constructed, reconstructed, altered, modified or repaired without first obtaining a permit from the director. No such permit shall be issued until the director is satisfied that the plans for the work have been prepared in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan and with the Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual and until the applicant has posted a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow or other performance security acceptable to the director, in the city's favor assuring the construction, reconstruction, alteration, modification or repair of all stormwater management facilities authorized by the permit. The performance security shall be in the amount of the estimated cost of the project. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-94. - Certificate of occupancy; when issued. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a structure on any property subject to this article until construction of the required stormwater management facilities is completed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. If completion of the work or structure is at such time of the year that completion of the required stormwater management facilities is not feasible, a performance bond or other acceptable financial instrument for the estimated cost of completion of the work may be accepted to allow the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 12A-95. - Maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant, which must be approved by the director before final plat or plan approval and subsequently be recorded by the city with the Boone County Recorder of Deeds. The covenant will include a schedule for maintenance of the facilities to insure proper function of each stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include a schedule for inspections of each facility to ensure proper function of each stormwater management facility between scheduled maintenance functions. 
The director, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of stormwater management facilities for city maintenance based on specific criteria developed by the director and generally limited to those stormwater management facilities which serve multiple properties. Any stormwater management facility accepted by the city for maintenance must meet all the requirements of this article and include adequate access easements for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(b)  All stormwater management facilities shall be inspected at least once each year, during the period beginning on August 1 and ending on October 31, to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with this article. The facilities should also be inspected after each heavy rainfall and any necessary maintenance should be performed such as removal of silt, litter and debris from all catch basins, inlets, pipes and outlet structures. 
All maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner. The inspection and maintenance schedule may be modified for each facility based on results of the initial inspection program as deemed necessary to be fully compliant with the purpose of this article. 
(c)  The director may inspect any stormwater management facility as set forth in section 12A-192. Inspections may involve full evaluation of the physical structure and condition of the facility; review of the prior inspection, repair and maintenance records; and sampling of the surface water, discharges and groundwater as deemed necessary. 
(d)  Persons responsible for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall make records of the inspection, repair, maintenance and any modifications to the facilities and shall retain these records for a minimum of five (5) years. These records shall be made available to the director during inspection of the facility or at any time upon request. Inspection and maintenance records shall be submitted to the director by November 15 of each year. Any failure to submit these records shall be unlawful and subject to the penalties of section 12A-11. 
(e)  Failure to properly maintain a stormwater management facility is hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated under the procedures set forth in section 12A-202. 
(Ord. No. 19442, § 2, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 23299 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Secs. 12A-96—12A-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 12A-109. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director in the administration or enforcement of this chapter, other than the nuisance abatement provisions, may appeal such decision to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 12A-110. - Variances. 
(a)  Any property owner may petition the board of adjustment for a variance from strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the grounds for the petition and all facts relied upon by petitioner. The petition shall include a written detailed explanation of all burdens or hardships and how all options available in the stormwater manual or under this chapter have been exhausted. The petition shall address in detail how the petitioner is in compliance with subsections (b)(1)—(4) and (c) of this section; shall include all evidence and support that no adverse downstream impacts exist; and shall list all reasonable mitigation measures. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall not grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter unless it shall make all of the following findings: 
(1)  Good and sufficient cause based on an unreasonable burden or hardship has been proved. 
(2)  The granting of the variance would not result in any increase in quantity or velocity of flow, degradation of water quality, or negative impacts upon adjoining or downstream properties, nor upon the stormwater system. 
(3)  The degree of variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief from the unreasonable burden or hardship imposed by the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  The variance may be granted without defeating the public health, safety and welfare purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(c)  The board may grant a variance to the stormwater management requirements of Article V only if at least one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Alternative requirements for onsite management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan approved by the director. 
(2)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an existing offsite facility that is adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control at least equal to that which would be afforded by onsite practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term maintenance of the offsite facility. 
(3)  The board finds that meeting the minimum onsite management requirements is not feasible because of physical characteristics of the site. 
The board may not vary the stormwater management requirements of Article V if the variance would result in any of the following impacts in the downstream waterway: 
(1)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams or other structures; 
(2)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)  Accelerated stream bank or stream bed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Increased threat of flood damage. 
If a variance granted by the board will likely result in a lower level of stormwater control, the board shall impose reasonable mitigation measures including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation or reforestation. These lands must be adjacent to a stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(2)  The construction of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed property, whether public or private, which currently lacks stormwater management facilities, designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and purposes of this chapter and the city's Stormwater Management and Water Quality Manual. 
(3)  At the petitioner's request, monetary contributions to fund stormwater related studies and projects including regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies, hydrologic studies, stream assessment studies, including stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies and stream restoration projects. The monetary contribution shall be in accordance with a schedule established by the director and shall be based on the cubic feet of storage required but not provided for the stormwater management of the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 19442, § 3, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 21407, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 12A-111. - Procedure. 
The procedures set forth in Chapter 29 for appeals to the board of adjustment shall apply to petitions for appeals or variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13019, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Secs. 12A-112—12A-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CLEAN FILL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 12A-130 of this article shall be effective July 20, 1992, the remaining sections of this article shall take effect September 1, 1992. 
 
Sec. 12A-126. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful to dump, assist in the dumping, direct, solicit or allow the dumping of clean fill at any site within the city unless a clean fill permit for such dumping has been issued by the director. A permit shall not be required to dump topsoil for landscaping or gardening purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-127. - Applications for clean fill permits. 
(a)  No clean fill permit shall be issued unless an application for such permit has been filed with the director which sets forth the location and street address of the dump site and the name and address of the legal owner of the dump site. 
(b)  No clean fill permit shall be issued on sites two (2) acres or larger unless all applicable requirements of a land disturbance permit are satisfied. 
(c)  No clean fill permit shall be issued on sites less than two (2) acres unless the application for the permit sets forth reasonable and effective methods to control erosion and to keep adjacent streets and properties free from the clean fill and any mud or other material from the dump site. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-128. - Clean fill permits. 
The director shall issue a clean fill permit only after he is satisfied that the application complies with the provisions of this article. Every clean fill permit shall have the terms and conditions under which the permit is granted clearly stated upon it. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-129. - Clean fill site maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be a condition of every clean fill permit that no actively used clean fill site shall be left in a rough or unleveled condition for more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
(b)  Any clean fill site which does not receive clean fill for thirty (30) days shall be considered an inactive fill site. 
(c)  It shall be a condition of every clean fill permit that inactive fill sites must be seeded and mulched within thirty (30) days of becoming an inactive fill site, provided the period of inactivity is such that seeding and mulching can occur. Otherwise, the owner of the site shall meet performance guarantees as specified for land disturbance permits to assure that seeding and mulching will occur as soon as weather permits. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-130. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb the peace and quiet of neighboring inhabitants by dumping in a clean fill site other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Nothing in this section shall prohibit dumping in a clean fill site in connection with disaster cleanup or in connection with work to maintain or restore utility service. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-131. - Compliance with permit terms. 
It shall be unlawful to dump clean fill or to allow the dumping of clean fill or to maintain a clean fill dump site in any manner which is in violation of the terms or conditions of the clean fill permit or in any manner other than in conformity with the methods set out in an approved clean fill permit application. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-132. - Revocation of permit. 
The director may revoke a clean fill permit if the permit application contains any false statement or misrepresentation of fact. The director may revoke a clean fill permit if the permit holder fails to comply with the permit conditions or any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 12A-133. - Land disturbance permits. 
Nothing in this article shall exempt any person from the land disturbance permit requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13374, § 1, 7-20-92)  
Secs. 12A-134—12A-147. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
 
Sec. 12A-148. - Stormwater utility charge. 
There is hereby established a monthly stormwater utility charge to be paid by the occupant or owner of each parcel of developed land within the city in accordance with the following table: 
Category of land use 	Monthly Charge 
Multiple-family buildings having more than four units; single-family residences having a main floor area less than 750 sq. ft. 	$1.90 per unit 
Multiple-family buildings having four or less units; mobile homes; single-family residences having a main floor area of from 750 sq. ft. to 1,250 sq. ft. 	$2.49 per unit 
Single-family residences having a main floor area of from 1,251 sq. ft. to 2,000 sq. ft. 	$3.37 per unit 
Single-family residence having a main floor area more than 2,000 sq. ft. 	$3.96 per unit 
All non-residential uses of developed land 	$11.72 or $0.117 per 100 square feet impervious area, whichever is greater. 
 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 14212 § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 22572, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22922 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23299 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23634 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24009 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 12A-149. - Liability for charge. 
The owner(s) and occupant(s) of developed land, if different, shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the stormwater utility charge. 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-150. - Exemptions. 
The stormwater utility charge shall not be imposed on the occupants or owners of streets or railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 14249 § 1, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 12A-151. - Billing practices. 
(a)  General. The stormwater utility charge shall be billed by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section and the accounts and billings procedures set forth in chapter 27. Except as otherwise herein provided, each city utility service customer shall be billed the stormwater utility charge for the premises where the customer receives water, electric, sewage or refuse collection utility service. Where there is no city water, electric, sewage or refuse collection utility service customer for a parcel of developed land, the stormwater utility charge shall be billed to the property owner. 
(b)  Multiple-family buildings. A stormwater utility charge shall be billed to each utility service customer having an account for an individual dwelling unit in a multiple-family building. When no customer has an account for a dwelling unit, the stormwater utility charge for that unit shall be billed to the property owner. At the request of the property owner, the stormwater utility charge for some or all dwelling units in a multiple-family building may be billed to the property owner. 
(c)  Nonresidential use. Where there is more than one utility service customer for a parcel of land developed for a nonresidential use, the stormwater utility charge shall be billed to the property owner, except where the property owner and a tenant have agreed that the tenant shall be billed. 
(d)  Mixed multiple-family and nonresidential use. Where a parcel of land or single structure is developed with both multiple-family and nonresidential uses, the stormwater utility charge shall be billed to the owner or single entity representing multiple owners. The director, in determining the billing category of land to use for the monthly stormwater utility charge, shall compute the charge by comparing the total number of multiple family units charge to the total nonresidential uses charge and shall apply whichever charge is greater. 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 22578, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22785, § 1, 4-4-16 ) 
Note— The new rates established in Ordinance 22785 shall be applied to utility bills beginning with the first complete cycle billed after April 30, 2016.  
Sec. 12A-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22785, § 1, adopted April 4, 2016 , repealed § 12A-152, which pertained to reduction of charge for approved runoff control. See Code Comparative Table for complete history.  
Sec. 12A-153. - Use of stormwater utility charge revenue. 
All revenue received from the stormwater utility charge shall be used solely for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 12A-154. - Computing main floor area and impervious surface. 
The director shall be responsible for computing the main floor area of single-family residences and the impervious surface of nonresidential uses subject to the stormwater utility charge. In making such computations, the director may rely on the accuracy of any public records. 
(Ord. No. 13590, § 1, 2-15-93)  
Secs. 12A-155—12A-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DETECTION AND ELIMINATION OF ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGES  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12A-160. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to insure the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Columbia by enhancing the water quality of water courses and water bodies to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state laws. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant and Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants by stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system or to any water course; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges; and 
(3)  To establish legal authority for inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to insure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-161. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Accidental discharge. A discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Best management practices (BMP). Activities, practices and procedures to prevent or control the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the municipal storm drain system, waters of the state and waters of the United States. BMPs include but are not limited to treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwaters; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spills or leaks of stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from material storage; erosion and sediment control practices; the prohibition of specific activities, practices and procedures; and such other provisions the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Contaminated. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
Contamination. The presence of or entry into the municipal separate storm sewer system, waters of the state or waters of the United States of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health or quality of the water. 
Director. The director of utilities or the director's designee. 
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system or into the waters of the state or waters of the United States. 
Discharger. Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge including any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
Enforcement official. Any person designated by the director to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency or any duly authorized official of that agency. 
Hearing officer. The director or a person designated by the director to conduct hearings under this article. 
Illicit connections. An illicit connection is any drain or conveyance not specifically allowed by this article: 
(1)  Which allows a discharge; 
(2)  Which is connected to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks regardless of whether the drain or connection was previously allowed, permitted or approved by a governmental agency; or 
(3)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system. The system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, city streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater and which is not intended for collecting or conveying sewage. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under Section 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include but are not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure, including but not limited to sediments, slurries and concrete rinsates; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution. The human made or human induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
Storm drain system. The municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation including snow melt. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 22578, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 12A-162. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the municipal separate storm sewer system unless explicitly exempted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-163. - Responsibility for administration. 
The director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-164. - Regulatory consistency. 
This article shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and regulatory requirements of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-165. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth in this article and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards. Compliance with this article does not insure that there will be no contamination, pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any agent or employee of the city for any damages that result from any discharges, reliance on this article or any administrative decision made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Secs. 12A-166—12A-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 12A-176. - Illegal discharges. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal separate storm sewer system or into any water course any material other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: 
(1)  Waterline flushing or other potable water sources; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Groundwater infiltration; 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Foundation or footing drains (excluding active groundwater de-watering systems); 
(8)  Crawlspace pumps, air conditioning condensation; 
(9)  Springs; 
(10)  Non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
(11)  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
(12)  Swimming pools (if de-chlorinated — less than one (1) ppm chlorine); 
(13)  Fire fighting activities; 
(14)  Other water not containing pollutants; 
(15)  Discharges specified by the director as necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(16)  Dye testing if notification is given to the director before the test; and 
(17)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-177. - Illicit connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain or have an illicit connection. 
(b)  This section expressly applies to illicit connections made in the past even if the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-178. - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump or to cause or allow the placing, depositing or dumping any refuse, rubbish, yard waste, paper litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations containing pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system or into any waterway. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-179. - Connection of sanitary sewer prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or to allow such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-180. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to an industrial activity or construction NPDES stormwater discharge permit to fail to comply with all provisions of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-181. - Continuing violation. 
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Secs. 12A-182—12A-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS AND MONITORING 
 
Sec. 12A-191. - Best management practices. 
(a)  The city council may, by ordinance, adopt standards identifying best management practices (BMP) for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, waters of the state or waters of the United States. These standards shall be on file in the office of the director. It shall be unlawful for any person undertaking any activity or owning or operating any facility subject to such standards to fail to comply with the standards. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal separate storm sewer system or water courses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Any person responsible for property which is or may be the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent further discharge. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity to the extent practicable shall be deemed in compliance with provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be a part of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as necessary for compliance with the requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-192. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities which have stormwater discharges associated with the facility activity including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  Enforcement officers are authorized to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entering its premises, the discharger shall be given the opportunity to make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the enforcement officers. If an enforcement officer is denied entry to the property, the officer or city prosecutor may apply to the municipal court for a warrant under the provisions of Chapter 15 of this Code. 
(2)  Facilities operators shall allow enforcement officials ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records which must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit, or local or other state permits to discharge stormwater and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. If an enforcement officer is denied such access, the officer or city prosecutor may apply to the municipal court for a warrant under the provisions of Chapter 15 of this Code. 
(3)  The enforcement officer may install devices on any facility to monitor and sample the facility's stormwater discharge. If an enforcement officer is not allowed to install such a device, the officer or city prosecutor may apply to the municipal court for a warrant under the provisions of Chapter 15 of this Code. 
(4)  An enforcement officer may require a discharger to install monitoring equipment. The discharger shall maintain the facility sampling and monitoring equipment at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to insure their accuracy. 
(5)  At the request of an enforcement officer, a discharger shall promptly remove any obstructions to safe and easy access to a facility to be inspected. The obstructions shall not be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Secs. 12A-193—12A-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 12A-201. - Nuisances declared. 
(a)  Any discharge in violation of this article is a nuisance. 
(b)  Any illicit connection is a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-202. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Abatement notice. When an enforcement official determines that a nuisance exists in violation of this article, the enforcement official may initiate a nuisance abatement procedure by serving an abatement notice on the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is believed to exist. The abatement notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the location and nature of the alleged nuisance; 
(2)  A statement of the acts necessary to abate the alleged nuisance; 
(3)  An order establishing the time for beginning and completing abatement of the alleged nuisance and requiring that abatement activities continue without unreasonable delay; 
(4)  Information on the right to a hearing and the manner of requesting a hearing to contest the enforcement official's abatement notice; and 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as ordered and if no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city may abate the alleged nuisance and assess the costs against the property owner and the property. 
(b)  Service of abatement notice. 
(1)  The enforcement official shall serve the abatement notice on the property owner by first class mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(2)  If the enforcement official is unable to obtain service by either of the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing the abatement notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by posting the abatement notice on the property where the alleged nuisance exists. Notice shall be considered given on the date the notice is published or the notice is posted, whichever is later. 
(c)  Request for hearing. The owner of property on which the nuisance is alleged to exist may contest the abatement notice by requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made in writing and received by the director within seven (7) days of service of the abatement notice. The request for hearing must be either hand-delivered to the office of the director or sent to the director by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. At least ten (10) days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner except in cases where the public health, safety or interest shall make a shorter time reasonable. Notice shall be hand-delivered to the property owner or mailed to the address provided by the property owner in the request for hearing. Notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(e)  Hearing and decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists as charged in the abatement notice, the hearing officer may enter an order of abatement directing that the nuisance be abated under such conditions and within such time as the hearing officer deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(f)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made to the circuit court of Boone County in accordance with Chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-203. - Abatement by city. 
If the order of abatement is not complied with or if no hearing is requested and the abatement notice is not complied with, the director may have the nuisance abated by city employees or by persons under contract with the city. No person shall enter private property to abate a nuisance unless the owner or occupant has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-204. - Collection of abatement costs. 
(a)  The director shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk. The cost shall include administrative costs as well as the actual cost of abating the nuisance. The city clerk shall cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared in the amount of the abatement costs. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. No clerical error or informality in the tax bill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the tax bill shall be a defense in an action to collect the tax bill. Tax bills issued under this section, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum. 
(b)  The cost of abatement shall also constitute a personal obligation of the owner of the property and of any other person who caused the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-205. - Emergency abatement. 
(a)  The director may abate any nuisance without following the abatement procedures of this article if the nuisance presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of any inhabitant of the city. 
(b)  The director may assess the cost, including administrative costs, of abating a nuisance under this section against the property on which the nuisance was located. Before assessing costs, the director shall serve a bill of costs on the property owner. The bill of costs shall describe the nuisance that was abated, state the cost of abatement and inform the owner of the right and manner of requesting a hearing. 
(c)  The bill of costs shall be served on the property owner by first class mail, or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. If service is not able to be obtained by either of the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing notice of the bill of costs in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  The property owner may contest the assessment of costs by requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made in writing and received by the director within seven (7) days of service of the bill of costs or publication of notice of the bill of costs. The request for hearing must be either hand-delivered to the office of the director or sent to the director by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. The request for hearing must state an address to which a notice of hearing may be sent. 
(e)  Notice of hearing. At least ten (10) days' written notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner. Notice shall be hand-delivered to the property owner or mailed to the address provided by the property owner in the request for hearing. Notice shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. 
(f)  Hearing and decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that the abatement was justified under subsection (a), the hearing officer shall certify the cost of abatement to the city clerk for collection pursuant to the provisions of section 12A-204. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made to the Circuit Court of Boone County in accordance with Chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-206. - Nuisances on more than one property. 
If any nuisance abated by the director extended over more than one (1) parcel of land, the cost of abating the nuisance shall be assessed against each parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated in proportion to the amount of work and expense for each such parcel. Except in the case of an emergency abatement, however, no parcel of land shall be assessed unless an owner of the parcel was served with an abatement notice. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 12A-207. - Nuisances attributable to neighboring property. 
If any nuisance abated by the director was caused in whole or in part by activities on neighboring property, the cost of abating the nuisance shall be assessed against each parcel of such neighboring property in proportion to the amount of damage attributable to each such parcel. Except in the case of an emergency abatement, however, no property shall be assessed unless an owner of the property was served with an abatement notice. The owner of such property shall be entitled to the same hearing and appeal rights as the owner of property on which a nuisance is alleged to exist. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Secs. 12A-208—12A-214. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 12A-215. - Variances. 
(a)  The director may grant a variance for the following: 
(1)  Projects or activities serving a public need where no feasible alternative is available. 
(2)  The repair and maintenance of public improvements where avoidance and minimization of adverse impacts to wetlands and associated aquatic ecosystems have been addressed. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance to the director. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance request. The director may require site design, landscape planting, fencing, the placement of signs, and the establishment of water quality best management practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams, wetlands, and floodplains. 
(Ord. No. 18297, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Secs. 12A-216—12A-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STREAM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12A-231. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Stream buffers provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter needed by the aquatic ecosystem for food and energy; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic organisms; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Protecting the public from flooding, property damage and loss; and 
(12)  Providing sustainable, natural vegetation. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to protect streams in the city by establishing minimum stream buffer requirements. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-232. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article applies to all land in the city except the following: 
(1)  Land used for farming activities covered by an approved Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS) conservation plan that includes the application of Best Management Practices (BMPs). 
(2)  Land included in a preliminary or final plat approved before January 2, 2007. 
(3)  The portion of land for which a valid, unexpired building permit has been issued or for which application for a building permit is pending on January 2, 2007. 
(4)  Land used for surface mining operations that is operating in compliance with a state-approved surface mining permit. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-233. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means conservation practices or management measures which control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation mainly caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxins, sediment in the runoff. BMPs may be either structural (for example, grass swales, terraces, retention and detention ponds), or non-structural (for example, disconnection of impervious surfaces, directing downspouts onto grass surfaces and educational activities). 
Buffer means a vegetated area including trees, shrubs, managed lawn areas, and herbaceous vegetation which exists or is established to protect a stream system, lake or reservoir. 
Development means: 
(1)  The improvement of property for any purpose involving construction; or 
(2)  Subdivision or the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; or 
(3)  The combination of any two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of property for any purpose; 
(4)  The preparation of land for construction; or 
(5)  Land disturbance that requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Farming activities means disturbance of any area greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the purpose of planting, cultivating and harvesting any crop product for commercial use. 
Managed lawn areas means any area greater than five hundred (500) square feet where the vegetative ground cover is maintained at a uniform height of less than three (3) inches. 
Non-point source pollution means pollution which is generated by various land use activities rather than from an identifiable or discrete source, and is conveyed to waterways through natural processes such as rainfall, storm runoff or groundwater seepage and infiltration rather than through direct discharge. 
Pollution means any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or detrimental to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses; or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Streams means perennial and intermittent watercourses identified through site inspection and United States Geological Survey (USGS) maps and further defined and categorized as follows: 
(1)  Type I Streams are defined as perennial streams shown as solid blue lines on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map. 
(2)  Type II Streams are defined as intermittent streams shown as dashed blue lines on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map. 
(3)  Type III Streams are defined as waterways or natural channels which are not shown on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map as either blue or dashed blue lines which have drainage areas of greater than fifty (50) acres. 
Waterways means natural or manmade lakes, natural channels, rivers, streams, and creeks which store or convey stormwater runoff. 
Wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at frequency and duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-234. - No land disturbance in stream buffer before plan approved. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to clear, grade, disturb vegetation or build a structure on any land subject to this article that is located within one hundred (100) feet of a Type I Stream, fifty (50) feet of a Type II Stream or thirty (30) feet of a Type III Stream, as measured in section 12A-236(b), before the director has approved a stream buffer plan for the land. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-235. - Stream buffer plan requirements. 
(a)  All development plans and plats shall include or be accompanied by a stream buffer plan that sets forth an informative, conceptual and schematic representation of the proposed stream buffers by means of maps, graphs, charts, or other written or drawn documents to enable the city to determine whether the plan or plat is in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Stream buffer plans shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A site plan map at a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. 
(2)  Field delineated and surveyed streams, springs, seeps, bodies of water, sink holes, and wetlands (include a minimum of two hundred (200) feet into adjacent properties). 
(3)  Delineated stream buffers. 
(4)  Limits of the ultimate 100-year floodplain as shown on the adopted floodplain maps for the City of Columbia. 
(5)  Steep slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent for areas adjacent to and within two hundred (200) feet of streams, wetlands, or other waterbodies. 
(c)  A stream buffer plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the required land disturbance plan for each development, and the buffer must be clearly delineated on the site grading plan. Each site grading and drainage plan shall include a note stating, "There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of vegetation except as specifically approved by the city." 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-236. - Design standards for stream buffers. 
(a)  An adequate buffer for a stream system shall consist of a predominantly undisturbed strip of land extending along both sides of a stream and its adjacent wetlands, floodplains or slopes. The buffer width may be adjusted to include contiguous sensitive areas, such as steep slopes or erodible soils, where disturbance may adversely affect water quality, streams, wetlands, or other water bodies. 
(b)  The buffer shall begin and be measured from the ordinary high water mark of the channel during base flows. 
(c)  The required base width for all stream buffers is shown in Table I. 
Table I. Required Stream Buffer Width 
Waterway Type 	Required Width

(each side) 
Type I 	100 feet 
Type II 	50 feet 
Type III 	30 feet 
 
(d)  Stream buffer width shall be increased where there are steep slopes in close proximity to the stream that drain into the stream system as set forth in Table II. 
Table II. Modifications to Stream Buffer

Width Based on Slope 
Percent Slope 	Width of Buffer 
0—14% 	No Change 
15%—25% 	add 25 feet 
Greater than 25% 	add 50 feet 
 
(e)  Buffer averaging. The stream buffer width may be relaxed and the buffer permitted to become narrower at some points as long as the average width of the buffer meets the minimum requirement. This averaging of the buffer may be used to allow for the presence of an existing structure or to recover a lost lot, as long as the streamside zone (Zone I) is not narrowed by the averaging. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-237. - Stream buffer function, vegetation and uses. 
(a)  The stream buffer shall be composed of two (2) distinct zones, each having its own function, allowed vegetation and permitted uses as set forth in this section and as summarized in Table III. The streamside zone will begin and be measured as set forth in section 12A-236(b) and extend away from the ordinary high water mark a distance as shown in Table III. The outer zone will begin at the outside edge of the streamside zone and extend outward, away from the streamside zone the distances shown in Table III. 
Table III. Stream Buffers 
Streamside Zone 	Outer Zone 
Type I

Waterway 	Type II

Waterway 	Type III

Waterway 	Type I

Waterway 	Type II

Waterway 	Type III

Waterway 
Width 	50 	25 	15 	Width 	50 	25 	15 
Vegetation 	Indigenous Vegetation 	Vegetation 	Type I - Indigenous Vegetation 

Type II - Managed Lawns Permissible 

Type III - Managed Lawns Permissible 
Uses 	Flood control, footpaths, road crossings, utility corridors 	Uses 	Biking/hiking paths, flood control, detention/retention structures, utility corridors, stormwater BMPs, residential yards, landscaped areas 
Function 	Protect the physical and ecological integrity of the stream ecosystem 	Function 	Protect key components of the stream and filter and slow velocity of water runoff 
 
(b)  The width of the streamside zone is set forth in Table III. The normal width of the outer zone is set forth in Table III but will vary if the stream buffer is increased or decreased on an approved stream buffer plan. 
(c)  The function of the streamside zone is to protect the physical, biological and ecological integrity of the stream ecosystem. The function of the outer zone is to prevent encroachment into the streamside zone and to filter runoff from residential and commercial development. 
(d)  Indigenous vegetation must be preserved in the streamside zone and in the outer zone of Type I Streams. Managed lawns are permitted in the outer zone of Type II and Type III Streams although landowners are encouraged to preserve or plant indigenous vegetation in order to increase the filtering capability of the buffering system. 
(e)  The structures, practices and activities permitted in the streamside zone of the buffer are limited to the following: 
(1)  Roads and bridges; 
(2)  Utilities where no practical alternative exists; 
(3)  Paths and recreation trails (but use of the outer zone is preferred); 
(4)  Removal of diseased or dead trees, brush and trash; 
(5)  Removal of debris which could cause flooding; 
(6)  Selective (spot) spraying of noxious or other vegetation consistent with recommendations from the city arborist or the Missouri Department of Conservation; 
(7)  Water quality monitoring and stream gauging; 
(8)  Maintenance of city-approved bank stabilization measures; 
(9)  Maintenance of all city-approved improvements, including utilities. 
(f)  The following practices and activities are specifically prohibited within the streamside zone of the stream buffer, except by the city: 
(1)  Clearing of existing vegetation. 
(2)  Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices; 
(3)  Filling or dumping; 
(4)  Drainage by ditching, underdrains, or other systems; 
(5)  Use, storage, or application of pesticides, except as provided for in subsection (e)(6); 
(6)  Storage or operation of motorized vehicles, except for maintenance and emergency use approved by the city; 
(7)  Housing, grazing, or other maintenance of livestock. 
(g)  The structures, practices and activities permitted in the outer zone of the buffer are limited to the following: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the streamside zone; 
(2)  Flood control structures; 
(3)  Detention and retention structures; 
(4)  Utility corridors; 
(5)  Stormwater BMPs; 
(6)  Managed lawns (Type II and III Streams only); and 
(7)  Landscaped areas. 
(h)  There shall be no septic systems, permanent structures or impervious cover, with the exception of foot paths, roads, bridges and utilities within the outer zone. 
(i)  The following activities are specifically prohibited within the outer zone of the stream buffer of Type I Streams, except by the city: 
(1)  Clearing of existing vegetation; 
(2)  Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices. 
(3)  Filling or dumping. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-238. - Additional land use restriction near streams. 
The following land uses and activities are potential water pollution hazards and must be set back from any stream or waterbody by the distance indicated below: 
1. 	Storage and use of hazardous substances 	300 feet 
2. 	Above- or below-ground petroleum storage facilities 	300 feet 
3. 	Drain fields from on-site sewage disposal and treatment systems 	200 feet 
4. 	Raised septic systems 	200 feet 
5 	Salvage yards or automobile recyclers 	600 feet 
6. 	Confined animal feedlot operations 	500 feet 
7. 	Tilled land (for crops) 	200 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-239. - Temporary boundary markers. 
Temporary boundary markers shall be installed by the applicant before clearing and grading operations begin and shall be maintained throughout the development activities. The markers will be placed on the outside edge of the buffer zone before the start of any activity adjacent to the buffer zone. Markers shall be clearly visible and shall be spaced at a maximum of one hundred (100) feet. The markers shall be joined by marking tape or fencing. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-240. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any condition prohibited by this article is a nuisance. 
(b)  The abatement procedures and other provisions of Article IX, Division 4 of this chapter apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-241. - Variances by the director. 
(a)  The director may grant a variance or waiver for the following: 
(1)  Projects or activities serving a public need where no feasible alternative is available; 
(2)  The repair and maintenance of public improvements where avoidance and minimization of adverse impacts to wetlands and associated aquatic ecosystems have been addressed. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance or waiver to the director. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. The director may require an alternatives analysis that clearly demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that minimal impact will occur as a result of the project or development. 
(c)  In granting a request for a variance, the director may require site design, landscape planting, fencing, the placement of signs, and the establishment of water quality best management practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams, wetlands, and floodplains. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 12A-242. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Where the standards and management requirements of this article are in conflict with other laws, regulations, and policies regarding streams, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, timber harvesting, land disturbance activities, or other environmental protective measures, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 19343, § 1, 1-2-07)  
Chapter 13 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Continuance of taxes, § 145; rates of taxation, § 152; remitting taxes prohibited, § 154; adoption of earnings tax restricted, § 165; licensing, taxation and regulation of occupations and business, § 166. 
Cross reference— General fund, § 2-3; permit for commercial use of airport, § 3-41 et seq.; license required for manufacture, brewing, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, § 4-2; intoxicating liquor licenses and permits, § 4-46 et seq.; nonintoxicating beer license, § 4-81 et seq.; licensing of domestic dogs and cats required, § 5-63; food service establishments, § 11-131 et seq.; permit required for food service establishments, § 11-135; permits authorized for disabled parking, § 14-442; license required for cycles, § 14-494; municipal court cost enumerated, § 15-19; permits for special shooting events and fireworks display, § 16-234(b)(2); noise regulations regarding hawkers and peddlers, § 16-267; commercial advertising by sound amplifying equipment of trucks prohibited, § 16-282; registration statement required for noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment in trucks, § 16-283 et seq.; merchandising, advertising and sign regulations for parks, § 17-121 et seq.; permit required for special use or activity in parks, § 17-134; transportation fares, § 22-29; special tax for public sewers, § 22-227; special tax for district sewers, § 22-232; special tax for joint district sewers, § 22-242; sewers and sewage disposal rates and charges, § 22-261 et seq.; right-of-way closure permit § 24-41 et seq.; special event permits, § 24-71 et seq.; when permit required for landscaping, § 24-86; permit required for parades and processions, § 24-101 et seq.; permit for sale of cigarettes, § 26-47 et seq.; license tax for sale of cigarettes, § 26-53 et seq.; motor bus licenses, § 28-26 et seq.; motor bus permit, § 28-41 et seq.; public transfer license required, § 28-57; taxicab operator's license, § 28-91 et seq.; taxicab driver's license, § 28-110 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION LICENSES 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "General Licensing Ordinance of the City of Columbia, Missouri." 
(Code 1964, § 11.010)  
Sec. 13-17. - Scope. 
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, or personal property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Code 1964, § 11.020)  
Sec. 13-18. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
Business. Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction, as permitted by the Statutes of Missouri, and as provided for by the charter of the city. 
Business services administrator, business license administrator, license administrator or administrator. The business services administrator of the city. 
Employee. A regular employee or associate is one who works in the service of the licensee twenty (20) hours or more per week during thirty (30) or more weeks per year. 
Garage sale. The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five (5) items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district, as defined in section 29-1.11 of this Code, whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school athletic events shall not be deemed to constitute garage sales. 
Gross receipts. Unless otherwise provided, the aggregate amount of all sales within the city limits, and shall include the receipt of cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of any items sold, the cost of any materials used, or of any labor, service costs, interest paid or payable, or any losses or any other expenses whatsoever; gross receipts is meant to include gross annual commissions (to apply to real estate brokers and agents, insurance agents, agents and solicitors for surety companies or bonding companies and any other business whose income is calculated by commissions); provided, however, that the following shall be excluded from any computation of gross receipts if the books of accounts segregate the amounts as to reflect such exclusions: 
(1)  Receipts of traded merchandise recorded as cash receipts and resold and recorded as a sale upon such resale; provided, this subparagraph has no application to utilities licensed under chapter 26, Article V, divisions 2 and 3 of this Code. 
(2)  Interdepartmental sales within the organization of the seller. 
(3)  Such part of the sales price of property returned by the purchasers as is refunded either in cash or by credit. 
(4)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that portion of refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the gross receipts of the seller. 
License or licensee. Include, respectively, the words "permit" or "permittee," or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this article or other law or ordinance. 
Person. Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. The term" person" shall not be deemed to include the servants, agents, officers, or employees of a person, as herein defined, while such servants, agents, officers or employees are engaged in or carrying on or aiding in the conducting, engaging in, or carrying on of the business, trade, calling, privilege, vocation or profession of such person when such person is duly licensed to carry on such business, trade, calling, privilege, vocation or profession, except as may be otherwise provided herein. 
Premises. Includes all lands, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any other business conducted on such premises. 
Related occupation. An occupation customarily incident to that occupation in which the licensee is primarily engaged, and which is similar in nature insofar as the type of item sold or service offered or performed. 
(Code 1964, § 11.030; Ord. No. 15454, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. 19996, § 1, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 23117 , § 5, 3-20-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-19. - Business license administrator. 
(a)  Position Created. There shall be a business license administrator under the personnel ordinance of the city, who shall possess qualifications including those established for a police officer of the city and who shall perform all the duties of this article specified to be performed by the business license administrator. The administrator shall be under the general supervision of the director of finance, and shall be subject to his control and direction. 
(b)  Duties. The business license administrator shall accept all applications for licenses provided by this article; and shall investigate all applications and, upon investigation, determine that the license sought be either issued or not issued, under the provisions of this article, and shall: 
(1)  Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations approved by the finance director. 
(2)  Adopt forms. Adopt all forms as prescribed, the information to be given therein as to character and other relevant matters for all necessary papers. 
(3)  Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this article. 
(4)  Obtain endorsements. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing. 
(5)  Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as prescribed herein. 
(6)  Examine records. Examine, with the express consent of the city council, the records and books of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article, and then only to such extent necessary to obtain an accurate gross sales amount. 
(7)  Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his application; and shall, upon his refusal of any license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
(c)  Information Confidential. The business license administrator shall keep all information furnished or secured under the authority of this article in strict confidence. Such information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to the persons charged with the administration of this article. Any city officer or employee disclosing confidential information under this section shall be subject to immediate dismissal. 
(Code 1964, § 11.050)  
Sec. 13-20. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise, or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device in whole or in part, for which a license or permit is required by any law or ordinance of this city, without a license or permit therefor being first secured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this article or other law or ordinance of this city. 
(b)  Special sales. This article shall apply to all business in the nature of special sales for which a license is required by any law or ordinance of this city; and it shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any such sale except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  One act constitutes doing business. For the purpose of this article, any person shall be deemed to be in business or engaged in nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, when he does one (1) act of: 
a.  Selling any goods or services. 
b.  Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire. 
c.  Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes. 
(2)  Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents, who are doing business in this city, shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals, and of the businesses they represent, with this article. 
(3)  Separate license for branch establishments. A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(4)  Joint license. Every person engaged in more than one (1) related occupation, where all such occupations are operated as one (1) business under the same management and at the same location, may pay one (1) license fee on the gross receipts of the combined occupations for all such occupations licensed. This may also apply in the case of contractors who may engage in more than one (1) type of contracting where the fee rate is the same; except, that in all cases, the computation of fee shall be based on the occupation with the highest maximum fee. 
(5)  No license required for mere delivery. No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at a regular place of business outside the city where no intent by such person is shown to evade the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Special permits to nonprofit enterprises. The business license administrator will issue special permits without the payment of any license fees or other charges therefor to any person or organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant operates without private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, civic or religious purpose. 
(7)  Procedure concerning special permits. 
a.  Application for special permit: An applicant for a special permit shall submit an application therefor to the business license administrator, upon forms prescribed by the administrator, and shall furnish such additional information and make such affidavits as the administrator shall require 
b.  Special permits must conform: A person or organization operating under a special permit shall operate his nonprofit enterprise in compliance with this article and all other applicable rules and regulations, except as provided herein. 
(c)  Garage sales. 
(1)  No more than two (2) garage sales may be conducted at any dwelling in a calendar year. However, a third garage sale may be conducted at a dwelling if the sale is conducted by a resident who is moving from the dwelling or by the estate or heir of a person who died while living at the dwelling. 
(2)  No more than two (2) garage sales may be conducted at any nonresidential use located in a residential zoning district. 
(3)  No garage sale shall be conducted between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No garage sale shall last for more than three (3) days. 
(4)  No food shall be served at a garage sale without the required permit from the health department. 
(5)  A garage sale shall not be used to sell items purchased for resale. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, conduct or permit to be conducted, any garage sale in violation of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 11.040; Ord. No. 10790, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. 16432, § 1, 5-1-00)  
Sec. 13-21. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  General standards. The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the business license administrator. The applicant shall: 
(1)  Good moral character. Be of good moral character. In making this determination the business license administrator shall consider: 
a.  Penal history: All convictions, the reasons therefor, and demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his release. 
b.  License history: The license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
c.  General personal history: Such other facts relevant to the general personal history of the applicant as he shall find necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant. 
(2)  No obligations to city. Not be in default under the provisions of this article or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city except for current taxes and utilities. 
(3)  Compliance with zoning and building regulations. Present a certificate of occupancy furnished by the city building inspector evidencing that: 
a.  The proposed use of any premises to be used in the applicant's business is not a violation of city zoning regulations; and 
b.  The premises to be used in the applicant's business is not in violation of city building regulations; 
provided, however, that a business license shall not be denied under this subsection if the applicant establishes that a request for a certificate of occupancy is pending. 
(4)  Compliance with all other city regulations. Comply with all health, fire and any other applicable codes and regulations and present certificates and written assurances of compliance with the initial license application and when requested by the license administrator for license renewals. 
(5)  Compliance with state licensing requirements. Present certificates or licenses where applicable, showing that the applicant is authorized under state law to operate the business or occupation for which he is seeking a license. 
(b)  Security standards for sales of drugs, firearms and explosives. An applicant for a city license to sell any drug, classified or defined as a controlled substance by state law, or any firearms or explosives, must present a certificate from the chief of police stating that the applicant has made adequate provisions for securing the drugs, firearms and/or explosives offered for sale from theft. The chief of police shall establish procedures for making security inspections of applicant's premises and shall establish standards for determining if adequate provision for securing drugs, firearms and/or explosives from theft have been made. 
(c)  Standards for apartments, rooming houses. An applicant for a city license to operate an apartment house or rooming house, as defined in section 22-183 must present a current certificate of compliance for the apartment or rooming house as required by chapter 22, article V of this Code as a condition to obtaining such license. Revocation or expiration of such certificate of compliance shall be grounds for revoking the business license under section 13-31. 
(Code 1964, § 11.060; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 9-17-84)  
Sec. 13-22. - Issuance of licenses. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an application for such license to the business license administrator. The application shall: 
(1)  Form of application. Be a written statement on forms provided by the business license administrator. 
(2)  Contents of application. Require the disclosure of all information necessary to comply with section 13-21 above, and of any other information which the business license administrator shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article. 
(3)  Payment of fees. Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees chargeable for such license. 
(4)  Application fee. The application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) plus a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining the criminal record check required in subsection (b). 
(5)  Statement of gross receipts. Every person for whom a license is provided herein, the amount of which license is to be computed upon the annual gross receipts of such person, shall furnish the city with a correct statement in writing, showing the amount of such annual gross receipts, based on the preceding calendar or fiscal year, whichever is used for accounting purposes by the business or occupation for which a license is sought, which statement shall not be made public or used by the city except for the purpose of establishing a correct basis for fixing and collecting the amount of the license herein provided. All books of account showing the amount of such annual gross receipts shall be open to the inspection of the city officials charged with the duty of issuing the license herein provided and collecting for the same, and the issuance of any such license may be withheld until all the requirements have been filled. 
(b)  The department of finance shall obtain a criminal record check of the applicant. If the application is on behalf of a partnership, a criminal record check must be provided for each partner. If the application is on behalf of a corporation or limited liability company, a criminal record check must be provided for the officer, member or manager who will be in charge of the establishment for which the license is sought. 
(c)  Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time the application for the same is made, the business license administrator shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance, subject to the following construction: such receipt shall not be construed as the approval of the business license administrator for the issuance of a license; nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Renewal. The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an application for such license to the business license administrator. The application shall: 
(1)  Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided by the business license administrator. 
(2)  Contents. Require the disclosure of such information concerning the applicant's demeanor and conduct in the operation of applicant's business during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary to the determination by the license administrator of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license and to the possible adjustment of license fee. 
(e)  Duplicate. A duplicate license or special permit shall be issued by the business license administrator to replace any license previously issued, which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any wilful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to such fact and the paying to the business license administrator of a fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(f)  Denial. The business license administrator shall, upon disapproval of any application submitted under the provisions of this article, refund all fees (other than the investigation fee) paid in advance, to the applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city if the applicant is indebted to the city, such fees tendered shall be delivered to the director of finance to be applied against such indebtedness. 
(1)  Compliance pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is denied and any action has been instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was refused unless a license is issued to him pursuant to a judgment ordering the same. 
(2)  Appeal. Denial of a license by the business license administrator, may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31(c). 
(g)  Issuance requirement. Upon the approval of an application for license under this article by the business license administrator, and the receipt of all fees therefor, the license administrator shall issue to the applicant a license as described in the application. 
(Code 1964, §§ 11.070, 11.080(A); Ord. No, 10311, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 12060, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07; Ord. No. 21799, § 2, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 13-23. - Contents of license. 
Each license issued under this article shall state upon its face the following: 
(1)  The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business is to be conducted. 
(2)  The kind and address of each business so licensed. 
(3)  The dates of issuance and expiration thereof. 
(4)  Such other information as the business license administrator shall determine is necessary. 
(Code 1964, § 11.080(B))  
Sec. 13-24. - Duties of licensee. 
(a)  General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of the business and examinations of the books by the business services administrator, subject to the provisions of section 13-19. 
(2)  Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed business. 
(3)  Operate properly. Avoid fraud, misrepresentation and false statements made in the course of carrying on the business; avoid conducting the business in an unlawful manner; avoid conducting the business in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed business on-premises after expiration of the license and during the period in which the license is revoked or suspended. 
(b)  Display of license. Every licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Premises. Post and maintain the occupation license upon the licensed premises in a conspicuous place where it may be seen at all times. 
(2)  Persons. Carry such license on licensee's person when licensee has no licensed business premise. 
(3)  Inoperative licenses and special permits. Not allow any license or special permit to remain posted, displayed or used after the period for which it was issued has expired; or when it has been suspended or revoked, or for any other reason become ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return such inoperative license or special permit to the business services administrator. 
(4)  Unlawful possession. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to possess, except as authorized by the business services administrator or by law, any license which has been issued to such licensee. 
(c)  New location. A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed business, provided the business notifies the business services administrator of the change of location. 
(d)  Keep records. Every licensee under this article shall keep all records and books necessary to the computation of the license fee and to the enforcement of this article. When the licensee fails to keep such records, the license administrator shall determine the financial statement for the business. 
(Code 1964, § 11.090; Ord. No. 15454, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. 19996, § 1, 7-21-08)  
Sec. 13-25. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  When authorized. A licensee hereunder shall have the right to transfer his license to another person provided he shall: 
(1)  Approval of license administrator. Obtain written permission from the business license administrator for such transfer. 
(2)  Method of transfer. Execute the transfer in the form and under the conditions required by law and as prescribed by the license administrator. 
(3)  Notification. Promptly report the completed act of transfer to the license administrator. 
(4)  Surrender license. Promptly surrender any license certificate. 
(5)  Payment of investigation fee. The transferee shall make application for a license and pay the investigation fee provided for in section 13-22(a)(4). 
(b)  New license. Upon the completion of a transfer of license in compliance with subsection (a) above, the license administrator shall issue a new license to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old license. 
(1)  Effect of new license. The new license issued hereunder shall authorize the transferee to engage in the same business at the same location or at such other place as shall be approved by the license administrator and named in the new license. 
(2)  Transfer fee. The license administrator shall collect a transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00) from the transferee prior to the issuance of the new license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.100; Ord. No. 15454, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 13-26. - Term of license. 
Every person engaged in any of the businesses described in this article shall pay the license fees herein named, which shall be annual, and which shall be issued from the first day of July each year until the thirtieth day of June of the following year. The business license administrator shall cause a notice to be mailed to each licensee on or before June 1, informing him that his license shall expire on June 30 of that year, unless otherwise renewed. 
(Code 1964, § 11.120)  
Sec. 13-27. - License fee schedule. 
(a)  Businesses and occupations shall pay annual license fees according to the following fee schedule, except that any business or occupation shall pay at least one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) for every regular employee or associate in such business during the preceding year, with a maximum fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and the license fee shall be the higher of that computed by the fee schedule or that based on the number of employees: 
(1)  Fee schedule: 
a.  Gross receipts not exceeding $25,000.00 ..... $15.00 
b.  Gross receipts of above $25,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 ..... 25.00 
c.  Gross receipts of above $100,000.00 ..... 25.00 
Plus, for every $1,000.00 of gross receipts above $100,000.00, up to a maximum fee of $750.00 ..... 0.25 
(2)  Business and occupations. The following businesses and occupations shall pay annual license fees as indicated above: 
Abstractors. 
Accountants. 
Acoustical articles and supplies. 
Addressing businesses. 
Adjusters of claims. 
Advertising agencies and advertising of any kind or by any means, and advertising advisers. 
Aerial surveying. 
Agents and agencies for sale of oil stocks. 
Agents and solicitors for nurseries. 
Agents for cooperative insurance. 
Agents for solicitors for any surety company or bonding company. 
Air compressors. 
Air conditioning machines, articles and supplies therefor. 
Air express service, air freight, and air transportation services. 
Aircraft dealers and manufacturers. 
Aircraft flying schools, services and instructors. 
Aircraft repair services. 
Airports. 
Aluminum products. 
Aluminum siding. 
Alumni organizations. 
Ambulances. 
Amusement parks. 
Amusement ticket brokers and sellers. 
Animal shows. 
Antique shops, buyers, sellers and dealers. 
Any kind of locker for food or merchandise storage. 
Any service to automobiles and any motor driven vehicles. 
Appraisers. 
Apprentice electricians 
Apron supply. 
Architects. 
Arenas. 
Armature rewinding. 
Art galleries. 
Art glass. 
Artists. 
Asphalt work. 
Assayers. 
Athletic, boxing, wrestling or sparring exhibitions or contests. 
Auction criers. 
Auction house establishments. 
Auctions. 
Auctioneers. 
Auditors. 
Automatic doors. 
Automatic machines or devices. 
Automobile dealers, agencies, establishments, buyers, sellers, repairers and servicers. 
Automobile livery. 
Automobile shows. 
Automobile, trailer and vehicle rental agencies. 
Automobile yards. 
Automobiles and automobile accessories and supplies. 
Awnings. 
Badminton or tennis courts. 
Bail bondsmen. 
Bakers. 
Bakery delivery wagons. 
Bankers. 
Banks. 
Barber shops. 
Barbers and barber supplies. 
Barkers. 
Baseball parks. 
Bathhouses. 
Battery chargers. 
Battery dealers. 
Beauticians, chiropodists, manicurists and hairdressers. 
Beauty shops. 
Beds. 
Beer depots. 
Beer or wine gardens, taverns, dramshops. 
Beer storerooms. 
Bicycle repair shops. 
Bicycles. 
Billboards or bill posters. 
Billiard or pool room tables or other tables or instruments used for amusement. 
Blacksmith shops. 
Bleaching. 
Blueprint or photostat makers. 
Board, livery or sales stables. 
Boarding, lodging or rooming houses. 
Boats for hire. 
Boiler cleaning and inspection and setting. 
Boilers. 
Bonding or surety companies. 
Bookstores, vendors, sellers and solicitors. 
Bookbinding. 
Bookkeeping services. 
Bottle exchanges, bottling plants. 
Bottlers, wholesale or retail. 
Bowling or ball alleys. 
Brewers or breweries. 
Brick makers. 
Brick masons. 
Brickwork. 
Bridges and culverts. 
Broadcasting stations. 
Brokerage companies. 
Brokers of whatever class or character. 
Brush manufacturers, sellers and solicitors. 
Buffing, grinding, repolishing. 
Builders. 
Building companies. 
Building, house or window cleaners. 
Building management, operation or maintenance. 
Building material sales. 
Building or house movers. 
Building reports. 
Bullfights. 
Butchers' supplies. 
Butler building. 
Cabinet makers. 
Cafeterias. 
Cameras and camera agencies. 
Candy manufacturers and sellers, wholesale or retail. 
Carnivals and any other kind of show. 
Carpenters. 
Carpet and rug cleaning, laying and repairing service. 
Carpets. 
Carters or draymen. 
Carwashing establishments. 
Caterers. 
Caulking work. 
Cemeteries. 
Certifiers or guarantors of land titles. 
Chair rental agencies. 
Chairs or tables. 
Chat and gravel companies. 
Check cashing. 
Check rooms. 
Chemical sales. 
Chemical spray contractors. 
Chemists. 
Children's nurseries. 
Chimney cleaning. 
Cigarette, cigar or tobacco manufacturers or dealers, wholesale or retail. 
Circuses. 
Claim agents. 
Clairvoyants and fortunetellers. 
Clearing houses. 
Clothing. 
Coal and other fuels and dealers, haulers, peddlers, brokers and deliverers thereof. 
Cocktail lounges. 
Coffee, tea, spice, cocoa and condiment dealers, and coffee roasters and processors. 
Coins, stamps and lapidary clubs. 
Collectors of accounts or claims. 
Commercial contract cleaners. 
Commercial pedal trolley. 
Commission merchants or agents. 
Composers or writers. 
Computer services. 
Concert bureaus. 
Concerts. 
Concrete and cement work. 
Concrete and cinder block markers. 
Concrete mixer rentals. 
Concrete pipe, block and products manufacturers, sellers and dealers. 
Concrete (ready mixed) service. 
Conduit companies. 
Confectioners. 
Contract haulers. 
Contract tailors. 
Contractors and subcontractors engaged in or contracting for work and labor or materials to be performed within the city limits, irrespective of whether such contractor or subcontractor are residents of such city, for the construction, alteration or repair of any structure or thing. 
Contractors' equipment. 
Convalescent or nursing homes. 
Cookie, bread, pastry and cracker products and dealers. 
Corn dealers. 
Corset dealers, sellers and solicitors. 
Cosmetic dealers, sellers and solicitors. 
Costumes. 
Coupon books. 
Craft and hobby supplies. 
Cranes. 
Crating service. 
Creameries. 
Credit associations, bureaus or agencies. 
Credit reporting bureaus and service. 
Crematories. 
Curb market merchants. 
Curb painter. 
Cycloramas. 
Dairies. 
Dairy and vegetable compound products. 
Dairy equipment and supplies. 
Dairy products. 
Dance halls. 
Dancing studios, schools, and instructors. 
Dealers in stamps or devices to control or affect trade. 
Dealers or distributors of goods, wares or merchandise, new or used. 
Decorators. 
Delicatessens. 
Dental laboratories. 
Department, discount and variety stores. 
Desiccating. 
Designers. 
Desks. 
Development companies. 
Diapers, diaper service. 
Diecutting. 
Distillers or distilleries. 
Dog kennels. 
Dogs and cats and other domesticated animals. 
Dredgers. 
Drillers. 
Drugs, druggists and drugstores, wholesale or retail. 
Drummers or salesmen. 
Dry cleaners, dyers and pressers. 
Drywall contractors. 
Duplicating service, duplicating machines. 
Dye houses. 
Electric charging stations. 
Electric or compressor hammers. 
Electrical goods of all kinds. 
Electrical supply establishments. 
Electrical transcription. 
Electricians. 
Electrologist or electrotherapists. 
Electronic communications service. 
Electronic equipment sales. 
Electronic service. 
Electroplating. 
Elevators. 
Embalmers. 
Embossing. 
Employment agencies. 
Enameling. 
Engineers. 
Engines. 
Engravers. 
Equestrian exhibitions. 
Equipment contractors. 
Escrow service in land transfers. 
Escort service. 
Excavating contractors. 
Excavating machinery and supplies. 
Exhibitions. 
Explosive dealers and haulers of explosives. 
Explosives. 
Express companies. 
Fabric stores and yarns. 
Fans. 
Farm implements, machinery, vehicles and tractors. 
Farm supplies. 
Feed manufacturers and dealers. 
Feather renovating. 
Fence and iron companies. 
Filling or service stations. 
Film developing. 
Film rental service. 
Filters. 
Finance or loan companies. 
Finders of missing persons. 
Fire escapes. 
Fire or burglar alarm systems. 
Fireworks dealers, retail or wholesale. 
Fish dealers. 
Floor refinishing. 
Floor sanding, floor sanders and floor surfacing machines. 
Florists. 
Flour mills. 
Fluorescent lighting and maintenance. 
Food and all other processors. 
Food brokers. 
Food lockers and cold storage plants. 
Foods other than produce (orange juice distributors, etc.). 
Foundation work. 
Foundries. 
Freight or other forwarders. 
Freight or other warehousing. 
Fumigators. 
Funeral directors. 
Fur dealers and storage. 
Furnace manufacturers, dealers and servicers. 
Furniture manufacturers, dealers and repairers and refinishers. 
Galvanizers. 
Garages. 
Gas appliances. 
Gas or electric ranges. 
Gas services. 
Gasoline, inflammable fuels and haulers thereof. 
Gauges. 
Gaugers. 
Geologists. 
Gift, premium or trading stamp enterprises. 
Gift shops. 
Glass dealers. 
Glazing contractors. 
Golf courses, driving ranges and any other golf enterprises. 
Golf professionals. 
Gold refinishers or goldsmiths or silversmiths. 
Grading. 
Grain, grain elevators. 
Greenhouses. 
Grinding or sharpening. 
Grocers. 
Gunsmiths. 
Guttering or spouting. 
Gymnasiums. 
Handwriting analysis. 
Hardware, wholesale or retail. 
Hat cleaning and blocking. 
Hatcheries. 
Haulers. 
Hauling and recycling. 
Hearing aids and equipment thereof. 
Health institutes or reducing parlors. 
Health school. 
Heating services. 
Hoisting. 
Home builders. 
Horoscopic viewers. 
Horse and cattle dealers. 
Horse, mule and cattle buyers and sellers. 
Horse shows. 
Horses. 
Horseshoers. 
Hospitals, sanitariums or sanatoriums. 
Hotel or restaurant equipment. 
Hotels. 
Ice cream, soft drinks, frozen desserts and similar products. 
Ice or dry ice dealers and haulers. 
Imports. 
Income or other tax returns or tax services. 
Industrial or technical instruments. 
Inspectors, inspection bureaus. 
Insulator contractors. 
Insurance agents and agencies. 
Insurance companies. 
Installation with or without sale. 
Intercommunicating systems. 
Interior decorating. 
Interior supplies, 
Interpreters. 
Investment or trust companies. 
Itinerant vendors, traveling or auction stores. 
Itinerant wholesale or retail produce dealers. 
Janitor service. 
Jewelers. 
Jewelry. 
Job printing plants. 
Jobbers, job wagons. 
Journeyman plumbers. 
Juke boxes, and renters or repairers thereof, and other musical instruments of whatsoever nature or kind. 
Kalsomining. 
Karate schools. 
Kitchen equipment. 
LP gas. 
Labor or public relation counselors. 
Laboratories and laboratory equipment. 
Lamps. 
Land clearing. 
Lathing. 
Laundries and self-service laundries. 
Laundry wagons and all other laundry vehicles. 
Lawn and garden equipment. 
Lawn service and tree trimming. 
Lawnmowers. 
Leather goods. 
Lenders and their agents. 
Lifting jacks. 
Light and water companies. 
Lightning rods. 
Linen and towel supply. 
Linoleum and linoleum laying. 
Linotyping. 
Liquor. 
Liquor dealers, wholesale or retail. 
Lithographers. 
Livestock. 
Loan companies. 
Locksmiths. 
Lumber, lumber brokers and agents. 
Lumber measurers. 
Lunch stands, counters or wagons. 
Lung testers. 
Machine shops. 
Machinery designing. 
Machinery of all kinds. 
Magazines. 
Mail order houses. 
Mailing. 
Malt dealers. 
Manufacturers. 
Manufacturers of and dealers in orthopaedic, medical or surgical supplies. 
Manufacturers of or dealers or agents for mining machiners, road machinery, earth moving machinery, building machinery and other heavy industrial machinery and equipment. 
Manufacturers of pool tables. 
Manufacturers of water softeners. 
Marble and stone dealers and stone or marble quarries. 
Market places. 
Market research. 
Masseurs. 
Material suppliers. 
Mausoleums. 
Meat. 
Meat choppers. 
Membership sales. 
Menageries. 
Mercantile agents or agencies. 
Merchant delivery companies. 
Merchants. 
Merry-go-rounds. 
Messengers. 
Metal finishing. 
Midwives. 
Milk wagons. 
Milk and dairy products processors, salesman, solicitors, haulers or deliverers. 
Milk dealers. 
Millwrights. 
Mines and mining companies and ore concentrating plants. 
Miniature golf. 
Mirror resilvering. 
Mobile home sales and anchoring. 
Mobilphones, answering services and CBers. 
Modeling agents. 
Money transportation. 
Monuments. 
Mothproofing. 
Motion picture projecting equipment. 
Motor clubs. 
Motor courts and motels. 
Motor scooters. 
Motor vehicle and motor truck salvage dealers. 
Motor vehicle oiling, repossessing, steam cleaning, washing, towing, wheel aligning or repairing wrecks. 
Motorcycle agencies, buyers, sellers, dealers and repairers and servicers. 
Motors. 
Movers of personal property for pay. 
Moving picture exhibitions or shows. 
Moving picture film producers, distributors, exchanges or rental establishments. 
Multigraphing. 
Muscle developers. 
Museums. 
Music arrangers or bureaus. 
Musical instruments. 
Natural or artificial gas. 
News agents, dealers or distributors. 
News service or bureaus. 
Newspaper publishers, agents, or dealers or distributors. 
Newspapers. 
Nightclubs, or any other public place of business or amusement where alcoholic beverages of whatsoever percentage of alcoholic content are sold or permitted to be consumed on the premises. 
Numbering machines. 
Nurseries or nurserymen. 
Nursery stock. 
Office business and professional buildings. 
Office coats, overalls, towels, uniforms and work clothes supply. 
Office equipment. 
Oil and gas burners or stockers. 
Oil companies. 
Oil cutting or reclaiming. 
Oil station equipment. 
Operatic, theatrical or other performances. 
Optical instruments, equipment, eye glass lenses and appliances. 
Opticians, optometrists. 
Orchestras or bands. 
Ore buyers, oil, mining or other stocks. 
Organs. 
Ornamental work. 
Outdoor advertising. 
Oxygen tents. 
Packing or slaughterhouses. 
Paint sprayers. 
Paint stores. 
Painters. 
Palmists. 
Palmreading. 
Panoramas. 
Paper hangers. 
Parking lots. 
Passenger stations or terminals. 
Patent medicine sellers and shows. 
Patrol, guard or watchman services. 
Pattern making. 
Paving. 
Pawnbrokers. 
Payrolls. 
Peanut and popcorn stands. 
Peddlers of vegetables, meat, fish and other foods and other kinds of personal property (except sale by farmers of any produce raised by them from their own vehicle or from any person in the employ of such farmers). 
Pension plans. 
Pest exterminators. 
Pharmacies. 
Phonographs. 
Photograph finishing. 
Photographers, local or itinerant. 
Physiotherapist or hydrotherapists. 
Piano tuners. 
Pianos. 
Pile driver. 
Pinball machines and all other coin-operated machines and devices and repairers thereof. 
Pipe bending, cleaning, cutting or threading. 
Pipe lines, pipes, poles, wires or conduits or public utility companies. 
Plasma centers. 
Plasterers. 
Plastic products, manufacturers and repairers. 
Plumbers and gas fitters. 
Pool and billiard rooms and halls. 
Portable saws. 
Poultry dealers. 
Poultry shows. 
Power plants. 
Prefabricators. 
Press clipping bureaus. 
Printing presses, printing establishments. 
Private airports. 
Private parks. 
Private schools and academies of art conducted for profit, business, correspondence, dancing, dramatics, expression, language, music, nursery, riding and private technical and trade schools or colleges, conducted for profit. 
Prize fights. 
Produce. 
Promotion and consulting. 
Public address systems. 
Public amusements and entertainments. 
Public garages. 
Public grounds, arenas and halls. 
Public halls. 
Public lecturers. 
Public masquerade balls. 
Public meetings. 
Public scales and weighers. 
Publishing companies. 
Pumps. 
Push carts. 
Quarries. 
Race tracks. 
Radio broadcasting and television stations. 
Radio equipment. 
Radios. 
Railroads and railroad tankcars. 
Railway traffic. 
Rating bureaus. 
Razing, shoring and wrecking. 
Realtors. 
Realty brokers and salesmen. 
Rebuilding, renovating, setting, repairing, maintaining or storing any of the specific property heretofore named or any other property not specifically named in any property or equipment used in connection therewith. 
Record shops and stereo equipment. 
Recreational vehicles (boats, campers, etc.). 
Rectifiers. 
Refrigerators, refrigeration systems, refrigeration companies. 
Rendering plants. 
Renovating and repair service. 
Rental agents and all agents of whatever kind or character. 
Rental services of all kinds. 
Renting, selling, leasing, hiring and repairing any of the specific kinds of property hereinbefore named or any other property or any kind or species of property. 
Research bureaus. 
Rest homes and homes for the aged. 
Restaurants. 
Riggers. 
Roads, road oiling. 
Roofers. 
Rooming houses, boarding, apartment and tenement houses. 
Rugs. 
Runners. 
Safe depositories. 
Safes. 
Salary brokers or buyers. 
Sales and service of water heaters and softeners. 
Sales counseling. 
Sales of goods by common carriers or agencies. 
Sales stable keepers. 
Sample and order salesmen and owners. 
Sandblasting. 
Sash metal. 
Savings and loan associations. 
Saws. 
Scaffolding. 
Scales. 
Scrap metal. 
Scalp treaters. 
Sellers. 
Selling or storing gasoline, butane, propane, oil, kerosene, diesel fuel and other fluid fuels. 
Service and rental cars. 
Service or rental car drivers. 
Services rendered in connection with, or any property or equipment connected therewith, upon any of the things or businesses hereinbefore or hereinafter set out, or any other kind of property. 
Sewers. 
Sewing and alterations. 
Sewing machines. 
Sheet metal work. 
Shippers. 
Shoe repairers and shoe repair establishments. 
Shoe shining parlors. 
Shoes. 
Shooting galleries. 
Shows or exhibitions. 
Sidewalks. 
Sightseeing tours. 
Sign wiremen. 
Signs. 
Silverware. 
Skating rinks. 
Slicing machines. 
Slot machines. 
Smokestacks. 
Soda fountains. 
Soft water services. 
Sound, X-ray and communication wiremen. 
Specialty shops (china, silverware, etc.). 
Sport events or exhibitions. 
Sporting goods. 
Spraying or stamping. 
Stage equipment. 
Stairs. 
Statisticians. 
Statuary. 
Steamfitters. 
Steamships. 
Steel. 
Steel shearing. 
Stock. 
Stock or merchants' exchanges. 
Stockyards. 
Stokers. 
Stone cutters. 
Stonework. 
Storage houses. 
Storage warehouses. 
Store fixtures. 
Stoves. 
Street contractors. 
Street exhibitions. 
Street lighting. 
Street railway cars and companies. 
Street stands. 
Suppliers for beauticians. 
Surety companies. 
Surgical instruments. 
Surveying instruments. 
Surveyors. 
Swimming pools. 
Tailormade clothing agencies (Hong Kong tailors). 
Tailors, including agencies for taking or soliciting orders for clothing. 
Tanks. 
Tanners. 
Tariff bureaus. 
Tatooing. 
Taxicabs. 
Taxidermists. 
Telegraph, telephone, street railway car, electric, gas, heating, air conditioning, lighting, water and transportation utilities of whatsoever name, kind or character, like and unlike. 
Tents, awnings and canvas products. 
Telescopic viewers. 
Television and radio repair. 
Television dealers, sellers and repairers. 
Television instruments or equipment. 
Terrazzo or tile work, tin work. 
Theater sound equipment. 
Theaters. 
Theatrical agents or agencies or bookings. 
Therapeutic devices. 
Ticket agents and agencies. 
Tire repairing or retreading. 
Tires. 
Tobacco of all kinds. 
Tools. 
Toy sales and distributors. 
Trailers. 
Transfer companies. 
Travel or traffic bureaus. 
Traveling shows and amusement of whatever kind. 
Truck terminals. 
Trucks, agencies, buyers, sellers, and dealers, repairers and services. 
Trust companies. 
Tube cleaning and expanding. 
Tuckpointing. 
Typewriters, adding, calculating machines, cash registers, and all other kinds of office machines and supplies and all kinds of recording machines and devices. 
Typing or secretarial work. 
Typographers or typesetters. 
Umbrellas. 
Undertakers. 
Upholsterers, upholstering. 
Upholstery, carpet sales and draperies. 
Used motor vehicles and used motor trucks and dealers. 
Ushering. 
Vacuum cleaners and similar devices. 
Vehicle agencies, buyers, sellers, repairers, servicers and dealers. 
Vehicle repossession agencies or services. 
Vending machines, operators, agents and repairers. 
Ventilation work. 
Veterinary hospitals. 
Vulcanizing. 
Wallpaper cleaning. 
Washing, ironing, dishwashing and all other similar household equipment and devices. 
Watches. 
Watercoolers. 
Waterproofing. 
Waterworks. 
Weatherstripping and all other improvements on real property. 
Welders. 
Welding equipment. 
Welding supplies. 
Wholesale doors and appliances. 
Wholesale fish companies. 
Wholesale grocers. 
Wholesale magazine distributors. 
Wholesale nursery growers. 
Wholesale oil stations. 
Wholesale plumbing and heating supplies. 
Wholesale refrigeration equipment. 
Wig shops. 
Wild west shows and rodeos. 
Window displays. 
Windows. 
Wine manufacturers. 
Wineries. 
Woodworking. 
Wreckers. 
Wrecking salvage. 
(b)  General inclusions. It is intended by the foregoing provisions of this section to include not only the articles and businesses herein named, but also all persons, corporations, agents and representatives of whatsoever nature engaged in operating, soliciting or contracting relative to all services or processes, or dealing in any of the above listed things, property or businesses, and all other things or businesses not specifically exempted by general law. 
(Code 1964, § 11.130; Ord. No. 23698 , § 1, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 13-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19996, § 1, adopted July 21, 2008, repealed § 13-28, which pertained to performance bonds and derived from § 11.140 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 13-29. - Exemptions. 
The terms of this article shall not be held to include persons selling for nonresident, bona fide wholesale establishments to retail dealers in the city, nor to milkmen, ice men or newsboys whose employers have been duly licensed by the city, nor shall it include or apply to farmers or producers or any employee of any farmer or producer who offers for sale or sells, or who peddles from house to house or in any market, fruits, vegetables or garden products produced and grown by such farmer or producer from lands cultivated by him within the state; however, every such farmer or producer who claims exemption from the license requirements of this article shall file with the business license administrator a certificate under oath, setting forth the full legal description of the land upon which such farm or garden products are produced and grown, and which certificate is certified to by the county assessor of the county in which such land is located; and, all attractions, devices, races or exhibitions under direct contract with the Boone County Agricultural and Mechanical Association (Boone County Fair) are exempt. 
(Code 1964, § 11.145)  
Sec. 13-30. - Penalty for delinquent payment of license fees. 
Every person who shall fail to obtain a license and pay the license fee therefor, as provided by this article, before beginning or becoming engaged in any of the businesses set out in section 13-27 of this chapter; and every person who shall fail to renew his license for any such business and pay the license fee therefor when such license fee is due, as provided by this article, shall, after notice by United States mail or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, pay, for each month that such license fee remains unpaid, a fee of fifteen (15) percent of the business license fee provided in this article for such business. 
(Code 1964, § 11.150)  
Sec. 13-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  Persons authorized. The business services administrator, the administrator's representatives and police officers are authorized to conduct investigations to enforce this chapter. 
(2)  Authority of inspectors. All persons authorized to make investigations shall have the authority to enter any premises for which a license is required at all reasonable times. 
If any party refuses to allow the inspection of a premises for which a license is required, the business services administrator may request the city prosecutor to apply for a search warrant or a police officer may apply for a search warrant pursuant to the provisions of chapter 15 of this Code. 
(3)  Reports by inspectors. Persons making investigations or inspections as herein authorized shall report violations to the business services administrator and shall submit such other reports as requested. 
(4)  Operating a business without a license. When a person is operating a business subject to licensing without a valid license or is operating such business when the license has been revoked or suspended, the business services administrator may cause such person to be summoned into municipal court. 
(b)  Order. When a licensee has violated any law or ordinance affecting the conduct of business within the city, other than the failure to have a valid business license, the business services administrator may issue an order which directs the offending person to cease and desist from the violation and to comply with the law or ordinance. When a licensee has failed to comply with an order of the business services administrator or when the licensee has failed to operate the business properly as required by this Code, the business services administrator may issue an order suspending or revoking the business license. 
(1)  Notice. The order of the business services administrator and all other notices shall be in writing and shall state sufficient facts to apprise the person affected of the specific violations. Service by registered or certified mail or delivering a copy of the order to the person affected or the person's agent or employee shall constitute valid service. The order shall inform the offending person of the appeal rights under this section. 
(2)  Compliance. The order shall require compliance within five (5) calendar days of service or such greater length of time as specified by the business services administrator. 
(c)  Hearing. The director of finance (director) shall conduct a hearing upon the request of the business services administrator or any person affected by an order of the business services administrator or the denial of a license. 
(1)  Application for hearing. 
a.  Order; business services administrator. Upon noncompliance with the order, the business services administrator shall deliver a copy of the notice served upon the violator to the director along with a written request for hearing. Such request shall state sufficient facts to show the specific violations and shall state the action or order proposed by the business services administrator. 
b.  Order; affected person. Within ten (10) days of the order of the business services administrator, the person affected by the order may file a written request for hearing before the director contesting all or part of the order. Such request shall state with specificity which part of the order is contested, the basis for the contest, and the relief sought. 
c.  License denial. Within ten (10) days of the denial of a business license, the person who was denied a license may file a written request for hearing before the director contesting the license denial. 
(2)  Hearing procedure. The director shall set the matter for hearing on the record within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the receipt of an application for a hearing. At least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given except in cases where the public health, safety or interest may make a shorter time reasonable. 
a.  Notice of hearing. 
1.  The director shall cause a copy of the request for hearing filed by the business services administrator and a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to be served upon the affected person. 
2.  The director shall serve a copy of the affected person's request for hearing and a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing upon the business services administrator. 
b.  Evidence, witnesses. 
1.  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses and impeach any witness. 
2.  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
3.  All evidence shall be suitably recorded and preserved. 
4.  The technical rules of evidence shall not apply, except the director may exclude evidence which is irrelevant or repetitious. 
5.  Each party shall be entitled to present oral arguments or written briefs at or after the hearing. 
(d)  Final order. After a hearing, the director shall issue an order based upon findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(1)  The director shall have the authority to suspend or revoke licenses. The director may extend the time for compliance with an order or modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
(2)  Upon revocation or suspension, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be paid to the licensee, and the licensee shall immediately cease all business at the licensed premises. 
(e)  Findings. The director shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law within ten (10) working days of the hearing. Such findings shall be based upon competent and substantial evidence found in the record as a whole. A copy of the director's order, and the findings of fact and conclusions of law, shall be delivered to the business services administrator and to the affected person. 
(f)  Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and this give rise to an emergency, the business services administrator shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of premises, or to suspend or revoke the license. Unless waived in writing within five (5) days after summary action by the business services administrator, the director shall conduct a special hearing for such action. Notice and procedure for the special hearing shall be as previously provided for a regular hearing. 
(g)  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director shall have the right to appeal to the circuit court pursuant to RSMo Ch. 536. 
(h)  Collateral actions to enforce. 
(1)  The city may institute civil suit to recover any unpaid fee. 
(2)  No civil judgment, or any act by the city counselor, the business services administrator or the licensee or other persons affected shall bar or prevent a prosecution for each and every violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 11.110; Ord. No. 12060, § 2, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 13544, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 19996, § 1, 7-21-08)  
Sec. 13-32. - Penalties for article violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, unless otherwise specified herein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be imprisoned in the city jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 11.160; Ord. No. 19996, § 1, 7-21-08)  
Secs. 13-33—13-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ARMED GUARDS AND SECURITY GUARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10810, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1985, in effect repealed Art. III, §§ 13-46—13-61, relative to guards and security patrol officers and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions relative to similar subject matter which has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as a new Art. III, §§ 13-46—13-60. Former Art. III, §§ 13-46—13-61 derived from Code 1964, §§ 11.830—11.910, 11.930—11.990, and 11.1010. 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-8; municipal court, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 13-46. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions and rules of construction shall apply: 
(1)  The term "armed guard" shall mean any person employed or retained in any manner, who is provided, required, or allowed to carry any firearm defined as such by Chapter 571 Revised Statutes of Missouri, as amended. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit carrying of concealed weapons. 
(2)  The term "chief" shall mean the chief of police or the chief's designated subordinates. 
(3)  The term "conviction" shall include a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty followed by a suspended imposition of sentence. 
(4)  The term "patrol guard or watchman service" shall mean any person who furnishes the services of another for the purposes of protection of property. The term shall include those who promote such services. 
(5)  The term "security firm" shall mean any patrol, guard or watchman service business which furnishes the services of an armed guard to another person or which employs an armed guard in performing services for another person. 
(6)  The term "security guard" shall mean any person employed by a patrol, guard or watchman service for the purpose of protecting property, who is unarmed while performing such duties. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-47. - License required. 
No person shall operate as an armed guard or as a security guard in the city without first obtaining a license, from the business license administrator. 
(Ord. No. 10810, 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-48. - Exemptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to an armed guard or security guard who is only temporarily in the city, provided that he is not present as an armed guard or security guard within the city more than fourteen (14) days within any six-month period, nor shall this article apply to any bona fide law enforcement officer of an agency on the training-approved list as certified by the chief and on file in his office. Any person who performs security guard services as a part of his regular duties in the course of his normal employment and whose employer is not a patrol guard or watchman service shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-49. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application for armed guard and security guard licenses shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the business license supervisor and shall state: 
(1)  The full name, age, residence, present and previous occupations of applicant; 
(2)  A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant; 
(3)  The extent of training and experience the applicant has had with firearms, if the applicant is seeking an armed guard license; 
(4)  The length of time applicant has been a bona fide citizen of the United States and a resident of the State of Missouri immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(5)  A specific description and if available, a picture or duplicate of the uniform, badge, shoulder patch, identification card and any logo or insignia to be used by applicant; 
(6)  Such other information as the business license administrator shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the general purpose of this article and to make a fair determination of whether the terms hereof have been complied with. 
(b)  Applications required hereunder shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set forth in section 13-55. 
(c)  Applications shall be accompanied by a full set of fingerprints made by an approved law enforcement agency and a photograph. The department of finance shall obtain a criminal record check of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 13-50. - Standards for issuance; additional standards for armed guards. 
(a)  Security guard license applicants shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age; armed guard license applicants shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  Armed guard license applicants and security guard license applicants have the burden of demonstrating good moral character. If an applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years or any misdemeanor involving theft, violence, drugs or sexual abuse within the past five (5) years, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime committed in relation to the license sought, the conduct of the applicant since the violation and other evidence as to the applicant's character. 
(c)  Any person applying for an armed guard license shall be determined by the chief to have met or exceeded adequate standards for firearms safety, knowledge of the law with regard to the use of firearms, and firearms skills commensurate with public safety. Such determination shall be based on the following criteria: Have, within the last calendar year passed with a score of at least seventy (70) percent on each section, a test provided by and administered by the chief, said test to include written sections on firearms safety, firearms law, and firearms skills and a shooting section on firearms safety and firearms skills, and a qualifying course of fire, the standards of which shall be set out in regulations promulgated by the chief. The handgun and ammunition used in the qualifying course of fire shall be the same as the handgun and ammunition that will be carried while the applicant is performing his duties as an armed guard. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-51. - Time for test sessions. 
The above described test shall be provided by and administered by the chief within thirty (30) calendar days of the application for license. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-52. - Notice of rejection. 
The business license administrator shall act upon each application under this article and, if disapproved, he shall notify the applicant within seven (7) calendar days of his action stating the reasons for denial of the license and include a copy of test results. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-53. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by the denial of any license issued under this article shall have the right to appeal the decision pursuant to the procedure for appealing a license denial set out in section 13-31. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 13-54. - Issuance of license. 
If a person shall meet or exceed the standards described in section 13-50 above, the business license administrator may not deny that individual a license based on the criteria set forth in said section. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-55. - Fees. 
(a)  The following table of fees shall apply to this article: 
(1)  Application or reapplication and testing: 
Security guards ..... $20.00 
Armed guards ..... $25.00 
(2)  Written or shooting retest ..... 10.00 
(b)  The applicant shall pay a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining the criminal record check required in section 13-49(c). 
(c)  Failure of the written or shooting tests shall require retesting. Failure of both tests shall require reapplication and successful testing prior to issuance of a license. 
(d)  All fees shall be paid in advance and no fee shall be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07; Ord. No. 21799, § 2, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 13-56. - Term of license. 
Each license issued hereunder shall be valid for one (1) calendar year, or until a new license is issued, whichever is sooner. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-57. - Invalidation and revocation of license. 
In the event that any information is falsely given in an application for a license, or that a license is illicitly gained or retained, or if any licensee shall be or become ineligible to possess a license under standards set out in this article, is found guilty of any charge involving the misuse of firearms, or becomes manifestly or demonstrably incapable of meeting the safety, law, or skills standards, or if any licensee shall willfully conceal information or facts concerning such matters, or fails to maintain the surety bond required hereunder, such license shall be subject to immediate revocation. The business license administrator shall immediately give notice of revocation and afford the licensee opportunity to be heard by the business license administrator. The business license administrator is empowered to conduct ongoing investigations to determine any licensee's continued fitness to hold any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-58. - Duties of licensee. 
(a)  Each person licensed hereunder shall carry on his person at all times while on duty, and display upon request of any police officer, a currently valid armed guard license. In the event that a licensee comes into official contact with a police officer, said guard shall display said license automatically and without request. 
(b)  No person issued a license hereunder shall wear any uniform or insignia which is substantially similar to that of any uniform of any law enforcement agency operating in Boone County, Missouri, nor shall any licensee hold himself out to be a member of any such law enforcement agency. 
(c)  Armed guards shall report to the chief the circumstances surrounding any discharge of firearms within the territorial limits of the City of Columbia within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-59. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who shall employ or retain any armed guard or security guard who does not possess a current license, or any person who shall conceal in any manner any information or facts concerning the validity of any such license, or any person who shall instigate, authorize, or allow the use of firearms or ammunition other than the type with which the test, upon which such license is based, was taken, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any armed guard or security guard who does not have a valid armed guard or security guard license respectively upon his person while on duty, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-60. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall in addition to any other penalty imposed, be ineligible for a period of thirty (30) calendar days to apply for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 13-61. - Insurance and fidelity bond prerequisites to issuance of license. 
(a)  Armed guards, security guards and patrol, guard or watchman services shall maintain general liability insurance for damages in consequence of operating as armed guards, security guards or patrol, guard or watchman services in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for all claims arising out of a single occurrence. No armed guard, security guard or patrol, guard or watchman service license shall be issued by the business license administrator until the applicant has presented to the licensing authority a liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance evidencing compliance with the insurance requirements of this section. 
(b)  Patrol, guard or watchman services which provide insurance coverage for any armed guard or security guard employee shall notify the business license supervisor whenever such an employee leaves his employment with the patrol, guard or watchman service. The notice required by this subsection shall be given in writing no later than three business days after the employee leaves his employment. 
(c)  Those holding armed guard, security guard or patrol, guard or watchman service licenses shall maintain the requisite insurance in effect at all times. 
(Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 11614, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 11739, § 1, 1-4-88)  
Sec. 13-62. - Limitation to handguns only. 
Armed guards licensed under this article are expressly prohibited from carrying, wearing or otherwise possessing a rifle, shotgun, or any other projectile-type weapon except a handgun while performing the duties of an armed guard. 
All handguns used by armed guards shall be limited to the following calibre of ammunition: 
(1)  .38 
(2)  .357 
(3)  .380 
(4)  .38 Super 
(5)  .9 MM 
(6)  .45 ACP 
(Ord. No. 11482, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Secs. 13-63—13-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Junk dealers and junkyards, § 11-176 et seq.; precious metal dealers, § 13-16 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-76. - Definition. 
Any person who loans money on deposit on personal property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his place of business of a sign or display generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, to wit: three (3) gilt or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits a sign indicating money to loan on personal property on deposit, is hereby declared for purposes of this article to be a pawnbroker. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1500) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-77. - Register to be kept; availability for inspection. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases, and the names of all persons who have left any property of any description on deposit as a collateral security or as a delivery on sale thereof. Opposite each name and date shall be written in plain hand the person's age and motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license number, or such other identification of public record, with photographs, as may be required by the business license administrator; a full description of such property purchased or received or deposited as collateral security; the manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number if applicable; the time when the loan falls due; the amount of purchase money or the amount loaned, and the interest charged. He shall give the party negotiating or selling, a plain written or printed receipt for the articles purchased having on each a copy of the entry required by this section and kept in his register. He shall not be entitled to make any charge for such receipt. 
(b)  The register shall, at all times, be open to inspection by the chief of police, his designee, or any law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1530)  
Sec. 13-78. - Business with minors. 
No pawnbroker shall accept any goods, articles or things whatever from an individual under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Code 1964, § 11.1540)  
Sec. 13-79. - Hours of business. 
No pawnbroker shall accept any goods, articles or things whatever from any person between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1550)  
Sec. 13-80. - Place of business. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct business as a pawnbroker or as agent for a pawnbroker at any place other than the location stated in the application for license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1560)  
Sec. 13-81. - Serial numbers required. 
No pawnbroker shall accept as collateral security or purchase any camera, radio, television set, lawnmower, firearm, typewriter, adding machine, calculating machine, copying machine, duplication machine, tape recorder, tape player, cash register, still or moving picture projector or offset projector, record player, stereo equipment, dictating machine, electric buffer, electric polisher, or electric floor waxer, or any other property or item which, at the time it was manufactured, had a serial number or identification number affixed to it, unless such item shall have plainly visible thereon, the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1570)  
Sec. 13-82. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. License revocation as provided in this article shall constitute a separate remedy. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1590)  
Secs. 13-83—13-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 13-96. - License deemed supplemental to business license; no fee. 
Prior to issuance of the license provided for herein, the pawnbroker shall first obtain the city business license provided for in Article II of this chapter. There shall be no additional charge for the issuance of this license.  
Sec. 13-97. - Required; affidavit. 
No person shall do business as a pawnbroker without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall conform to the provisions of this article and be in such form as the business license administrator shall dictate, and include an affidavit in which the applicant shall subscribe and make oath that he will faithfully carry out the provisions of this chapter. Each location shall require a separate license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1510)  
Sec. 13-98. - Application; endorsement by chief of police. 
Every application for license hereunder shall be made in writing to the business license administrator and shall state where the business is to be carried on. Before any license shall be issued, the business license administrator shall secure from the police chief an endorsement on the back of the application therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1520)  
Sec. 13-99. - Revocation. 
The business license administrator shall have the power and authority to revoke any license issued under this article for any violation by a licensed pawnbroker, of any of the provisions or conditions contained herein; provided such license may be revoked only after the licensee shall have been notified in writing at his place of business, of the violations complained of, and shall have been afforded a reasonable opportunity to have a hearing thereon before the business license administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1580)  
Secs. 13-100—13-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Junk dealers and junkyards, § 11-176 et seq.; pawnbrokers, § 13-176 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-116. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings given herein: 
Coin show. A meeting or convention not exceeding four (4) days in length of dealers in coins or tokens of precious metal at which dealers buy, sell and trade coins from tables or booths or at auction. 
Dealer. Any person, who deals, in whole or in part, in the purchase, trade or pledge of precious metals. 
Lot. An item or items offered for sale, purchase or trade as a unit for the purposes of such a transaction. 
Precious metals. Any object comprised, in whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum shall, for the purposes of this article, be deemed to be a precious metal. Aluminum, brass and other valuable metals shall not be deemed as precious metals. 
Principal operating agent. The principal employee operating the dealer's place of business. 
Transient dealer. A dealer who maintains a place of business in the city for less than one (1) calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1300) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-117. - Payments of dealer by check. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a dealer to make a payment in cash money to any seller or pledger unless the dealer shall record the number of a valid form of identification with a photograph of the identified individual or shall photograph the same along with the object or objects tendered for sale, trade or pledge, and preserve same as a record of the transaction. 
(b)  A dealer may purchase or pledge, by check, precious metal, provided that a record of such check be maintained as herein provided for by section 13-118. 
(c)  Violation of paragraph (a) of this section shall be a Class A misdemeanor and punishable under the penalties provided in section 16-66 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1370)  
Sec. 13-118. - Records—Required; contents; inspection. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase or accept the pledge of any object comprised in whole or in part of precious metal when the total amount of any purchase or pledge transaction exceeds twenty-five dollars ($25.00) without making a record which shall contain: 
(1)  The time and date of the transaction. 
(2)  A brief description of the object or objects and the price paid therefor, the object traded for or the amount of the pledge accepted. 
(3)  The person selling or pledging the object; the address of such person and a record of a form of valid identification containing a photograph of the individual presented by such person at the date of sale or pledge, such record to include the serial or identifying number contained on such identification. 
(4)  In the event that the seller or pledger fails to provide an identification card containing a photograph, the number of the check used in payment for the object or the pledge therefor or in the alternative, a photograph of the seller or pledger, may be taken. 
(5)  The name of the dealer when he accepts the object for purchase or pledge, or the employee or agent who accepts the object for purchase or pledge on behalf of the dealer. 
(b)  No record made under the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section shall be damaged, altered or destroyed until same shall have been inspected by the chief of police, his designee or the business license administrator, or until eighteen (18) months from the date the record is made, whichever comes first. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a Class A misdemeanor and punishable under the penalties as provided in section 16-66 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1360)  
Sec. 13-119. - Same—Maintenance; duration; location. 
(a)  All records required to be made and kept under the provisions of this article shall be maintained at the principal place of business of the dealer within the city for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date a record is made; provided, however, that a transient dealer shall deposit all records kept with the police chief or at some other location within the city during such times within the three-year record-keeping period as the dealer is not maintaining a place of business within the city. 
(b)  All records kept in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be the property of the dealer and shall in no respects be considered public records subject to the provisions of Chapter 610 RSMo. 1969, or the provisions of section 2-23 of this Code. 
(c)  All records kept in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be available for inspection by the chief of police, his designee, or the business license administrator during all regular business hours of the dealer at his principal place of business, or, in the case of a transient dealer, at a repository designated by the dealer where such records are open for inspection at least forty (40) hours each week. 
(d)  Failure to maintain such records within the city shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor and is punishable under the penalties established in section 16-66 of this Code for such Class A misdemeanors. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1380)  
Sec. 13-120. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Dealers in scrap iron, bronze, aluminum, brass and/or precious metals, where such metals are purchased or traded only in lots exceeding four (4) ounces in weight. 
(2)  Dealers buying or trading securities, commodities, bonds or other certificate of value representing or having as its basis a precious metal when same are sold, bought or traded at any exchange outside the city limits. 
(3)  Persons dealing in precious metals solely for the purpose of providing dental, medical or other forms of health care service. 
(4)  All transactions conducted as a part of any coin show where all dealers conducting business at such coin show register with the chief of police their names, addresses, and the communities in which business licenses are held by such dealers. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1310)  
Secs. 13-121—13-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 13-131. - License deemed supplemental to business license; no fee. 
Prior to issuance of the license provided for herein, the dealer shall first obtain the city business license provided for in article II of this chapter. There shall be no additional charge for the issuance of this license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1340)  
Sec. 13-132. - Required. 
No dealer shall purchase or accept the pledge of any object comprised in whole or in part of precious metal without first having obtained a license to conduct a business in precious metals as herein provided from the business license administrator. Failure to obtain such a license prior to such purchase, trade or pledge shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section 16-66 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1320)  
Sec. 13-133. - Application. 
(a)  Contents. Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the business license administrator and shall contain: 
(1)  The full name, age and principal residence of the owner or operating agent of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of any partnership, corporation or unincorporated association; the address and state of its principal place of business; the state of its incorporation and its registered agent, if any; and any fictitious names under which it is doing or has done business. 
(3)  The name, address and description of any entity which has licensed or is licensing the applicant to conduct his business in any other jurisdiction. 
(4)  A specific description of the location or locations at which the applicant intends to do business. 
(5)  The criminal record, if any, of the applicant, his principal operating agent and any employee who shall purchase, trade or accept the pledge of precious metal on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  Oath. The application shall be made under the oath of the applicant. Any applicant who supplies false information in his application for business or their registration for exemption as provided for in section 13-120(4) shall be subject to the refusal or revocation of the license; any applicant who knowingly supplies false information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 16-66 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1330)  
Sec. 13-134. - Transferability. 
Licenses issued under the terms of this article shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1350)  
Sec. 13-135. - Suspension or revocation. 
The license issued under this article shall be suspended or revoked, as a part of and under the same terms, conditions and procedures as business license suspension and termination, heretofore established as article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1350)  
Secs. 13-136—13-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21854, § 1, adopted October 21, 2013, repealed § 13-156, which pertained to real estate agents, real estate brokers and property managers and derived from Ord. No. 21558, § 1, 1-7-13. 
 
Secs. 13-156—13-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WASTE HAULERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14915, adopted Aug. 5, 1996, repealed Art. VII, §§ 13-186—13-211. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 14915, Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 10.090—10.170. 
Cross reference— Dealers in junkyards, § 11-176 et seq.; nuisances, § 11-221 et seq.; pawnbrokers, § 13-76 et seq.; precious metal dealers, § 13-116 et seq.; refuse collection, § 22-156 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-186. - Definitions. 
The following terms are, for the purpose of this article, defined as follows: 
Acceptable liquid wastes. Those liquid wastes which may be discharged into the city's designated disposal facilities. Acceptable liquid wastes are limited to septic tank pumpings, portable/chemical toilets, domestic holding tanks, food service grease traps, waste activated sludge from package waste activated sludge plants and liquid from stabilization ponds. 
Director. The director of utilities or the director's designee. 
Food waste. Uneaten food and food preparation wastes which have been separated from other refuse so to be free from contaminants such as wrappers. Food waste is limited to waste generated from commercial establishments such as grocery stores, restaurants, produce stands, institutional cafeterias and kitchens, and industrial sources such as employee lunchrooms or other locations as approved by the director. 
Licensed waste hauler. A waste hauler licensed by the City of Columbia. 
Liquid waste. Sand trap pumpings, septic tank pumpings, portable/chemical toilet pumpings, food service or petroleum service pumpings, sludge generated from domestic wastewater treatment plants and lagoons, waste or used oils and lubricants, chemical wastes, waste from commercial or industrial treatment systems, storm drain sludges and other waste as defined by the director. 
Waste vehicles. All vehicles and vessels used for the transportation of the contents of privies, liquid waste, manure or food waste. 
Waste hauler. Any person, company, corporation or other entity that collects, hauls, transports or disposes of the contents of privies, liquid waste, manure or food waste. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-187. - Supervision of waste hauling activities. 
It shall be the duty of the director to supervise or cause to be supervised the removal of food waste, the contents of privies, the contents of septic tanks and manure, and all persons licensed or engaging in the activities of waste hauler shall be subject to the director's direction to time, manner and place of removal. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 13-188. - Only licensed waste hauler to engage in removal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, haul, convey or carry on or over the streets of the city, food waste, any contents of privies, contents of septic tanks or manure, unless licensed as a waste hauler, according to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 13-189. - Waste hauling vehicles—Sanitary specifications; markings. 
(a)  All vehicles used for the transportation of the contents of privies, contents of septic tanks or manure, shall be watertight and flytight, equipped with sanitary metal compartments and fully enclosed bodies and shall be so maintained as to prevent the escape of any of their contents. All waste hauling vehicles shall be equipped with close-fitting covers so as to prevent the escape of offensive odors, and the covers shall be kept closed except when refuse is actually being loaded or unloaded. The vehicle compartments shall be thoroughly washed and cleaned once every twenty-four (24) hours. The size of waste hauling vehicles shall meet with the approval of the director. Waste hauling vehicles shall be kept in good running order and in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. 
(b)  All vehicles used for the transportation of food waste shall be watertight, equipped with sanitary metal compartments, and shall be maintained so as to prevent the escape of any contents within such compartments. All waste hauling vehicles shall be equipped with close-fitting covers so as to prevent the escape of offensive odors, and the covers shall be kept closed except when refuse is being loaded or unloaded. The vehicle compartments shall be thoroughly washed and cleaned once every twenty-four (24) hours. The size of waste hauling vehicles shall meet with the approval of the director. Waste hauling vehicles shall be kept in good running order and in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  Waste hauling vehicles must bear the name and business address of the owner on both front door panels in clear and legible letters at least two (2) inches high and such letters shall be in a contrasting color to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 13-190. - Same—Parking. 
(a)  Adequate facilities for garaging or parking waste collection vehicles on private off-street lots located in areas zoned other than for residential use are required if vehicles are housed within the city. Parking facilities must be approved by the director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a waste hauling vehicle on a public street, or on private property used for residential purposes, except while picking up items for hauling as a licensed waste hauler. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 13-191. - Delivery of refuse to authorized areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the activities of a waste hauler to dispose of the contents of privies or manure, except at the city landfill or other solid waste disposal facility which is licensed and approved by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the activities of a licensed waste hauler to transport or dispose of any liquid waste, except in the manner and at locations designated by the director. The director may require the pretreatment of the contents of acceptable liquid waste loads and may require sampling and analyses of the wastes before allowing dumping, and may refuse to allow dumping if in the director's discretion allowing the dumping would violate any wastewater treatment regulations or requirements, cause damage to the treatment process or facility, or a hauler violates any regulation or ordinance regarding use of the plant. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the activities of a waste hauler to dispose of food waste, except at a composting facility which is licensed and approved by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-17-19)  
Sec. 13-192. - Charges for disposal services. 
(a)  There shall be an extra strength charge for any acceptable liquid waste discharged into the designated disposal facility, as provided by section 22-263(b)(2) of this Code. 
(b)  The following charges shall be imposed for acceptable liquid waste generated within the city limits of Columbia which is discharged at the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant: 
(1)  Waste activated sludge from package wastewater treatment plants and stabilization pond sludge, per gallon ..... $0.049 
(2)  Portable/chemical toilet, domestic holding tank, septic tank and other wastewater not described above in (b)(1), per gallon ..... $0.092 
(3)  Treatment service availability, per load ..... $12.37 
(c)  Charges for acceptable liquid waste generated outside the city limits of Columbia which is discharged at the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant will equal the rates listed above times 1.5. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 15926, § 1, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 16890, § 1, 5-7-01; Ord. No. 18215, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18685, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19231, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 19656, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20046, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20413, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20740, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21074, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21161, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 21429, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22209, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22923 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23300 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23635 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 13-193. - On-site storage and proper disposal of food waste required. 
(a)  All food waste stored for collection by a licensed waste hauler shall be stored on the property where the food waste is generated. It shall be unlawful for any person to store food waste on any public street, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way without the consent of the city. In addition to any other penalties prescribed, any such collection device or container found to be on public property or in the public right-of-way may be removed at the enforcement officer's discretion, and all costs for removal and storage of such collection device or container shall be levied against the responsible party. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor as designated by this code and punishable under section 16-31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Sec. 13-194. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Waste haulers shall maintain an inventory of all containers used to collect or store food waste within the City of Columbia. Such inventory shall include the container serial number, size, and location. 
(b)  Waste haulers shall keep a record of the amount in tons of food waste, including food waste mixed with other compostable materials, collected, hauled, or transported from the City of Columbia. 
(c)  Waste haulers shall submit an annual report to the office of sustainability on or before the last business day in January of each calendar year. The report shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The amount in tons of food waste, including food waste mixed with other compostable materials, delivered to a composting facility. 
(2)  The number of containers deployed. 
(Ord. No. 24040 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Secs. 13-195—13-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 13-206. - Required; application and examination; hearing upon denial. 
All persons intending to engage in the activities of waste hauler shall first make written application to the business license administrator for a license. It shall be the duty of the business license administrator to notify the director of such application and the director shall make, or cause to be made, an examination of the vehicles and equipment to be used in such work by the applicant. If it shall be found that such vehicles and equipment comply with the requirements of this article, the director shall so note such findings on the application for the information of the business license administrator, who shall grant or deny such license, according to the recommendations of the director. Any person who shall be denied a license hereunder shall have the right of appeal to the city council, which shall afford the applicant a hearing and thereupon grant or deny such license. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 13-207. - Amount of license tax; reduced fee. 
Every person engaging in, operating or conducting the activities of waste hauler shall pay therefor an annual license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) for one (1) waste hauling vehicle used in such activity and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional vehicle used in such activity; provided, however, that if any license is granted after the seventh month of the license year, the above fees shall be reduced fifty (50) percent. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 13-208. - Liability insurance prerequisite to license. 
Every person licensed to engage in the activities of a waste hauler shall maintain during the time the license is in effect liability insurance in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit for any one (1) occurrence and not less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per individual, covering both bodily injury, including accidental death, and property damage, to cover all claims arising from waste hauler activities. No license to engage in the activities of a waste hauler shall be issued unless the applicant provides the business license administrator a certificate of insurance prepared by the insurance company which includes a provision requiring the city to be notified within ten (10) days of cancellation of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 13-209. - Issuance; vehicle sticker or plate. 
After any applicant has been granted the license required by this article and after the applicant has filed the required policy or bond with the business license administrator, the business license administrator shall, upon payment of the license tax, which shall be determined by the number of waste hauling vehicles covered by the license, whether in actual operation or not, issue and deliver such license to the applicant, together with a sticker or plate for each waste hauling vehicle covered by the license, which sticker or plate must be maintained on the vehicle at all times for the license to be in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 13-210. - Revocation and suspension. 
Whenever it shall appear to the satisfaction of the director that any licensed waste hauler has violated any of the provisions of this article or has not complied with the reasonable instructions of the director, the director shall notify the holder of such license and may, after a hearing as provided for in section 22-217.1 of this Code, order the license revoked and require licensee to surrender such license. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22578, § 2, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 13-211. - Records to be kept by business license administrator. 
The city business license administrator shall keep a record of the number of the waste hauling vehicle stickers or plates issued to each licensee, together with the make, model and motor number of the vehicle for which each was issued. 
(Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Secs. 13-212—13-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 
 
Sec. 13-226. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Canvasser or solicitor. Any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Newsboy. Any person who distributes, house-to-house on a regular route, a newspaper of general circulation in the city limits and who solicits orders for such newspaper on his distribution route. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-227. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, as defined in section 13-226 hereof, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The inclusion of an individual or business as a canvasser or solicitor under the coverage of this article shall not exempt that individual or business from the requirements of this chapter regarding business licenses, and a business license fee may be collected from an individual or business involved in canvassing or soliciting where lawful to so do. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3000)  
Sec. 13-228. - Permit application. 
(a)  Contents. Applicants for a permit under this article must file with the business license administrator a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by such business license administrator, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the business and goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining the criminal record check required in section 13-229. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3020; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 13-229. - Investigation of applicant; permit denial or issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the business license administrator shall make such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. The department of finance shall obtain a criminal record check of the applicant. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the business license administrator shall endorse on such application the disapproval and the reasons for the same, and notify such applicant that the application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the business license administrator shall endorse on the application the approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, and deliver to the applicant the permit. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3030; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 13-230. - Permit cards. 
The business license administrator shall issue to each permittee at the time of delivery of his permit a permit card which shall contain the words "solicitor's permit, " the period for which the permit is issued, and the number of the permit. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3040)  
Sec. 13-231. - Exhibition of permit. 
Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their business permit cards at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3050)  
Sec. 13-232. - Expiration of permit. 
All annual permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirtieth day of June in the year next following its issuance. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3080)  
Sec. 13-233. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Reasons. Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the business license administrator after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3060)  
Sec. 13-234. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the business license administrator in the denial of a permit as provided in section 13-229 of this article, or of the revocation of a permit as provided in section 13-233 of this article, shall have the right of appeal the decision pursuant to the procedure for appealing a license denial set out in section 13-31. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3070; Ord. No. 19518, § 2, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 13-235. - Exemptions from article. 
All recognized charitable organizations or any other bona fide nonprofit charitable, educational, political, social welfare or religious organization and newsboys shall be exempt from the terms of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 7.3000)  
Secs. 13-236—13-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKER SERVICE BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 13-246. - Screening requirements for motor vehicle wrecker service businesses. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a permanent screen shall be constructed and maintained on all property: 
(1)  Which is used in connection with a motor vehicle wrecker service business; 
(2)  Which is used to keep or store more than fifteen (15) motor vehicles at any one (1) time; and 
(3)  Which abuts zoning districts R-1, R-2, or R-MF. 
The permanent screen shall be located in such a manner that, to the extent possible, the stored vehicles shall not be visible from any ground location in the abutting residentially zoned district which is located within three hundred (300) feet of the stored vehicles. For purposes of this section, "ground location" means any point within six (6) feet of the surface of the earth. 
(b)  The permanent screen required in this section shall be at least six (6) but no more than ten (10) feet in height and shall consist of a solid masonry wall, solid wood fence, or combination of both. The permanent screen shall be maintained in good order and not be allowed to exist in a state of disrepair. If wood fencing is used, it shall be durable in nature or treated to prevent rapid deterioration. 
(c)  The screening requirements of this section shall not apply to property used for the storage of vehicles if the stored vehicles are not readily visible from any ground location in the abutting residentially zoned district which is located within three hundred (300) feet of the stored vehicles. 
(d)  This section shall apply to all property in the city used in the manner described herein, regardless of whether such use existed prior to the enactment of this section. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 11877, § 1, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 21095, § 4, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 23117 , § 5, 3-20-17)  
Secs. 13-247—13-253. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 13-254. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this division: 
Alarm system. A device or devices or an assembly of equipment intended to signal the presence of a hazard requiring a police or fire department response, including, but not limited to, burglar alarms, fire alarms, hold-up alarms, mechanical failure alarms, environmental alarms, digital communicators and automatic telephone dialer alarms, but does not include smoke detectors which do not signal outside the premises or alarm systems on motor vehicles. 
Automatic telephone dialing device. An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Central alarm system company. Any person engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems to report hazards to the Joint Communications and Information Center for a police or fire department response. 
False alarm. An activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, human error or alarms caused by acts of nature which result in an audible alarm or which results in the notification of emergency services personnel when in fact no emergency exists. 
Non-monitored alarm system. An alarm system that is not monitored by a central alarm system company. 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 13-255. - Alarm system reporting requirements. 
(a)  Each central alarm system company operating in the city shall provide the following information to the Joint Communications and Information Center Administrator for each building in the city which is connected to the company's central alarm system: 
(1)  The address and telephone number of the building in which the alarm is installed. 
(2)  For each building other than a private residence, the name of the business or other use. For each private residence, the name of the person in whose name the telephone is listed. 
(3)  If a hold-up alarm is connected to the central alarm system, the number of a telephone inside the building that can be called for information regarding the status of an alarm. 
The owners, lessees and occupants of each building or portion of a building connected to a central alarm system shall be responsible for providing the above information to the Joint Communications and Information Center Administrator if the central alarm system company fails to do so. 
(b)  Each central alarm system company operating in the city shall notify the Joint Communications and Information Center administrator of any changes in the information provided under subsection (a) within seven (7) days of the change. The owners, lessees and occupants of each building or portion of a building connected to a central alarm system shall be responsible for providing the above information to the joint communications and information center administrator if the central alarm system company fails to do so. 
(c)  The owners, lessees and occupants of each building or portion of a building protected by a non-monitored alarm system shall provide the following information to the Joint Communications and Information Center Administrator: 
(1)  The address and telephone number of the building in which the alarm is installed. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the property owner, lessee and any other person who controls access to the premises. 
(3)  For premises other than private residences installing police or fire alarms, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of three (3) responsible persons having access to the property who can respond to the location of an alarm within thirty (30) minutes after notice to assist the responding agencies. 
(4)  For private residences, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of two (2) responsible persons having access to the property who can respond to the location of an alarm within thirty (30) minutes after notice to assist the responding agencies. 
(d)  Each person required to provide information under subsection (c) shall notify the Joint Communications and Information Center administrator of any changes in the information provided under subsection (c) within seven (7) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 15106, § 1, 1-6-97)  
Sec. 13-256. - Automatic dialers. 
(a)  No automatic dialing device shall dial or terminate at any city emergency service telephone number other than numbers designated by The Joint Communications and Information Center. Under no circumstances may an automatic dialer be programmed to dial 9-1-1. 
(b)  Automatic dialing devices in existence prior to the effective date of this section (February 5, 1996) shall be reprogrammed to numbers designated by the Joint Communications and Information Center within sixty (60) days of the effective date (February 5, 1996) of this section. 
(c)  All automatic dialers shall be required to provide information to emergency service providers as required by the Joint Communications and Information Center administrator. 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 13-257. - External alarm noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or operator of any residence, business or structure within the city limits to install, connect or maintain any burglar alarm or anti-theft device or fire alarm in or upon any such residence, business or structure when such alarm or device produces any loud noise that is audible off the premises on which it is installed unless such alarm or device will automatically reset itself, thereby terminating such loud noise within fifteen (15) minutes. This section shall not apply to any structure within the Columbia Special Business District or any structure upon property zoned for industrial use, or to any waterflow (water gong) alarm, or to any Automatic Teller Machine (ATM). 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 13-258. - False alarms—Administrative fee. 
The owners and lessees of any property protected by an alarm system shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the following false alarm administrative fees: 
(1) 	For the fourth and subsequent false alarms by any alarm system within a thirty (30) day period ..... 	$100.00 for each such false alarm 
(2) 	For the thirteenth and subsequent false alarms by any alarm system within a twelve (12) month period ..... 	$100.00 for each such false alarm 
 
An administrative fee shall not be charged under both subsections (1) and (2) for any single false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 13-259. - False alarms—Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, lessee or person in charge of any property protected by an alarm system to fail to prevent an alarm system from generating more than three (3) false alarms in any thirty (30) day period or more than twelve (12) false alarms in any 365 day period. Each false alarm in excess of three (3) in any thirty (30) day period shall be deemed a separate offense. Automatic Teller Machines located on bank premises shall be considered along with the bank to be one (1) location. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge brought under this section that the person charged has paid the administrative fee for the false alarm under section 13-258. 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 13-260. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating section 13-259 shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, but in no event shall the fine be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 14746 § 1, 2-5-96)  
ARTICLE X. - CONVENIENCE STORE SECURITY 
 
Sec. 13-261. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this Article, "convenience store" means a place of business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and is open for business at any time between 8:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. "Convenience store" does not include a business that is solely or primarily a restaurant or that has more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail floor space. 
(Ord. No. 14122 § 1, 7-5-94)  
Sec. 13-262. - Required security measures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a convenience store unless the following security measures are in effect: 
(1)  The convenience store must have a security camera system which records and is capable of retrieving the image of all persons entering the convenience store and all persons approaching within five (5) feet of the cash register. 
(2)  The convenience store must have a drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts and a conspicuous notice at the store entrance which states that the cash register contains limited funds. 
(3)  The convenience store must have lighting for parking areas, entrances or other areas of the store accessible to the public at an intensity providing clear visibility under normal conditions. 
(4)  The convenience store must have an unrestricted view of the cashier area from outside and inside the building. 
(5)  The convenience store must have height markers at the entrance of the store. 
(6)  The convenience store must have a telephone or holdup panic alarm device behind the sales counter for easy access by store employees. 
(7)  The convenience store must enforce a cash management policy to limit cash on hand at all times after 8:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 14122 § 1, 7-5-94)  
Secs. 13-263—13-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME LAND LEASE COMMUNITIES 
 
Sec. 13-271. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article: 
Manufactured home means a factory-built structure or structures which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, contains three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent foundation. The phrase "without a permanent foundation" indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the manufactured home placed thereon may be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. 
Manufactured or mobile home land lease community means any area, lot, parcel or tract held in common ownership and on which individual portions of such area, lot, parcel or tract are leased for the placement of manufactured or mobile homes as a primary residence. 
Mobile home means a residential building constructed or assembled in a factory which is not certified pursuant to the Federal Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Code and which conforms to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards for mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 16985, § 1, 8-20-01)  
Sec. 13-272. - Eviction notice. 
(a)  A landlord of a manufactured or mobile home land lease community shall provide written notice to all of the community's tenants and owners of manufactured or mobile homes at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to requiring such tenants to vacate the property due to a change in use of the property or the closing of the community. In cases where more than one hundred eighty (180) days remain on a current lease, the longer time period shall apply for purposes of providing notice pursuant to this section. The landlord shall not increase the rent, except for rent increase based solely on an increase in property taxes, for any tenant of the manufactured or mobile home land lease community during the sixty-day period prior to providing such notice or at any time after providing such notice. Rent shall be abated for the last three (3) months of the one hundred eighty-day notice period. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a landlord from evicting a tenant with less than one hundred eighty (180) days' notice for a violation of the lease or as otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  The rent abatement provided for in subsection (a) shall only apply to rental agreements entered into after November 7, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 16985, § 1, 8-20-01; Ord. No. 21130, § 1, 11-7-11; Ord. No. 21205, § 1, 1-3-12)  
Secs. 13-273—13-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TEMPORARY BUSINESS LICENSES  
DIVISION 1. - TEMPORARY ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS 
 
Sec. 13-291. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall produce or offer to the public a temporary entertainment event without first obtaining a temporary business license. 
(b)  An "entertainment event" includes but is not limited to any show, music concert, theatrical event, amusement, carnival or circus. 
(c)  A "temporary entertainment event" is any entertainment event which is open to the public for twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or less within any three-month period. 
(d)  Nonprofit charitable, religious, fraternal, civic, and education institutions are exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(e)  If the temporary entertainment event involves the sale or preparation of food, the licensee must comply with all provisions of the City of Columbia Food Code. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-292. - License application. 
(a)  Applicants for a license under this division must file with the business license administrator an application on a form furnished by the business license administrator, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name, local address and telephone number of the applicant. (If a corporation, the state in which the business is incorporated.) 
(2)  Permanent address of the applicant. 
(3)  Name and address of the person for whom the business will be conducted. 
(4)  Name and address of the person or persons having management or supervisory responsibility of the firm represented by the applicant and any other information necessary to properly identify such persons. 
(5)  The place or places in the city where applicant proposes to carry on business and the length of time during which the business will be conducted. 
(6)  A statement of the nature and character of the business to be conducted under the license and any merchandise to be offered for sale by the applicant. 
(7)  If the applicant has been convicted of a felony, a statement of the nature of each such offense and the city, county, and state where each conviction occurred. 
(8)  A letter of approval or copy of lease from the owner or agent of the premises to be licensed. 
(9)  A valid Missouri sales tax number. 
(10)  Any other relevant information required by the business license administrator. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by payment of a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-293. - Applicant license denial or issuance. 
(a)  If the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime committed in relation to the license sought and the conduct of the applicant since the violation. 
(b)  Additional reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the issuance of a license. Permission to operate a temporary business may be refused if the applicant is unable to comply with the requirements of this division and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-294. - License cards. 
(a)  The business license administrator shall issue to each licensee a license card containing: the words "temporary business license," the period for which the license is issued, the number of the license and the place where the business may be conducted. 
(b)  Each license issued under this division shall be issued for fourteen (14) days or less. Upon request, the license may be extended for an additional fourteen (14) days or less. 
(c)  The license shall be posted conspicuously in the place where the business is conducted. 
(d)  The license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-295. - Fees. 
The fee for a temporary business license under this division shall be determined in accordance with the fee schedule in section 13-27(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-296. - Licensee additional duties. 
Licensees, within a reasonable time after the end of the entertainment event, shall remove all trash, refuse, rubbish, signs and all unsold merchandise from the place where the event took place. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-297. - Public liability insurance requirements. 
(a)  Before any license is issued under this division, the applicant must procure public liability insurance with the following coverage: 
(1)  For bodily injury to or death of any one (1) person in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(2)  For any one (1) accident in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(3)  For damage to the property of another person in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one (1) accident. 
(b)  The applicant shall file with the business license administrator a certificate of insurance issued by the insurance carrier as evidence that the public liability insurance requirements have been met. 
(c)  Every insurance policy required under this division shall extend through the period covered by the license. The cancellation or termination of such policy shall automatically terminate and revoke the license issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-298. - Compliance with the law. 
Every licensee under this division shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-299. - Revocation of license. 
Licenses issued under this division may be revoked by the business license administrator for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conducting the temporary business in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-300. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the business license administrator in the denial of a license or of the revocation of a license, may appeal the decision under the procedures set out in section 13-31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Secs. 13-301—13-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY BUSINESS STANDS 
 
Sec. 13-311. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall erect, maintain, operate or occupy any temporary business stand in the city without first obtaining a temporary business license. No sales activities or services offered, other than those outlined in the application for a temporary business stand license, shall be conducted within the confines of the temporary business stand. 
(b)  A "temporary business stand" is any stationary booth, tent, storeroom, street stand, or other temporary place, for the sale of food, confections, toys, jewelry, groceries, dry goods, drinks of all kind, goods, wares, merchandise or services, operated from doorways, building recesses, alleyways, vacant lots, private parking lots, private streets or walkways or any other place near the public streets of the city and which may last for fourteen (14) days and all days must be consecutive in any three-month period at only one (1) location. 
(c)  Non-profit charitable, religious, fraternal, civic, and educational institutions are exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-312. - License application. 
A person desiring a temporary license under this division shall apply for a temporary business license in the manner set out in section 13-272. A copy of a lease agreement or letter of approval from the property owner for the use of the property must accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-313. - Applicant license denial or issuance. 
(a)  If the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime committed in relation to the license sought and the conduct of the applicant since the violation. 
(b)  Additional reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the issuance of a license. Permission to operate a temporary business may be refused if the applicant is unable to comply with the requirements of this division and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-314. - License cards. 
(a)  The business license administrator shall issue to each licensee a license card containing: the words "temporary business license," the period for which the license is issued, the number of the license and the place where the business may be conducted. 
(b)  Each license issued under this division shall be issued for fourteen (14) days or less. Upon request, a license issued for less than fourteen (14) days may be extended; provided, that the total time of the license does not exceed fourteen (14) days. 
(c)  The license shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business. 
(d)  The license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-315. - Fees. 
The fee for a temporary business license under this division shall be determined in accordance with the fee schedule in section 13-27(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-316. - Licensee additional duties. 
Immediately after ending use of the temporary business stand location, the licensee shall remove all trash, refuse, rubbish, signs and unsold merchandise from the stand location. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-317. - Compliance with the law. 
Temporary business stands must comply with the pertinent provisions of the building code, zoning regulations and sign regulations. If the temporary business stand involves the sale or preparation of food, the licensee must comply with all provisions of the City of Columbia Food Code. Every operator of a temporary business stand shall comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-318. - Revocation of license. 
Licenses issued under this division may be revoked by the business license administrator for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conducting the temporary business in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-319. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the business license administrator in the denial of a license or of the revocation of a license, may appeal the decision under the procedures set out in section 13-31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Secs. 13-320—13-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 13-411. - License required. 
(a)  No promoter shall organize or promote a temporary special event without first obtaining a temporary business license. 
(b)  A "promoter" is any person who provides to any other person a sales or exhibit area at a temporary special event. 
(c)  A "temporary special event" is any exhibition, display or show, involving multiple individual exhibits or booths, for the purpose of selling, trading, bartering or displaying goods or services to the public which is professionally promoted and which lasts for fourteen (14) consecutive days or less within any three-month period. Temporary special events include, but are not limited to, trade shows, festivals and arts and crafts shows. "Temporary special event" includes any festival held not more than once per week during not more than two (2) calendar months per calendar year in the "central business district" as defined in section 14-1 of this Code. 
(d)  Promoters of events which are not open to the public are exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(e)  The following are exempt from the requirements of this division: garage sales, bake sales, swap meets, hobby shows, arts and crafts shows, fund raising events, and other similar temporary events provided that (1) the event is sponsored and organized or promoted by a nonprofit service club, hobby club, sports club, charitable, religious, fraternal, civic, eleemosynary or educational institution, (2) the event is entirely organized, promoted and staffed by unpaid volunteer members of such organization, (3) the expenses of the temporary event are paid by the organization and (4) all receipts go to the organization and not to a paid or professional promoter or organizer. 
(f)  An exempt temporary special event shall not continue for more than three (3) consecutive days. 
(g)  Organizations otherwise exempt under this section shall not lose such exemption solely because they are sponsored, co-sponsored, programmed or assisted in any manner by the parks and recreation department or conduct a special temporary event on city property. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-412. - License application; duty of promoter. 
(a)  The promoter of any temporary special event shall apply for a temporary business license in the manner set out in section 13-272. 
(b)  At the time of applying for a license pursuant to this division, the promoter shall submit to the business license administrator a list of the total number of vendors or exhibitors participating at the special temporary event for which the license is sought. The list shall include the vendors' names, addresses and business phone numbers, as well as a general description of the goods and services offered by each vendor. 
(c)  The promoter shall be responsible for distributing the necessary sales tax information and forms to any person with a booth or display in the special temporary event. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-413. - Applicant license denial or issuance. 
(a)  If the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime committed in relation to the license sought and the conduct of the applicant since the violation. 
(b)  Additional reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the issuance of a license. Permission to operate a temporary business may be refused if the applicant is unable to comply with the requirements of this division and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-414. - License cards. 
(a)  The business license administrator shall issue to each licensee a license card containing: the words "temporary business license," the period for which the license is issued, the number of the license and the place where the business may be conducted. 
(b)  A temporary special events license shall be valid for a definite period not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days. The duration of the license shall be determined by the number of days of the trade show. A license granted for fewer than fourteen (14) days may be extended up to the fourteen (14) day limit if the temporary special event is extended. If the event is rescheduled due to inclement weather, the license shall be valid during the rescheduled period not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
(c)  The license shall be posted conspicuously at the location of the temporary special event. 
(d)  The license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-415. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee for a temporary special event license shall be five dollars ($5.00) a day for each vendor participating at the temporary special event, not to exceed a total of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each vendor. 
(b)  The temporary special events license fee shall be collected by the promoter from each vendor who intends to be included under the promoter's temporary special event license and shall be remitted by the promoter to the business license administrator three (3) days before the temporary special event. The promoter shall be responsible for any sums collected, and any sum which should have been collected from a vendor. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-416. - Compliance with the law. 
If the temporary special event involves the sale or preparation of food, the licensee and all food vendors must comply with all provisions of the City of Columbia Food Code. Every licensee under this division shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17347, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 13-417. - Revocation of license. 
Licenses issued under this division may be revoked by the business license administrator for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this division. 
(4)  Conducting the temporary business in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-418. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the business license administrator in the denial of a license or of the revocation of a license, may appeal the decision under the procedures set out in section 13-31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17023, § 1, 9-17-01)  
ARTICLE XIII. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-419. - Scope. 
This article regulates business license provisions for the cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana within the City of Columbia corporate limits as authorized by law. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, or personal property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this article shall control. All penalty and enforcement provisions not expressly superseded in this article remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-420. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, as used in this article, shall be deemed to have the meanings hereinafter specified: 
Department of health and senior services ("DHSS"). The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services ("DHSS"), or its successor agency. 
Medical marijuana activities. The cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana. 
Medical marijuana cultivation facility. A facility licensed by the DHSS to acquire, cultivate, process, store, transport, and sell marijuana to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana testing facility, or to a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana dispensary facility. A facility licensed by the DHSS to acquire, store, sell, transport, and deliver marijuana, marijuana infused products, and drug paraphernalia used to administer marijuana as provided for by state law and regulations to a qualifying patient, a primary caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana facility. Any one or more of the following described medical marijuana facilities: medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana testing facility. 
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. A facility licensed by the DHSS to acquire, store, manufacture, transport, and sell marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or to another medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana testing facility. A facility certified by the DHSS to acquire, test, certify, and transport marijuana. 
Primary caregiver. An individual twenty-one (21) years of age or older who has significant responsibility for managing the well-being of a qualifying patient and who holds a primary caregiver identification card issued by DHSS. 
Qualifying patient. A Missouri resident diagnosed with at least one (1) qualifying medical condition in accordance with state law and holds a qualifying patient identification card issued by DHSS. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY TYPE APPLICATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-421. - License—Required; term; renewal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either personally or through the use of an agent or employee, to engage in medical marijuana activities within the city, without the appropriate license issued by the DHSS and a license issued by the city under this article. A license issued under this article shall be issued for a period of one (1) year from the first day of January each year. The fee for any license issued after the first day of January shall be prorated. Thereafter, the renewal of all licenses shall be made effective on the first day of January each year. 
(b)  If the business services administrator determines that there is good reason not to issue a license for the full license term, the business services administrator may issue a license for a shorter period of time. Any person licensed under this subsection for a shorter period of time shall pay a prorated license fee. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-422. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No applicant shall be granted a license under this article unless the applicant is of good moral character. In determining whether an applicant is of good moral character, the applicant's criminal history shall be considered as permitted under state law. 
(b)  No person shall be granted a license under this article unless the person is a resident of the State of Missouri for at least one (1) year prior to application. 
(c)  No license issued under this article shall be denied, suspended, revoked or otherwise affected based solely on the fact that an employee of the licensee has been convicted of a felony unrelated to medical marijuana activities so long as any such employee is not directly responsible for the retail sale of medical marijuana. Each licensed medical marijuana facility shall report the identity of any employee convicted of a felony to the business services administrator. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-423. - Premises requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be granted or retained under this article for a medical marijuana facility if the premises includes a building occupied or used for unlawful purposes or the premises are connected by an entrance or exit or other means of access with any place used for unlawful purposes. 
(b)  No license shall be granted or retained under this article for a medical marijuana facility if the applicant has not submitted, received, or maintained an approved security plan, operation and management plan, and emergency response plan in accordance with this article. 
(1)  Security plan. A written security plan shall be submitted for the premises upon which applicant intends to conduct medical marijuana activities, to the Columbia Police Department demonstrating there is limited undue burden on city public safety services as a result of the proposed business. The plan shall be submitted with the business license application. The plan must be reviewed and approved by the Columbia Police Department prior to the issuance of a business license. The plan shall detail security measures for the site and the transportation of medical marijuana and medical marijuana products to and from off-site premises to ensure the safety of employees and the public and to protect the property from theft or other criminal activity. Each facility shall comply with the security requirements established by the DHSS and include, but not be limited to, the following elements in the security plan: 
i.  Cameras. The medical marijuana facility shall install and use security cameras to monitor and record all areas of the premises, except in restrooms and consultation rooms while a patient is undressed. Such security cameras shall specifically include all areas where a person may gain or attempt to gain access to marijuana or cash maintained by the medical marijuana facility. Cameras shall be of sufficient resolution to record operations of the business to an off-site location and shall also include any parking lots or areas near the facility and all potential areas of ingress or egress to the business with sufficient detail to identify facial features and clothing. Recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a minimum of forty (40) days in a secure off-site location in the city or through a service over a network that provides on-demand access, commonly referred to as a "cloud." The off-site location shall be identified in the security plan submitted to the city and access to recordings maintained must be provided to the Columbia Police Department upon request. Any change in location of the off-site location shall be updated within seventy-two (72) hours of any such change. 
ii.  Use of safe for storage. The medical marijuana facility shall install and use a secure safe for storage of all processed marijuana and cash on the premises when the business is closed to the public. The safe shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For marijuana-infused products or marijuana being tested in a testing facility that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, the business may lock the refrigerated container or freezer in a manner authorized by the city in place of use of a safe, so long as the container is affixed to the building structure and secure from intrusion. 
iii.  Alarm system. The medical marijuana facility shall install and use an alarm system that is monitored by a company that is staffed twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The security plan submitted to the city shall identify the company monitoring the alarm, including contact information, and must be updated within seventy-two (72) hours of any change of monitoring company. If the alarm system includes a panic alarm, an operable dedicated phone for law enforcement to respond to the alarm shall remain on the premises at all times. 
iv.  Lighting system. The medical marijuana facility shall have sufficient exterior lighting for security purposes and shall otherwise comply with applicable city code requirements. 
v.  Additional requirements. The medical marijuana facility shall install and provide any additional security measures as may be deemed necessary for the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the Columbia Police Department from time to time, including but not limited to, additional lighting, additional security cameras, upgraded security cameras, etc. 
(2)  Operation and management plan. A written operation and management plan shall be submitted for the premises upon which applicant intends to conduct medical marijuana activities as part of the business license application process. The plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Department, Building and Site Development Division, Utilities Department, and any other city department the business services administrator deems appropriate prior to the issuance of a business license and/or occupancy permit. The operation and management plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following elements: organizational structure, location, property description, proof that facilities are wheelchair accessible, proof that facilities comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, hours of operation and staffing, description of proposed operations, list of any hazardous materials used as part of its operations, distribution practices, employee safety procedures and guidelines, fire mitigation and prevention systems in compliance with the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Columbia, sanitation requirements and waste management processes, electrical system overview, proposed energy demand and proposed electrical demand off-sets, any environmental or carbon emission mitigation practices (if applicable), ventilation system and air quality controls showing how odor emission will not be detectable off the premises, and proposed water system and utility demand. The operation and management plan must also meet the minimum facility standards established by the DHSS, comply with city code, and include any additional measures required by the city. 
(3)  Emergency response plan. A written emergency response plan shall be submitted for the premises upon which applicant intends to conduct the medical marijuana activities to the Columbia Fire and Police Departments for approval before issuance of a business license and/or occupancy permit. The plan shall be submitted with the business license application. The plan shall identify emergency plans and contingency plans that would be executed in the event of an emergency arising from the site's usage as a medical marijuana facility. The emergency response plan must meet any minimum standards established by the DHSS, comply with city Code, and include any additional measures required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-424. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license to operate a medical marijuana facility shall apply to the business services administrator in writing and under oath. If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the applicant shall be all partners. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the applicant shall be all officers, directors, stockholders who own at least ten (10) percent of the corporation, and manager who will be in charge of the facility. If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability company, the applicant shall be all members and managers. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and birth place of the applicant. If the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the application shall state the place and time of naturalization. 
(2)  The length of time the applicant has resided in the State of Missouri, and the residential addresses of the applicant for the preceding five (5) years from the date of application. 
(3)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the state in which incorporated, the amount of paid in capital, the amount of authorized capital, and the number of shares held or percentage of the business owned by each officers, directors, and stockholders. 
(4)  If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability company, the date of formation, and the state in which formed. 
(5)  The name and address of the individuals who will be actively engaged in the actual control and management of the establishment for which the license is sought. 
(6)  The name and business address of applicant's employers for the five (5) years immediately prior to the application. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, and if so the date, court of conviction, and the specific crime which is the subject of the conviction. 
(8)  The location, place, or premises for which a license is sought. 
(9)  The zoning district in which the proposed location is located. 
(10)  The class of license for which the application is made. 
(11)  Whether or not the applicant has had a license for medical marijuana activities suspended or revoked, or has been convicted of the violation of any local, state, or federal law applicable to medical marijuana activities, or whether the applicant employs, or will employ in the business, any person not of good moral character, or whose license has been revoked or suspended, or who has been convicted of violating the provisions of any local, state, or federal law applicable to the medical marijuana activities. 
(12)  A full listing of the business ownership percentage for each individual; or when the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company the business ownership percentage for each officers, directors, members, and managers. 
(13)  Any further information reasonably required by the business services administrator. 
(b)  The department of finance shall obtain a criminal record check of the applicant. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a complete security plan, operation and management plan, and emergency plan for review. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by proof of a valid and current license or certificate issued by the DHSS for each medical marijuana facility type for which a license is sought; provided, however, if DHSS has not yet issued its license or certificate by the application deadline, the applicant may supplement the application to include this documentation once DHSS issues such license or certificate. 
(e)  The application may be accompanied by a State of Missouri or other equivalent government certification showing that the applicant is a minority-owned business enterprise, women-owned business enterprise, service disabled veteran-owned business enterprise, or veteran-owned small business, and any additional information showing ownership percentages for persons who are minority as defined under RSMo. § 37.013, women, or veterans. 
(f)  The application shall be accompanied by payment of a processing fee in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining any required criminal record checks. 
(g)  An application for license renewals shall be submitted to the business services administrator no later than October 1 together with a renewal processing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The business services administrator may allow a renewal applicant to continue the medical marijuana activities at an existing facility with a temporary license if the renewal application has been submitted to the business services administrator but has not been processed. 
(h)  For failure to submit a renewal application on or before October 1, a late charge shall be added to the renewal fee as follows: 
(1)  October 2 to October 31 ..... $100.00 
(2)  November 1 to November 30 ..... $200.00 
(3)  December 1 to December 31 ..... $300.00 
(4)  Any renewal application not submitted by December 31 shall result in automatic forfeiture of the license. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-425. - Investigation of application. 
The business services administrator, upon receipt of an application, shall cause an investigation to be made of the statements in the application, the character of the applicant, accompanying documentation, and the location and condition of the premises to be licensed. A copy of each application shall be forwarded by the business services administrator to the relevant city departments for review and comment. On each application for an original license, the relevant city departments shall investigate the safety and sanitation of the premises of the applicant, all relevant plans required under this article, and the equipment and furnishings contained in the applicant's premises. Each department shall report the findings of the investigation to the business services administrator. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the business services administrator from issuing a temporary conditional license contingent upon the findings of any subsequent on-site investigation determining the premises to be in conformance with the submitted application and plans. A temporary conditional license shall not authorize the applicant to operate. After the original license has been issued, the business services administrator may, at any reasonable time, have the premises or records of the licensee re-inspected for compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
DIVISION 3. - APPROVAL PROCESS FOR MEDICAL MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FACILITY, MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY, OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY 
 
Sec. 13-426. - Standards for issuance of license for medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana cultivation facility, or medical marijuana testing facility. 
The business services administrator shall issue a license under this article for medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana cultivation facility, or medical marijuana testing facility when the business services administrator determines that: 
(1)  The application including any required attachments and submissions is complete and signed by the applicant, and all plans are approved by the appropriate city departments; 
(2)  The applicant currently holds a valid medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana cultivation facility, or medical marijuana testing facility license or certification issued by the DHSS; 
(3)  The applicant has paid the application fee and any other fees required by this article; 
(4)  The application does not contain any falsehood, material misstatement, or misrepresentation; 
(5)  The application contains proof of the applicant's right to occupy and use the premises in the manner proposed by the application; 
(6)  The application, applicant, including each individual owner and manager, and proposed medical marijuana facility comply with all of the requirements of this article, city code, state law and rules promulgated by the DHSS; 
(7)  The applicant, and when the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company the officers, directors, members, and managers, have good moral character and are without a disqualifying felony offense as that term is defined by state law; and 
(8)  The proposed location of the medical marijuana facility is permitted under chapter 29 of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
DIVISION 4. - APPROVAL PROCESS AND ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 13-427. - Limit on number of licenses for medical marijuana dispensary facilities. 
As set forth in chapter 29 of the city code, the number of medical marijuana dispensary facilities located within the city limits shall be limited to one (1) per twenty thousand (20,000) population, or fraction thereof, as established by the most recent U.S. Census Bureau, Population Estimates Program (PEP). 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-428. - Time period for initial medical marijuana dispensary licenses applications. 
The business services administrator will accept applications for the initial issuance of medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses under this article for a period of twenty-one (21) days after DHSS has issued its licenses for medical marijuana dispensary facilities. An applicant for consideration of issuance of an initial medical marijuana dispensary facility license issued by the city must submit a complete application during the identified twenty-one (21) day period. An application must satisfy the requirements of this article to be considered complete. The business services administrator shall review all applications within sixty (60) days after the close of the initial application filing period. For good cause shown, the business services administrator may extend the review period for issuance of initial medical marijuana dispensary licenses for up to an additional thirty (30) days. Applications filed after the close of the initial application filing period will be based on availability of licenses and will only be processed after all of the applications filed during the initial application filing period have been either issued or denied. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-429. - Prerequisite standards for issuance of license for medical marijuana dispensary facility. 
The business services administrator shall first conclude that an application is complete by determining that the following minimum elements have been met: 
(1)  The application including any required attachments and submissions is complete and signed by the applicant, and all plans are approved by the appropriate city departments; 
(2)  The applicant currently holds a valid medical marijuana dispensary facility license issued by the DHSS; 
(3)  The applicant has paid the application fee and any other fees required by this article; 
(4)  The application does not contain any falsehood, material misstatement, or misrepresentation; 
(5)  The application includes all documentation submitted by the applicant to the DHSS as part of applicant's state medical marijuana dispensary facility license application; 
(6)  The application includes all scores issued by the DHSS on applicant's state medical marijuana dispensary facility license application; 
(7)  The application contains proof of the applicant's right to occupy and use the premises in the manner proposed by the application; 
(8)  The application, applicant, including each individual owner and manager, and proposed medical marijuana facility comply with all of the requirements of this article, city code, state law and rules promulgated by the DHSS; 
(9)  The applicant, and when the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company the officers, directors, members, and managers, have good moral character and are without a disqualifying felony offense as that term is defined by state law; 
(10)  There are sufficient licenses remaining for issuance in accordance with section 13-427 and chapter 29 of the City Code; and 
(11)  The proposed location of the medical marijuana facility is permitted under chapter 29 of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-430. - Medical marijuana dispensary licenses scoring criteria. 
In addition to the core application requirements, an applicant may submit supplemental information upon which the business services administrator may award bonus points to be used in connection with determining the order in which medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses will be issued. After reviewing completed applications, the business services administrator will assess bonus points to each completed application based on following criteria: 
(1)  An application that complies with section 13-429 shall be assessed ten (10) bonus points. 
(2)  An application from a government certified minority business enterprise, women business enterprise, service disabled veteran business enterprise, or veteran-owned small business shall be assessed five (5) bonus points. For every ten (10) percent ownership share above fifty (50) percent held by a minority as defined under RSMo § 37.013, woman, or veteran the application shall receive one (1) additional bonus point. A single individual may not qualify for points under more than one qualifying criteria. For example, if an application has a woman veteran who owns seventy-seven (77) percent of the business, then that application will receive seven (7) bonus points. An application is eligible to receive a total of ten (10) bonus points for this criteria. 
(3)  An application for a dispensary located two (2) miles or more when measured from property line to property line from 701 E. Broadway, Columbia, Missouri 65201 shall be assessed ten (10) bonus points. Any facility that is located one and one-half (1½) miles or more when measured from property line to property line from 701 E. Broadway, Columbia, Missouri 65201 shall be assessed five (5) bonus points. 
(4)  An applicant who has resided within the corporate limits of the City of Columbia for a minimum of three (3) consecutive years immediately preceding the date of the application shall be defined as a "local owner" for purposes of this subsection. An application that includes at least one (1) local owner with a minimum of ten (10) percent ownership interest shall be assessed one (1) bonus point. For every ten (10) percent ownership share held by a local owner who has at least a ten (10) percent ownership interest, the application shall receive one (1) additional bonus point. For example, if an application has three (3) total owners and two (2) local owners and together the local owners own sixty-six (66) percent of the business, then that application will receive six (6) bonus points. By way of further example, an application which has a local owner with seventy-five (75) percent ownership interest and a second local owner with five (5) percent ownership interest would be eligible for seven (7) bonus points. An application is eligible to receive a maximum of ten (10) bonus points for this criteria. 
(5)  An application that contains a written cultural competency plan that describes how the facility will ensure services are provided effectively to people of all cultures, races, ethnic backgrounds and religions in a manner that recognizes, values, affirms and respects the worth of the individual and protects and preserves the dignity of each, shall be assessed ten (10) bonus points. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-431. - Process to determine how medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses are issued. 
Medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses shall be issued by the business services administrator in the following order in accordance with this article: 
(1)  The completed applications received prior to the end of the initial application period shall be reviewed by the business services administrator and eligibility for issuance of a license determined by the business services administrator. For the license year January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020, the business services administrator shall issue a maximum of seven (7) initial medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses. In the event more than seven (7) applications are received, the business services administrator shall issue the licenses based on the point system set forth in section 13-430 to the seven (7) initial applicants with the highest number of points. 
(2)  If one (1) or more applicants have the same total points using the point system set forth in section 13-430, the business services administrator shall utilize the scores issued by DHSS to determine the priority rank for the applicants who have the same points. 
(3)  If one (1) or more applicants have the same total points after using both of the processes set forth in sections 13-431(1) and 13-431(2), then the business services administrator shall hold a random lottery between the remaining tied complete applications to award the remaining licenses. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec 13-432. - Process when new medical marijuana dispensary facility licenses are available. 
In the event the limit for issuance of licenses for medical marijuana dispensary facilities is met, the business services administrator shall reject further applications. At any time a license becomes available in the future, the business services administrator shall notify the public by weekly publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city for four (4) consecutive weeks. Following such publication, the business license administrator shall open up the application process for a minimum of two (2) weeks to accept new applications in accordance with this article and using the same process as set forth in sections 13-430 and 13-431. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-433. - Limitation on retail sale of medical marijuana. 
No medical marijuana dispensary facility may sell, give away or transfer medical marijuana except to a qualifying patient, a primary caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, or other entity allowed under state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-434. - Hours of operation for medical marijuana dispensary facility. 
Hours of operation for a medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., irrespective of what zoning district such facility may be located within. Medical marijuana dispensary facilities are prohibited from having hours of operation between 10:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
DIVISION 5. - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; APPEAL 
 
Sec. 13-435. - Approval of applications and issuance of license. 
If the applicant meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this article, and in the case of a renewal the business has been conducted in accordance with the additional requirements of this article, and in the case of medical marijuana dispensary facility a license is selected in accordance with this article, the business services administrator shall grant and issue the license. Every license issued under this article shall set forth the type of license granted and shall particularly describe the premises at which medical marijuana activities will occur and the license shall not authorize or permit medical marijuana activities at any other place. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-436. - Posting of license. 
A license shall be continuously posted in a conspicuous location at the medical marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-437. - Denial of application; appeal. 
(a)  Denial. When a license under this article is denied, the business services administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such denial. Such notification shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed letter shall be presumed received three (3) business days after it was mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application. 
(b)  Appeal by applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the marijuana facility license review board by delivering a written notice of appeal to the director of finance with a copy to the business services administrator. The notice of appeal must be filed with the director no later than ten (10) business days after the applicant received the letter of denial. The applicant may submit to the director of finance a position statement explaining why applicant believes the license should be granted. The business services administrator may also submit to the director a position statement explaining why the administrator believes the denial should be upheld. 
(c)  Right to continue operation. If an application for renewal of a license is denied, an applicant who has filed an appeal under this section shall be allowed to continue operating as though the license were renewed until the marijuana facility license review board has rendered a decision. If the board affirms the denial of the license, the applicant shall be allowed to continue operating as though the license were renewed until ten (10) days after receiving the letter of denial. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-438. - Marijuana facility license review board. 
(a)  Establishment; composition of board. A three (3) member marijuana facility license review board is hereby established consisting of the director of finance, the director of public health and human services and a citizen member appointed by the city council to serve a three (3) year term. The marijuana facility license review board may adopt rules and procedures that are consistent with city code and state law. 
(b)  Review of license denial, suspension or revocation. The director of finance, after receiving an appeal from a license denial, suspension, or revocation shall schedule a meeting of the marijuana facility license review board. Before the meeting, the board members shall be provided with copies of the letter of denial, suspension, or revocation the notice of appeal and any documentation and position statements provided by the business services administrator and the applicant pertaining to the action. The board may allow the business services administrator and the applicant or the applicant's representative to explain their positions to the board at the meeting. The board shall render decisions in conformance with this article. The board may either affirm the action taken by the business services administrator or direct the business services administrator to grant or reinstate the license. The license, in the board's discretion, may be for less than the full period of time ending on December 31. If the board affirms the action taken by the business services administrator, the board shall set forth the grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension in writing to the applicant. The determination shall be hand-delivered or sent by first class mail. A mailed determination shall be presumed received three (3) business days after it was mailed. 
(c)  Judicial review. A decision of the marijuana facility license review board may be appealed by the applicant by filing a petition with the Circuit Court of Boone County within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the determination letter from the marijuana facility license review board. The petition shall set forth with particularity the grounds for review. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-439. - License—Issuance after decision of marijuana facility license review board. 
On approval of the application by the marijuana facility license review board for a license under this article, the business services administrator shall issue the applicant a license to conduct business at the location specified in the application for the period set forth by the marijuana facility license review board. The license issued shall set forth the type of license granted and shall particularly describe the premises at which medical marijuana activities will occur and the license shall not authorize or permit the cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana at any other place. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-440. - Must provide current information. 
Licensee must at all times possess a current valid state license from the DHSS for its medical marijuana facility type and must immediately update the business services administrator if there are any changes to the information provided under section 13-424 or otherwise required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-441. - Renewal, suspension, revocation of license—Standards of conducting business on licensed premises. 
The standards set forth in this section shall be considered in determining whether a license under this article should be renewed, suspended, or revoked. In conducting business on the licensed premises, a licensee and the licensee's agents and employees shall: 
(1)  Prevent or suppress any violent quarrel, disorder, brawl, fight or other unlawful conduct of any person on the premises. As used in this section, "premises" includes the licensed premises and the parking lots and areas around the business which are owned, used or maintained as part of the business. 
(2)  Immediately report to the police any illegal or violent act committed on the premises when the licensee or the licensee's employee knew or should have known that the act occurred on the premises. 
(3)  Cooperate fully with law enforcement authorities during an investigation of an illegal or violent act committed on the premises. 
(4)  Operate the business in such a manner that it does not constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  Take appropriate and necessary steps to supervise the outdoor area of the premises including keeping the area free from litter and preventing the parking area from becoming a gathering place for customers of the business. 
(6)  Begin facility operations within one (1) year of license issuance. 
(7)  Prohibit alcohol consumption on premises. 
(8)  Comply with all provisions of this article and city code. 
(9)  Comply with all state laws including all regulations promulgated by the DHSS pertaining to the cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana. 
(10)  Answer all summons and appear for all scheduled hearings and trials in any court for purported violations of this article or state and federal law, including all rules and regulations pertaining to the cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana. 
(11)  Every licensee shall be responsible for medical marijuana activities by its employees. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-442. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Suspension or revocation. The business services administrator may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee under this article who has failed to meet any of the standards of conducting business set forth in this article or who has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement in the license application. A suspension may be from one (1) day to one (1) year. 
(b)  Notice of suspension or revocation. The business services administrator shall suspend or revoke a license issued under this article by sending notice of the suspension or revocation to the licensee by first class mail or by personal service on the licensee or the person in charge at the licensed premises. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3) business days after it is mailed. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  A statement of the grounds for the suspension or revocation. 
(2)  The effective date of the suspension or revocation, which shall be at least ten (10) business days after the notice is received. 
(3)  In the case of a suspension, the length of the suspension. 
(4)  Instructions on how to appeal the suspension or revocation. 
(c)  Appeal to marijuana facility license review board. The licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation by requesting a hearing before the marijuana facility license review board. The appeal must be in writing, addressed to the director of finance and received by the director of finance within ten (10) business days after the notice of suspension or revocation was received. Receipt of an appeal by the director of finance shall automatically stay enforcement of the suspension or revocation. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. After receipt of an appeal, the director of finance shall schedule a hearing before the marijuana facility license review board. At least ten (10) business days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee. Notice shall be given in the same manner as the notices of denial. 
(e)  Depositions. There shall be no right to depositions. 
(f)  Issuance of a subpoena duces tecum. The marijuana facility license review board shall have the authority to issue subpoenas duces tecum for purposes of hearings only. Requests for subpoena duces tecum must be submitted in writing at least three (3) business days before the hearing. 
(g)  Hearing and decision. The marijuana facility license review board shall conduct the hearing within a reasonable amount of time and enter a decision in conformance with this article within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the hearing in accordance with the rules and procedures adopted by the board and the requirements of chapter 536, RSMo., for contested cases. The board may affirm or reverse the decision of the business services administrator. If the board finds that a marijuana facility license violation has occurred, the board may impose a suspension from one (1) day to one (1) year or revoke the license. The board is not bound by the suspension period imposed by the business services administrator. 
(h)  Appeal. The licensee may appeal an adverse decision of the marijuana facility license review board under this section to the Circuit Court of Boone County in accordance with chapter 536, RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-443. - Changing location of establishment; license transfer; license required for each place of business. 
(a)  No licensee under this article shall move the location of the licensed establishment as pertains to medical marijuana activities without the express approval of the business services administrator after verification that the provisions in this article and the provisions of chapter 29 are met. 
(b)  No license issued under this article shall be sold, transferred, or assigned from one person to another, nor shall such license be used at any place except on the premises for which such license is issued, and the proper license shall be procured for each place of business for which a state license is required. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-444. - Updating ownership changes. 
A licensee must provide the business services administrator a notarized affidavit showing any ownership changes within ten (10) business days of the change. If more than five (5) percent of the business is conveyed to any individual or entity not listed in the initial license application, the license is automatically forfeited and the licensee must apply for the license again in accordance with this article. Regardless of whether there are any ownership changes, licensee shall provide a notarized affidavit at the time of their annual license renewal detailing current individual ownership shares. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-445. - Selling to intoxicated and certain individuals prohibited. 
No person shall sell or supply or permit another to sell or supply any medical marijuana product to an intoxicated person or to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of alcohol or narcotics. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-446. - Consumption on premises prohibited. 
The consumption of alcohol and medical marijuana are prohibited upon or about any licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-447. - Sales, handling by minors. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall participate in the retail sale of medical marijuana. 
(b)  In any medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility, or medical marijuana testing facility, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may be employed and their duties may include the handling of medical marijuana products for all purposes except consumption, dispensing, or sale at retail. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-448. - Purchase or possession on behalf of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, or attempt to purchase or possess, any medical marijuana for a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless otherwise allowed by federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-449. - Presumption. 
In any prosecution under this article, there is a rebuttable presumption that a container marked or labeled as containing medical marijuana actually contains the described medical marijuana. This rebuttable presumption applies to both open and sealed containers. This rebuttable presumption applies only in cases where a sample of the contents of the container has been preserved and is available to the defendant for testing. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-450. - Penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the powers granted to the business services administrator, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor unless otherwise provided herein. Each offense is punishable by confinement not to exceed thirty (30) days, or payment of the following fines, or by both such fines and confinement: 
(1)  An individual violating the provisions of this article shall pay a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  Any corporation or partnership violating the provisions of this article shall pay a fine not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  The city is authorized to seek civil penalties in a court of competent jurisdiction up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.000) against any person that violates the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-451. - Business license required; fees. 
A separate business license shall be required for each place of business and a business license fee shall be determined in accordance with section 13-27. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-452. - Taxes. 
Each licensee shall collect and remit sales tax and other applicable taxes on all medical marijuana, paraphernalia, and other tangible personal property sold by the licensee at the medical marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-453. - Rules and regulations—Records. 
(a)  Each medical marijuana facility in the city shall procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of each shipment of marijuana or marijuana products received, the date thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a period of five (5) years subject to the use and inspection of the city. 
(b)  All medical marijuana facilities in the city shall maintain and keep for a period of five (5) years such other records of marijuana received, sold or delivered within the city as may be required by the city. 
(c)  The city, through its duly authorized representatives, is authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records, stock of marijuana in and upon any premises where they are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any such medical marijuana facility pertaining to the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, dispensing, sale and delivery of marijuana taxable under city code during all business hours. 
(d)  To verify the accuracy of any taxes imposed and assessed by city code, each medical marijuana facility shall give the city and its duly authorized representatives the means, facilities and opportunity to examine all records pertaining to marijuana sales and all marijuana inventories. 
(e)  The city is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-454. - Revocation of license upon denial or revocation of state license or applicable federal prohibition. 
If the state prohibits the cultivation, manufacturing, dispensing, selling, or testing of medical marijuana through medical marijuana facilities, or if a medical marijuana facility is denied a medical marijuana license or has such license revoked by the state, or if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the federal government's prohibition of medical marijuana activities through medical marijuana businesses supersedes state law, any license issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress on behalf of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 13-455. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this article shall be held by a state or federal court to be invalid or unconstitutional, such portion is hereby declared to be severable and such invalid or unconstitutional portion shall in no way affect the remainder of this article, but shall be in full force and effect and it is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the remainder of this article would have been passed notwithstanding the invalidity or unconstitutionality of any section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase thereof. 
(Ord. No. 23979 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-8; commission on bicycling, § 2-241 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; civil defense, Ch. 7; municipal court, Ch. 15; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16; abandoning motor vehicles, § 16-232; horns and signaling devices on vehicles, § 16-257; mufflers required on vehicles, § 16-262; noise regulations regarding sound amplifying equipment and trucks, § 16-281 et seq.; traffic regulations for parks, § 17-76 et seq.; police, Ch. 21; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Abandoned property. Any unattended motor vehicle, trailer or all-terrain vehicle removed or subject to removal from public or private property as provided by this chapter, whether or not operational. 
Alley or alleyway. Any public roadway which affords only a secondary means of access to the abutting property. 
Authorized emergency vehicle. A vehicle publicly owned and operated as an ambulance, or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the state highway patrol, police or fire department, sheriff or constable or deputy sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an ambulance when responding to emergency calls. 
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
Campus area. An area bounded by the south right-of-way line of Locust Street, the east right-of-way line of Providence Road, the north right-of-way line of Stadium Boulevard and the west right-of-way line of College Avenue. 
Central business district. All streets and portions of streets within the area described as: being bounded on the north by Park Avenue; on the south by Elm Street; on the west by Garth Avenue; and on the east by College Avenue. 
Commercial motor vehicle. A motor vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying freight and merchandise or more than eight (8) passengers but not including van pools or shuttle buses. 
Controlled access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
Cross walk: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Cycle. As defined in section 14-491 of this chapter. 
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, or the entire area ordinarily used for vehicular traffic or parking in municipal parking lots, when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Holiday. For the purpose of this chapter, holidays shall be New Year's, Martin Luther King, Jr., Memorial, Independence, Labor, Veterans, Thanksgiving and Christmas Days. 
Intersection: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as separate intersections. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of the two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Local commercial motor vehicle. A commercial motor vehicle whose operations are confined solely to a municipality and that area extending not more than twenty-five (25) miles therefrom. 
Minor traffic violation. A traffic ordinance violation that does not involve accident or injury, that does not involve the operation of a commercial motor vehicle, and for which no points are assessed by the department of revenue or the department of revenue is authorized to assess one (1) to four (4) points to a person's driving record upon conviction. A minor traffic violation shall include amended charges for any minor traffic violation. Violations for exceeding the speed limit by more than nineteen miles per hour (19 mph) or violations occurring within a construction or school zone are excluded from this definition. 
Mobile food vendor. A self-contained food service operation, located in a wheeled motor vehicle or trailer, used to store, prepare, display or serve food intended for individual portion service. 
Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon tracks, except farm tractors. 
Motorcycle. A motor vehicle operated on two (2) wheels. 
Motortricycle. A motor vehicle operated on three (3) wheels, including a motorcycle while operated with any conveyance, temporary or otherwise, requiring the use of a third wheel. 
Motor propelled scooter. Scooters, e-scooters and other small wheeled vehicles which do not rely solely on human propulsion and are equipped with an electric motor that is capable of propelling the device to a maximum speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Official traffic control devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Owner. Any person who owns or holds legal title to a vehicle, either individually or jointly with others, or in whose name such vehicle is registered or licensed, either individually or jointly with others, according to the records of any city, county or state, but shall not include persons holding only a security interest in such vehicle unless such persons have possession and control of such vehicle. 
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
Parking meter. A device, or a sign directing payment to a device or software application, for the purpose of measuring time elapsed since payment was made, and equipped with a notification to indicate the legal time a vehicle may remain parked in a designated place. 
Parking meter district. All streets and portions of streets within an area where parking meters are erected and maintained by authority of the city council. 
Parking meter hood. Cover placed on parking meters by authority of the police department or city traffic engineer. 
Parking meter space. That portion of the street bounded by lines or marks on the curb, or on the street, above or alongside each parking meter to designate the parking space for which each meter is to be used. 
Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedal trolley. A wheeled device designed to be propelled by a passenger or passengers via pedaling, with brakes and steering operated by a non-pedaling driver. A pedal trolley may include an assist motor. 
Pedestrian. The term pedestrian shall include a person on foot, a person walking a bicycle and a person operating a manual or electric wheelchair. 
Police officer. Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district, when the property on such highway, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more, is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
Right-of-way. The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
Roadway. That portion of a highway, including the entire area of municipal parking lots, that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
State highway. A highway maintained by the State of Missouri as a part of the state highway system. 
Stop. When required, complete cessation from movement. 
Stop or stopping. When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control signs or signal. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, or the entire area ordinarily used for vehicular traffic or parking in municipal parking lots, when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Through highway. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
Through truck traffic. Truck traffic which is not en route to a destination on the street on which it is travelling. 
Tractor or truck tractor. A self-propelled motor vehicle designed for drawing other vehicles but not for the carriage of any load when operating independently. When attached to a semitrailer, it supports a part of the weight thereof. 
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
Traffic control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Traffic division. The traffic division of the police department of the city, or in the event traffic division is not established, then such term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of the city. 
Trailer. Any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively on trucks, including a semi-trailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a self-propelled vehicle that a considerable part of its own weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle. 
Trucks. All motor vehicles designed, used, or maintained for the transportation of property. 
University of Missouri campus. All streets and portions of streets within the area described as: being contained within an area enclosed by a boundary beginning at the intersection of Stewart Road and Providence Road; thence east on Stewart Road to Fifth Street; thence north on Fifth Street to Elm Street; thence east on Elm Street to Hitt Street; thence south on Hitt Street to Paquin Street; thence east on Paquin Street to College Avenue; thence south on College Avenue to Missouri Highway 740; thence west on Missouri Highway 740 to Providence Road; and thence north on Providence Road to the starting point at Stewart Road. 
The streets and portions of streets which form the boundaries of the campus area shall be considered as without the University of Missouri campus for the purposes of section 14-223(b)(2)c. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1964, § 12.010; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 10811, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 14252, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 14598, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 17011, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 19360, § 1, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 22045, § 1, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 22887 , § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 23371 , § 2, 11-6-17; Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.010.  
Sec. 14-2. - Compliance with rules of the road. 
Every person operating or driving a vehicle upon the highways and streets of the city shall observe and comply with the rules of the road as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294)  
Sec. 14-3. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.095.  
Sec. 14-4. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1964, § 12.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.085.  
Sec. 14-5. - Use of coasters, roller skates, motor propelled scooters, and similar devices. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, motor propelled scooter, or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk or public parking lots and garages within the boundaries of the Central Business District. 
(b)  Wherever the use of roller skates, coasters, skateboards, motor propelled scooters, or similar device upon a street, sidewalk or alley is not prohibited, the person using such device shall be granted all the rights and be subject to all the duties applicable to bicyclists including the duty to obey all traffic control devices and signs. 
(c)  Every person using roller skates, skateboards, coasters, motor propelled scooters, or similar devices upon any sidewalk or public path shall use the device in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed no greater than is reasonable under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the amount and character of pedestrian traffic, grade and width of sidewalk or public path, and condition of surface. Every person using these devices upon a sidewalk or public path shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with normal pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  All persons who use roller skates, skateboards, coasters, motor propelled scooters, or similar devices on any road, street or alley shall: 
(1)  Stay as far to the right of the road, street or alley as possible, except when necessary to make a left hand turn; 
(2)  Operate the device with the flow of traffic; 
(3)  Operate the device in a careful and prudent manner; 
(4)  Wear reflective clothing including, at a minimum, the attachment of a rear-facing red reflector on the back of the person, at least two (2) square inches in reflective surface area, which shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600) feet during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise; 
(5)  Be equipped with a front-facing lamp on the front of the person or carried by the rider which shall emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred (500) feet during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise. 
(Code 1964, § 12.085; Ord. No. 11836, § 1, 4-4-88, Ord. No. 14126 § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 21155, § 1, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.090.  
Sec. 14-6. - Passengers to remain inside vehicles. 
No person shall allow any part of such person's body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle or pedal trolley in which such person is riding, except to give such signals as are required by law, and no person shall hang onto any vehicle whatsoever or ride upon the outside of any vehicle. It shall be unlawful for a passenger to exit or enter a pedal trolley while the pedal trolley is in motion. 
(Code 1964, § 12.400; Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 14-7. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, motor propelled scooter, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or any part of such person to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.380; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.350.  
Sec. 14-8. - Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission. 
No person shall enter, jump on or ride in or on any vehicle without the consent of the owner or driver. 
(Code 1964, § 12.405)  
Sec. 14-9. - Riding in stolen motor vehicle. 
No person shall knowingly ride in a motor vehicle which has been stolen or is being operated without the consent of the owner thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person employed by the owner of such motor vehicle as a chauffeur or registered operator if such vehicle is driven or operated, used or tampered with without the owner's knowledge or expressed consent, or in violation of his instructions. 
(Code 1964, § 12.415) 
Cross reference— Offenses against property, § 16-151 et seq.  
Sec. 14-10. - Railroad trains not to block streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes; provided, that this section shall not apply to a moving train or to one stopped because of an emergency or for repairs necessary before it can proceed safely. 
(Code 1964, § 12.390) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.360.  
Sec. 14-11. - Removal of traffic hazards. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of real property to remove from such property any tree, plant, shrub or other obstruction, or part thereof, which by obstructing the view of any driver, constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(b)  When the state highway commission or the chief of police determine, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that such traffic hazards exist, the commission or police chief shall notify the property owner and order that the hazard be removed within ten (10) days. 
(c)  The failure of the owner to remove such traffic hazard within ten (10) days shall constitute an offense punishable by the penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and every day said property owner shall fail to remove such traffic hazard shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1380)  
Secs. 14-12—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1964, § 12.070) 
Cross reference— Fire department generally, § 9-36 et seq.; police department generally, § 21-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.075.  
Sec. 14-27. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1964, § 12.075) 
Cross reference— Fire department generally, § 9-36 et seq.; police departments, § 21-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.080.  
Sec. 14-28. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof, shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1964, § 12.025) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.025.  
Sec. 14-29. - Driver files to be maintained. 
The police department or traffic division thereof, shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(Code 1964, § 12.045) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.045.  
Sec. 14-30. - Method of identifying funeral processions. 
The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed, to identify the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Code 1964, § 12.055) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.055.  
Sec. 14-31. - Annual traffic safety report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1964, § 12.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.050.  
Sec. 14-32. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations governing traffic in cases of emergency or special conditions of a temporary character which, in the opinion of the city manager, the public safety, convenience and expedition of traffic may demand, which regulations shall be effective for the duration of such emergency or such condition and no longer. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer, with approval of the director of public works and the city manager, may test experimental traffic control regulations and/or devices under actual conditions of traffic for a specified length of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, unless such regulation be continued in effect by the council by duly enacted ordinance. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer shall keep a record in his office of all regulations made under the authority of subsection (b) of this section, which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1964, § 12.065) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.065.  
Secs. 14-33—14-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC DIVISION 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Police administration. 
There is established in the police department a traffic division, to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 12.015) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.015.  
Sec. 14-47. - Duty of traffic division. 
The traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, shall enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, and shall have the power and duty to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.020.  
Secs. 14-48—14-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC ENGINEER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Office established; general powers and duties; state highway commission to function as for state highways. 
(a)  The office of city traffic engineer within the department of public works is established. The director of public works or his designated city official shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city, and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city, except as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  The function of the city traffic engineer with all the powers, duties and authority given under Section 300.010 through Section 300.600, Revised Statutes of Missouri, known as the "Model Traffic Ordinance," and adopted as revised herein, shall be vested in the state highway commission for all state highways as defined in section 14-1 and hereinafter called "state highway," which are presently in existence and maintained by the state highway commission and all such state highways which are in the future built, constructed, or which the state highway commission assumes the responsibility to maintain within the corporate limits or within any area annexed by the city. 
(d)  The state highway commission shall have exclusive authority to place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices on all state highways maintained by the state highway commission, as defined in subsection (c) hereof. The state highway commission is given express authority to delegate to the district engineer any power or authority vested in the state highway commission by this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.060) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.060.  
Sec. 14-62. - Signs required at through streets. 
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of any engineering and traffic investigation, at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersection of such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either or both of such streets, as may be determined by the city traffic engineer, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1964, § 12.250) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.260.  
Sec. 14-63. - All-way stop intersections. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized and directed to place and maintain stop signs and, where appropriate, yield signs at the following all-way stop intersections: 
Ann Street and Cliff Drive and Anthony Street. 
Ash Street and Clinkscales Road. 
Ash Street and Garth Avenue. 
Ash Street and Ninth Street. 
Ash Street and Orr Street. 
Ash Street and Pershing Road. 
Ash Street and Seventh Street. 
Ash Street and Tenth Street. 
Ash Street and West Boulevard. 
Audubon Drive and Shepard Boulevard. 
Bearcreek Drive and Leslie Lane. 
Bearcreek Drive and Parkade Boulevard. 
Bethel Street and Green Meadows Road. 
Bethel Street and Southampton Drive. 
Blue Ridge Road and Oakland Road. 
Chadwick Drive and Royal Lytham Drive. 
Chapel Hill Road and Fairview Road. 
Chapel Hill Road and Limerick Lane. 
Cherry Street and Fifth Street. 
Cherry Street and Sixth Street. 
Conley Avenue and Fifth Street. 
Conley Avenue and Tiger Avenue. 
Conley Avenue and Sixth Street. 
Corporate Lake Drive and the western Providence Road outer road. 
Crestland Avenue and Ridge Road. 
Crestland Avenue and St. Michael Drive. 
Danforth Drive and Shepard Boulevard. 
Derby Ridge Drive and Brown School Road. 
Derby Ridge Drive and Smiley Lane. 
Eighth Street and Locust Street. 
Eighth Street and Park Avenue. 
Eighth Street and Rogers Street. 
Eighth Street and Wilkes Boulevard. 
El Cortez Drive and Monterey Drive. 
El Cortez Drive and Velancia Drive. 
Elm Street and Fifth Street. 
Fifth Street and Ash Street. 
Fifth Street and Hickman Avenue. 
Fifth Street and Locust Street. 
Fifth Street and Rogers Street. 
Fifth Street and Stewart Road. 
Fifth Street and Turner Avenue. 
Forum Boulevard and Southampton Drive. 
Garth Avenue and Leslie Lane. 
Garth Avenue and Sexton Road. 
Garth Avenue and Stewart Road. 
Garth Avenue and Texas Avenue. 
Green Meadows Road and Forum Boulevard. 
Greenwood Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Hinkson Avenue and William Street. 
Hitt Street and Locust Street. 
Hitt Street and Rollins Street. 
Hitt Street and University Avenue. 
Kentucky Avenue and Tiger Avenue. 
LaSalle Place and Pendleton Street. 
Limerick Lane and Katy Lane. 
Loch Lane and the north-most intersection of Concordia Drive. 
Locust Street and Seventh Street. 
Locust Street and Sixth Street. 
Locust Street and Tenth Street. 
Missouri Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Nifong Boulevard and Bearfield Road. 
Nifong Boulevard and Old Millcreek Road. 
Nifong Boulevard and Rock Quarry Road. 
Nifong Boulevard and Sinclair Street. 
Ninth Street and Park Avenue. 
Ninth Street and University Avenue. 
Oakland Gravel Road and Roger I. Wilson Drive and Brown School Road. 
Oakland Gravel Road and Smiley Lane and Springdale Drive. 
Park Avenue and Fifth Street. 
Providence Road and Blue Ridge Road. 
Providence Road and Rain Forest Parkway. 
Rangeline Road and Wilkes Boulevard. 
Rolling Hills Road and Grace Lane and Richland Road. 
Rollins Street and Sunset Drive. 
Sixth Street and Elm Street. 
Seventh Street and Wilkes Boulevard. 
Silvey Street and Worley Street. 
Sylvan Lane and White Gate Drive. 
Tenth Street and Park Avenue. 
Tiger Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Turner Avenue and Tiger Avenue. 
University Avenue and William Street. 
Walnut Street and William Street. 
William Street and Anthony Street. 
William Street and Rollins Street. 
William Street and Wilson Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 11856, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 11878, § 1, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 12329, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 12413, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 12485, § 1, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 12667, § 1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 13186, § 1, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 13187, § 1, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 13679 § 1, 5-17-93; Ord. No. 13746 § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. 13799 § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14046, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 14047, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 14251 § 1, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 14293 § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 15290, § 1, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 15357, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 15380, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 15765, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 16047, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 16211, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 16448, § 1, 5-15-00; Ord. No. 18698, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19466, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 19755, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 20147, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 20156, § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 20361, § 1, 8-3-09; Ord. No. 20380, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 20753, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21131, § 1, 11-7-11; Ord. No. 21539, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 23627 , § 1, 9-4-18)  
Secs. 14-64—14-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.555 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-76. - Established. 
The municipal judge is requested to establish, maintain and administer a traffic violations bureau pursuant to the rules of the Missouri Supreme Court. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1340; Ord. No. 15125, § 1, 1-21-97)  
Sec. 14-77. - Schedule of costs. 
The judge shall establish a schedule of costs to be paid in connection with pleas of guilty which are processed in the traffic violations bureau. Such costs shall not exceed the court costs established for cases in which the defendant appears before the judge. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1350; Ord. No. 15125, § 1, 1-21-97)  
Sec. 14-78. - Parking violations. 
In addition to the authority granted the traffic violations bureau by statute and court rule, the violations clerk or deputy clerk is hereby authorized to accept appearance, waiver of trial, plea of guilty and payment of fine and costs arising out of violations of the parking regulations established by this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1360; Ord. No. 15125, § 1, 1-21-97)  
Sec. 14-79. - Use of revenue from traffic violations. 
All sums collected from traffic violators under this chapter shall be paid to the general revenue fund. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1370)  
Secs. 14-80—14-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 14-91. - Leaving the scene of an accident. 
No person operating or driving a vehicle on any street, alley or highway within the city, knowing that an injury has been caused to a person or damage has been caused to property, due to the culpability of such operator or driver, or to accident, shall leave the place of such injury, damage or accident without stopping and giving his name, residence, including city and street number, motor vehicle number and chauffeur's or registered operator's number, if any, to the injured party or to a police officer, or if no police officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest police station or judicial officer. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor as defined and provided for in chapter 16. 
(Code 1964, § 12.417) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 577.060.  
Sec. 14-92. - Reporting of accidents. 
(a)  When required—Generally. Every person operating a vehicle within the city involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to property shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department. Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person from his obligations under section 14-91. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as defined and provided for in Chapter 16. 
(b)  Same—Written report. The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or damage to property shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. The provisions of this paragraph shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle involved in an accident from any duty imposed in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.105, 12.110, 12.418) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.110.  
Sec. 14-93. - Public inspection of accident reports. 
(a)  All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police department or other governmental agency may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(b)  No written reports forwarded under the provisions of this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish, upon demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law, and, if such report has been made, the date, time and location of the accident, the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, and the investigating officers. 
(Code 1964, § 12.115) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.125.  
Sec. 14-94. - Investigation of accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1964, § 12.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.030.  
Sec. 14-95. - Traffic accident reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1964, § 12.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.040.  
Sec. 14-96. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1964, § 12.035) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.035.  
Secs. 14-97—14-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Use of siren whistles limited, § 9-4. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-116. - Mechanically defective vehicles. 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a street which is in a defective mechanical condition, and which, because of such defective mechanical condition, would be reasonably likely to cause damage to person or property while being driven. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1050)  
Sec. 14-117. - Towed cars. 
When one (1) vehicle is being towed by another, they shall be coupled by a line so that the two (2) vehicles will be separated by not more than fifteen (15) feet, and there shall be displayed on the towline, a white cloth or paper, so that the same will be clearly visible to the other users of the street. During the time lights are required, the required lights shall be displayed by both vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1140)  
Secs. 14-118—14-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-131. - Regulations as to width, height and length of motor vehicles; exceptions. 
(a)  No vehicle operated upon the streets of this city shall have a width, including load, in excess of ninety-six (96) inches, except clearance lights, rearview mirrors or other accessories required by federal, state or city law or regulation. 
(b)  No vehicle operated upon the highways of this city shall have a height, including load, in excess of thirteen and one-half (13½) feet. 
(c)  No single motor vehicle operated upon the highways of this city shall have a length, including load, in excess of forty (40) feet. 
(d)  No bus or trackless trolley coach operated upon the streets of this city shall have a length in excess of fifty-six (56) feet; provided, however, such vehicles may exceed the fifty-six (56) feet length when such excess length is caused by the projection of a front safety bumper or a rear safety bumper or both. Such safety bumper shall not cause the length of the bus to exceed the fifty-six (56) feet length limit by more than one (1) foot in the front and one (1) foot in the rear. The term "safety bumper" means any device which may be fitted on an existing bumper or which replaces the bumper and is so constructed, treated, or manufactured so that it absorbs energy upon impact. 
(e)  No combination of truck-tractor and semitrailer operated upon the highways of this state shall have a length, including load, in excess of sixty (60) feet. 
(f)  Except as hereinafter provided, these restrictions shall not apply to agricultural implements operating occasionally on the streets for short distances, or to self-propelled hay-hauling equipment, or to implements of husbandry, or to vehicles temporarily transporting agricultural implements or implements of husbandry or road-making machinery, or road materials, or towing for repair purposes vehicles that have become disabled upon the streets, or to implement dealers delivering or moving farm machinery for repairs on any streets other than the interstate system. Implements of husbandry and vehicles transporting such machinery or equipment may be operated occasionally for short distances on streets when operated between the hours of sunrise and sunset by a driver licensed as an operator or chauffeur. As used in this paragraph the term "implements of husbandry" means all self-propelled machinery operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour, specifically designed for, or especially adapted to be capable of, incidental over-the-road and primary off-road usage and used exclusively for the application of commercial plant food materials or agricultural chemicals, and not specifically designed or intended for transportation of such chemicals and materials. No implement of husbandry may exceed a width of eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches. The purpose of this section is to permit a single trip per day by the implement of husbandry from the source of supply to a given farm. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1060) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 304.170.  
Sec. 14-132. - Regulations as to weight; axle load, tandem axle defined. 
(a)  No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be moved or operated on any street in the city having a greater weight than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds on one (1) axle when the wheels attached to such axle are equipped with high pressure pneumatic, solid rubber or cushioned tires, and no vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be moved or operated on the streets of the city having a greater weight than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds on one (1) axle when the wheels attached to such axle are equipped with low pressure tires, and no vehicle shall be moved or operated on the streets of the city having a load of over six hundred (600) pounds per inch width of the tire upon any wheel concentrated on the surface of the street, the width in the case of rubber tires, both solid and pneumatic, to be measured between the flanges of the rim. 
(b)  An "axle load" shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers are included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes forty (40) inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(c)  Subject to the limit upon the weight imposed upon the street through any one (1) axle, the total gross weight with load imposed upon the street by any one (1) group of two (2) or more consecutive axles of a vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not exceed the gross weight given for the respective distance between the first and last axle of the total group of axles measured longitudinally to the nearest foot as set forth in the following table: 
Distance in Feet Between First 
and Last Axles of Group 	Maximum Load in Pounds 
on Group of Axles 
 4 	32,000 
 5 	32,000 
 6 	32,000 
 7 	32,000 
 8 	32,610 
 9 	33,580 
10 	34,550 
11 	35,510 
12 	36,470 
13 	37,420 
14 	38,360 
15 	39,300 
16 	40,230 
17 	41,160 
18 	42,080 
19 	42,990 
20 	43,900 
21 	44,800 
22 	45,700 
23 	46,590 
24 	47,470 
25 	48,350 
26 	49,220 
27 	50,090 
28 	50,950 
29 	51,800 
30 	52,650 
31 	53,490 
32 	54,330 
33 	55,160 
34 	55,980 
35 	56,800 
36 	57,610 
37 	58,420 
38 	59,220 
39 or over 	60,010 
 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting lawful axle loads, tandem axle loads or gross loads in excess of those permitted under the provisions of Section 127 of Title 23 of the United States Code (Public Law 85-767, 85th Congress). 
(e)  Those regulations governing weight on interstate highways or other designated state highways enacted by the state legislature shall apply to any highway so designated that is within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 12.1090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 304.180.  
Sec. 14-133. - Lights on vehicles—Generally. 
(a)  Vehicles being operated. All vehicles being operated on the streets of the city between the time of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead, shall be equipped with and have in operation, headlights and tail lights, as provided by state law. 
(b)  Oversized vehicles when parked. No oversized vehicle shall be left standing in the roadway between the time of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise without displaying thereon at least one (1) light visible from both the front and rear for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet; provided, however, that such lights shall not be required when there is sufficient light to reveal such oversized vehicle for a distance of two hundred (200) feet upon such street. For the purpose of this section, an oversized vehicle shall be defined as a vehicle over seven (7) feet wide or having a capacity of two (2) tons or more. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 307.020(9), 307.110.  
Sec. 14-134. - Same—Use of spotlights. 
No searchlight or spotlight shall be equipped with a bulb stronger than twenty-one candle power, and no such searchlight or spotlight shall be used on a street except in an emergency, or when headlights are inadequate owing to rain, fog, etc., and then only provided their shaft of condensed light is directed well downward below the level of the lamp, and at no time into the eyes of other persons. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 307.090.  
Sec. 14-135. - Brakes. 
All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes, kept in good working order, and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes kept in good working order. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 307.170(3).  
Sec. 14-136. - Mirrors. 
All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's seat. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1110) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 307.170(4).  
Sec. 14-137. - Wheels and tires. 
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle, tractor or trailer on any paved street, alley or public way unless the wheels or tires thereof are equipped in such a manner as not to injure the surface of such street, alley or public way, and the use of any vehicle, tractor or trailer which is usually operated upon rubber tires is prohibited to be used upon the iron rim of the wheels of such vehicle, tractor or trailer. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1120)  
Sec. 14-138. - Light or flag on projecting loads. 
All vehicles loaded with materials or objects which project more than five (5) feet from the rear thereof shall, during the period when lights are required, carry a red light at or near the rear end of the protruding material or object. At other times a red cloth or flag not less than sixteen (16) inches square shall be displayed at the end of such projection. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1130)  
Sec. 14-139. - Windows and windshields must be unobstructed and windshields must be equipped with wipers. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any object suspended or mounted in any manner between the driver and the front windshield or with any sign, poster, snow, ice or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle, which obstructs or interferes with the driver's clear view of the street, or which might divert his attention from the street. 
(b)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with the windshield, side wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle broken or cracked in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with the driver's clear view of the street. 
(c)  The windshield of every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle, and shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1141)  
Sec. 14-140. - Loads required to be covered or secured. 
(a)  No person shall operate on any street or highway any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer that is carrying goods or materials which may reasonably be expected to become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a result of wind pressure or air pressure or by the movement of the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, unless the motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer has a protective cover or the load is sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while being transported. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any street or highway any truck having a capacity in excess of one (1) ton net weight that is carrying rock unless the truck has a protective cover over the rock such that none of the rock can fall from the truck while being transported. 
(Ord. No. 13879 § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 17904, § 1, 11-17-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17904, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003, which added subsection (b) to section 14-140 above, shall be in full force and effect from and after May 1, 2004.  
Sec. 14-141. - Material falling from vehicles and trailers. 
No person shall operate on any street or highway any motor vehicle or trailer that has rock or any other material on any part of the vehicle or trailer that may reasonably be expected to fall from the vehicle or trailer as a result of wind pressure or air pressure or by the movement of the vehicle or trailer. 
(Ord. No. 17949, § 1, 1-5-04)  
Secs. 14-142—14-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-161. - Duty of drivers to avoid collisions. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the driver of any vehicle shall at all times exercise the highest degree of care to avoid striking or colliding with any vehicle, cycle or pedestrian upon any roadway and shall, when approaching any stopped or parked vehicle, child, any obviously confused or incapacitated person or any other pedestrian on a roadway, exercise the highest degree of care to avoid injury or damage. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(R))  
Sec. 14-162. - Driving motor vehicle without permission. 
Any person using, operating, driving, injuring, or tampering with a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city without the permission of the owner of such motor vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction before the municipal judge shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 12.410)  
Sec. 14-163. - Drinking intoxicating liquors while operating a vehicle. 
No person shall drink any intoxicating liquors while operating or in charge of any vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 12.421) 
State Law reference— Driving while intoxicated, RSMo. § 577.010.  
Sec. 14-164. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue light authorized by state law, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer. 
(b)  An "emergency vehicle" is a vehicle of any of the following types: 
(1)  A vehicle operated by the state highway patrol, those vehicles operated by enforcement personnel by the division of transportation of the department of economic development, police or fire department, sheriff, constable or deputy sheriff, federal law enforcement officer authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the laws of the United States, traffic officer or coroner or by a privately owned emergency vehicle company; 
(2)  A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs; 
(3)  Motor vehicles and equipment which are operated by any member of an organized fire department, ambulance association or rescue squad, whether paid or volunteer, may be operated on streets and highways in this city as an emergency vehicle under the provisions of this section, while responding to a fire call or ambulance call or at the scene of a fire call or ambulance call and while using or surrounding a warning siren and while using or displaying thereon fixed, flashing or rotating blue lights, but sirens and blue lights shall be used only in bona fide emergencies. Permits for the operation of such vehicles equipped with sirens or blue lights shall be in writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the chief of an organized fire department, organized ambulance association, or rescue squad and it shall be unlawful to use or display a siren or blue lights on a motor vehicle, fire, ambulance, or rescue equipment without a valid permit authorizing the use; 
(4)  Any wrecker or tow truck, or a vehicle owned and operated by a public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency service, except however, any wrecker or tow truck not summoned by a public safety official to the scene of an emergency but rather engaged in routine business is not an emergency vehicle and shall not exhibit a lighted red light but shall instead use a lighted amber light; 
(5)  Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle. 
(c)  (1) 
The driver of any vehicle referred to in subdivisions (1), (2), (3) and (4) of subsection (b) of this section shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights or blue lights on except when the vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire; 
(2)  The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
a.  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of 
b.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation 
c.  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
d.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions; 
(3)  The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than those authorized in this section to display a flashing or rotating red or blue light. 
(Code 1964, § 12.100; Ord. No. 10250, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 11369, § 1, 2-2-87) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.105.  
Sec. 14-165. - Privileges of drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1964, § 12.095) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.100.  
Sec. 14-166. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1964, § 12.320) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 9-36. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.300.  
Sec. 14-167. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or streetcar track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1964, § 12.325) 
Cross reference— Fire department generally, § 9-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.305.  
Sec. 14-168. - Duties of drivers meeting or overtaking school buses; required marking. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the street for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, and whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to stop, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by its driver to proceed. 
(b)  Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following: "State Law: Stop While Bus Is Loading and Unloading." Each school bus shall be equipped with a mechanical or electrical signalling device, which will display a signal plainly visible from the front and rear indicating intention to stop. 
(Code 1964, § 12.290) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 304.050(1), (2).  
Sec. 14-169. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1964, § 12.330) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.310.  
Sec. 14-170. - Driving in procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1964, § 12.335) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.315.  
Sec. 14-171. - Funeral procession to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. 
(Code 1964, § 12.340) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.320.  
Sec. 14-172. - Vehicles shall not be driven on sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle, except bicycles and motor propelled scooters, as provided for in section 14-504, shall not drive within any sidewalk area except on a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.350; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.330.  
Sec. 14-173. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 12.355) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.335.  
Sec. 14-174. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1964, § 12.360) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.340.  
Sec. 14-175. - Controlled access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1964, § 12.385) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.355.  
Sec. 14-176. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail to or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1964, § 12.200) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.200.  
Sec. 14-177. - Weight limits on city roads and bridges reduced, when; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Whenever the director of public works shall find that any city road or bridge of such city is in such a condition that use thereof by vehicles of the weights specified in Section 304.180, RSMo., 1969, will endanger the road or bridge, or the users thereof, he may with the approval of the city manager establish maximum weight limits for vehicles using such road or bridge in such amounts as will preserve the road or bridge and provide a reasonable margin of safety to the users thereof. Notice of any such weight limit established shall be given by posting signs at convenient and public places along any such road, and in conspicuous places at each end of any such bridge. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle of a weight in excess of the maximum limit established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or over any road or bridge upon which such maximum weight limits have been established unless he shall have the express permission of the officer employed to establish such limit. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be liable in a civil action for any damages to the road or bridge. 
(Code 1964, § 12.348)  
Sec. 14-178. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
Whenever signs have been erected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, no person shall operate any commercial motor vehicle upon the streets hereinafter designated or on parts of streets so designated except commercial motor vehicles making deliveries thereon. The following streets are hereby designated as prohibited to commercial vehicles: 
Birch Road, from Burnam Road to Bingham Road. 
Leslie Lane, from Garth Avenue to Providence Road. 
Nelwood Drive, from Paris Road (State Route B) to Mulberry Road. 
Pioneer Drive, from Mexico Gravel Road to Fair Haven Drive. 
Quail Drive. 
(Code 1964, § 12.241; Ord. No. 13206, § 1, 1-6-92; Ord. No. 14166 § 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 20127, § 1, 12-1-08) 
State Law reference— Authority, RSMo. § 300.550.  
Sec. 14-179. - Through truck traffic prohibited. 
(a)  Whenever official signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, through truck traffic is prohibited on the following streets and public places within the city: 
Barberry Avenue, from Sunflower Street to the west city limit. 
Blue Ridge Road, from Brown Station Road to U.S. Highway 63. 
Blue Ridge Road, from Garth Avenue to U.S. Highway 63. 
Dahlia Drive. 
Garden Drive. 
Garth Avenue, from Texas Avenue to Blue Ridge Road. 
Monroe Street, from Paris Road to Old 63. 
Nelwood Drive, from Mulberry Road to Quail Drive. 
Oakland Gravel Road, north of Smiley Lane. 
Prairie Lane. 
Prairieview Drive. 
Primrose Drive. 
Proctor Drive, from Bear Creek Drive to the west side of Proctor Park. 
Riviera Drive, from Smiley Lane to Langham Drive. 
Rose Drive. 
Rowe Lane. 
Sunflower Street. 
Texas Avenue, from Garth Avenue to Creasy Springs Road. 
Trinity Place, from Park Avenue to Pendleton Street. 
West Boulevard, from Worley Street to Ash Street, when school is in session, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
(b)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to pickup trucks. 
(c)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the operator of any truck en route to a location which can only be reached by travelling on a street on which through truck traffic is prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 12.242; Ord. No. 10894, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 12740, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 13962, § 1, 2-21-94; Ord. No. 14252, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 15303, § 1, 8-4-97; Ord. No. 16497, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 20362, § 1, 8-3-09; Ord. No. 23045 , § 1, 1-3-17)  
Sec. 14-180. - Traffic restrictions in vicinity of university. 
(a)  When day classes are in session at the University of Missouri, and signs are installed in each block giving notice thereof, no motor vehicles except buses and vehicles of residents living in the block south of the library bounded by Conley Avenue on the north, Hitt Street on the east, Rollins on the south, and Missouri Avenue on the west, to whom special permits are issued for access into the closed areas, as authorized by the city manager; emergency vehicles; fire and police vehicles; city utility vehicles; authorized service and maintenance vehicles while engaged in service and maintenance to a facility, building, street, walk, grounds, or area within the closed portion, where adequate access for the area or location is unavailable; and authorized University of Missouri vehicles, shall be permitted between the hours of 8:15 a.m. and 3:45 p.m. upon the following streets or portions of streets: 
Conley Avenue, from Ninth Street to the east line of Missouri Avenue. 
Hitt Street, from a point seventy-five (75) feet south of the south curbline of University Avenue, thence south five hundred forty-four (544) feet. 
Ninth Street, from the south line of the entrance to Middlebush Hall parking lot to Conley Avenue. 
Rollins Street, from a point fifty (50) feet east of the east curbline of Missouri Avenue, thence east six hundred ninety (690) feet. 
(b)  There shall be no parking at any time on any of the streets or portions of streets described in this section. 
(c)  The city administration is authorized to establish a system of bicycle ways, eight (8) feet wide or less, upon the streets closed under this section, for use while such streets are closed. 
(d)  Only city buses are allowed to stop along the curbline or use the bus pullout location on Rollins Street at the location described in subsection (a). 
(Code 1964, § 12.243; Ord. No. 10390, § 1, 12-3-84; Ord. No. 12237, § 1, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 20753, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21390, § 1, 8-20-12)  
Sec. 14-181. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone except in the following safety zones where emergency vehicle and police access shall be allowed: 
Switzler Street for its entire width from Trinity Place east twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1964, § 12.395; Ord. No. 12357, § 1, 9-18-89) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.365.  
Sec. 14-182. - Transportation of hazardous materials. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate any bus, truck, truck-tractor and trailer combination, or other commercial motor vehicle upon any street, road or highway within the city limits when transporting materials defined and classified as hazardous by the United States Department of Transportation pursuant to Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations unless such vehicle is equipped with the equipment required by and be operated in accordance with the safety and hazardous materials regulations for such vehicles as adopted by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to operate any bus, truck, truck-tractor and trailer combination or other commercial motor vehicle upon any street, road or highway within the city limits when transporting materials defined and classified as hazardous by the United States Department of Transportation pursuant to Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations unless such vehicle is placarded in accordance with Title 49, part 172, subpart F of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(c)  Members of the Columbia Police or Fire Departments shall be authorized to enter the cargo area of a commercial motor vehicle or trailer to inspect the contents when reasonable grounds exist to cause belief that the vehicle is transporting hazardous materials as defined by Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10812, § 1(12.1145), 12-2-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10812, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1985, amended the 1964 Code by the addition of § 12.1145. At the editor's discretion said provisions have been codified herein as § 14-182 to facilitate classification in this volume.  
Sec. 14-183. - Safety belts required for passenger cars. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "passenger car" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except that, the term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motor tricycles and trucks with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more. 
(b)  Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal Service while performing duties for that federal agency which require the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles, or which require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968, operated on a street or highway in this city, and persons less than eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in RSMo § 301.010, on a street or highway of this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets federal National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. 
(c)  No person shall be stopped, inspected, or detained solely to determine compliance with this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their body, nor shall the provisions of this section be applicable to persons while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities. Noncompliance with this section shall not constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. 
(e)  The provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (d) shall not apply to the transporting of children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in section 14-184. 
(f)  If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area of a motor vehicle then the passengers who are unable to wear seat belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this subsection is not in violation of this section. This subsection shall not apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle who is licensed under RSMo. § 302.178 (intermediate driver's license). 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided for in section 14-184, each person who violates the provisions of subsection (b) of this section is guilty of an infraction, for which a fine not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed on any person due to a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11615, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 15735, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 19322, § 1, 12-4-06)  
Sec. 14-184. - Passenger restraint system required for children under sixteen years of age. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  Child booster seat: A seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally approved safety belt system; 
(2)  Child passenger restraint system: A seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment system; 
(3)  Driver: A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this city, for providing for the protection of such child as follows: 
(1)  Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child. 
(2)  Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child. 
(3)  Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet, nine (9) inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or booster seat appropriate for that child. 
(4)  Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4) feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or booster seat appropriate for that child. 
(5)  A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat installation. 
(6)  When transporting children in the immediate family when there are more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver transporting children referred to in this subsection is not in violation of this section. 
This subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Any driver who violates subsections (1), (2) or (3) of subsection (b) of this section is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any driver who violates subsection (4) of subsection (b) of this section shall be subject to the penalty in subsection (g) of section 14-183. If a driver receives a citation for violating subsection (1), (2) or (3) of subsection (b) of this section, the charges shall be dismissed if the driver prior to or at his or her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to the court. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public carrier for hire. The provisions of this section shall not apply to students four (4) years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as school buses are defined in RSMo § 301.010. 
(Ord. No. 11615, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 14254 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 19322, § 1, 12-4-06)  
Sec. 14-185. - Operating a motor vehicle without a driver license. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street in the city unless such person has a valid Missouri driver license or unless such person is legally licensed to operate a motor vehicle in the state of his residence. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any street in the city unless such person has passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Missouri director of revenue or unless such person is legally licensed to operate a motorcycle or motortricycle in the state of his residence. 
(Ord. No. 13620 § 1, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 14-186. - Driving a motor vehicle while driver license suspended or revoked. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon any street in the city while such person's license and driving privilege as a Missouri resident or nonresident has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the provisions of Missouri law. 
(Ord. No. 13620 § 1, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 14-187. - Operating an unlicensed motor vehicle. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street in the city unless the vehicle is validly licensed under the motor vehicle laws of Missouri or the laws of any other jurisdiction and such license is displayed in conformance with the laws of the jurisdiction in which the vehicle is licensed. 
(Ord. No. 13620 § 1, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 14-188. - Failure to exhibit proof of insurance. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle or pedal trolley in the city to fail to exhibit valid proof of motor vehicle liability insurance on the demand of any peace officer who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident involving the vehicle or pedal trolley while the officer is engaged in the performance of the officer's duties. The operator of a motor vehicle shall exhibit valid proof of motor vehicle or pedal trolley liability insurance by presenting to the officer one of the following documents showing that the motor vehicle is covered by motor vehicle liability insurance: 
(1)  A valid insurance identification card required by the state to be carried in an insured motor vehicle at all times. 
(2)  A valid motor vehicle liability insurance policy. 
(3)  A valid motor vehicle liability insurance binder. 
(4)  A valid receipt which contains the policy information required on the insurance identification card required by the state to be carried in an insured motor vehicle at all times. 
(b)  No person shall be found guilty of violating this section if the person demonstrates to the court that the person met the financial responsibility requirements of RSMo 303.025 at the time of the alleged violation or exhibits to the court any one (1) of the documents listed in subsection (a) showing that the motor vehicle was covered by motor vehicle liability insurance at the time of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 15585, § 1, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 19574, § 1, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Secs. 14-189—14-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 14-201. - Movement of vehicular traffic, generally. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 12.230) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.245.  
Sec. 14-202. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 12.225) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.240.  
Sec. 14-203. - One-way streets and alleys designated. 
One-way streets and alleys are designated as follows, and traffic on such streets and alleys shall move only in the direction indicated: 
Alley, extending from Ninth to Tenth Streets, between Locust and Elm Streets, westerly. 
Alley, extending from Seventh Street to Sixth Street between Walnut Street and Ash Street, westerly. 
Alley, extending from Sixth Street to Hitt Street, between Cherry Street and Broadway, easterly, during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Alley, extending from Woodson Way north to Elm Street, between Watson Place and Hitt Street, northerly. 
Alley, extending from Eighth Street to Short Street, between Broadway and Walnut Street, easterly. 
Alley, extending from a point one hundred eighty (180) feet east of Short Street to College Avenue, between Broadway and Walnut Street, easterly. 
Alley, extending from Seventh Street to Eighth Street between Broadway and Walnut Street, westerly. 
Atkins Drive, between Gary Street and Broadway, southerly. 
Bouchelle Street, from William Street to College Avenue, westerly. 
Curtis Street, between Burnam Avenue and Kentucky Boulevard, southerly. 
Hodge Street, from Ripley Street to Melbourne Street, westerly. 
Hubbel Drive, between Ash Street and Walnut Street, southerly. 
Gentry Place, southerly. 
Guitar Street, southerly. 
Lee Street, between Wilson Avenue and Bouchelle Avenue, southerly. 
Locust Street, between Hitt Street and College Avenue, easterly. 
Ninth Street, from Park Avenue to Rogers Street, northerly. 
Paquin Street, from College Avenue to Hitt Street, westerly. 
Shepard Boulevard, south lane, easterly; and on the north lane, westerly. 
Trinity Place, between Switzler Street and Park Avenue, southerly. 
Watson Place, southerly. 
Waugh Street, from Paquin Street to Locust Street, northerly. 
Willis Avenue, from Broadway to Bass Avenue, southerly. 
Woodson Way, east of Watson Place, easterly. 
(Code 1964, § 12.231; Ord. No. 10687, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 12357, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 12447, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 12515, § 1, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 12516, § 1, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 12741, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 13188, § 1, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 14292, § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 15665, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 15883, § 1, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 17236, § 1, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 20754, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21656, § 1, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 23046 , § 1, 1-3-17)  
Sec. 14-204. - One-way drives. 
(a)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating "one-way drives," it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to enter an exit drive or to exit by an entrance drive. 
(b)  When authorized signs are erected indicating the lawful direction of traffic on such drives, all traffic shall move only in the direction indicated by such signs. 
(Code 1964, § 12.235)  
Sec. 14-205. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon, upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1964, § 12.240) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.250.  
Secs. 14-206—14-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED 
 
Sec. 14-221. - State speed laws applicable. 
The state traffic laws regulating speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except that the city may, by ordinance, declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no city ordinance shall regulate the speed of vehicles upon divided limited access highways of the state. 
(Code 1964, § 12.205) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.205.  
Sec. 14-222. - State approval of city speed restrictions. 
The city will submit to the state highway commission, for approval, any ordinances, rules, regulations or resolutions appertaining to the regulation of speed where such ordinance, rules or regulations are applicable to state highways as determined in section 14-61(c), and will not enact or keep in force any ordinance not approved by the commission. 
(Code 1964, § 12.206)  
Sec. 14-223. - Speed restrictions on city streets. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a greater speed than is reasonable and approved under conditions then and there existing. 
(b)  No person shall, where no special hazard exists, drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the following: 
(1)  Fifteen miles per hour, night and day: 
All Alleys. 
Exit Drive, from Terminal Drive to South Airport Road. 
Terminal Drive, from South Airport Road to Exit Drive. 
(2)  Twenty miles per hour, night and day: 
All streets in the central business district, not herein more particularly specified. 
All streets in signed school speed limit zones, without flashing yellow lights, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days. 
All streets in signed school speed limit zones, with flashing yellow lights, when the yellow lights are flashing, not herein more particularly specified. 
All streets in the University of Missouri Campus, as defined in section 14-1. 
Ann Street, from Broadway to Anthony Street. 
Anthony Street, from William Street to Ann Street. 
Rollins Street, from College Avenue, east to its terminus. 
Walnut Street, from College Avenue to Melbourne Street. 
William Street, from Broadway to Rollins Street. 
(3)  Twenty-five miles per hour, night and day: All streets not herein more particularly specified, except that the speed limit on any street that had a posted speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour on August 16, 2009 shall remain at thirty (30) miles per hour until the thirty-mile per hour signs are removed from the street. 
(4)  Thirty miles per hour, night and day: 
Ash Street, from Park De Ville Drive to Providence Road. 
Bernadette Drive. 
Bethel Street. 
Bethel Church Road. 
Big Bear Boulevard. 
Blackfoot Road. 
Blue Ridge Road. 
Bluff Creek Drive. 
Broadway, from Clinkscales Road to Providence Road. 
Broadway, from College Avenue to Old 63. 
Brown Station Road, from Paris Road to Mexico Gravel Road. 
Burlington Street. 
Buttonwood Drive. 
Chapel Hill Road, from Grant Lane to Forum Boulevard. 
Cinnamon Hill Lane. 
Clark Lane, from Paris Road to U.S. 63 Connector. 
Clinkscales Road. 
Creekwood Parkway. 
Fairview Road, from Bernadette Drive to Chapel Hill Road. 
Forum Boulevard, from Nifong Boulevard to Old Plank Road. 
Garth Avenue, from Blue Ridge Road to Ash Street. 
Gillespie Bridge Road, from Chapel Hill Road to Scott Boulevard. 
Grace Lane. 
Grant Lane. 
Gray Oak Drive. 
Green Meadows Road, from Forum Boulevard to Providence Road. 
Hanover Boulevard. 
Hariford Road. 
Keene Street. 
Lakeview Avenue. 
Lemone Industrial Boulevard. 
Mexico Gravel Road, from Brown Station Road to Vandiver Drive. 
Nebraska Avenue. 
New Haven Road from U.S. 63 to Warren Drive. 
Northland Drive. 
Oakland Gravel Road, from Brown School Road to Vandiver Drive. 
Paris Road, from Ammonette Street to College Avenue. 
Parker Street. 
Peabody Road. 
Peachtree Drive. 
Pennsylvania Drive. 
Providence East Outer Roadway (Carter Lane), from its north terminus to Green Meadows Road. 
Providence East Outer Roadway (Buttonwood Drive), from Green Meadows Road to Buttonwood Drive. 
Ponderosa Street, Grindstone Parkway to Nifong Boulevard. 
Rice Road. 
Rock Quarry Road. 
Rogers Street. 
Smiley Lane. 
Smith Drive. 
Southampton Drive, from its western terminus to Providence Road. 
Stadium Boulevard, in signed school speed limit zone, between Timber Creek Drive and Aaron Drive, when the yellow lights are flashing. 
Sylvan Lane, from Vandiver Drive to Clark Lane. 
Texas Avenue. 
West Boulevard. 
Westfall Drive. 
Whitegate Drive, from Paris Road to Sylvan Lane. 
Worley Street, from Strawn Road to Providence Road. 
(5)  Thirty-five miles per hour, night and day: 
Bearfield Road. 
Broadway, from Clinkscales Road to Fairview Road. 
Brown Station Road, from two hundred (200) feet north of Rutledge Drive to its south intersection with Paris Road. 
Bull Run Drive. 
Business Loop 70. 
Clark Lane, from Ballenger Lane to Saint Charles Road. 
Clark Lane, from U.S. 63 Connector to seven hundred eighty-five (785) feet west of Hanover Boulevard. 
Creasy Springs Road, from the north City limit to one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet south of Sunnyridge Lane. 
Creasy Springs Road, from Prarieview Drive to Business Loop 70. 
College Avenue, from Business Loop 70 to Stadium Boulevard. 
Conley Road. 
Forum Boulevard, from Stadium Boulevard to Nifong Boulevard. 
Gans Creek Road. 
Heller Road. 
Hinkson Creek Road. 
I-70 Drive Southwest, from Stadium Boulevard to Business Loop 70. 
Lake of the Woods Road. 
Nifong Boulevard, from Providence Road to five hundred twenty (520) feet east of Buttonwood Drive. 
Old 63, from Business Loop 70 to Stadium Boulevard. 
Old Plank Road, from Providence Road to State Route K. 
Old Route K. 
Port Way, from I-70 Drive Southeast to Bull Run Drive. 
Providence Road, from the north City limit to Blue Ridge Road. 
Providence Road, from Vandiver Drive to Stadium Boulevard. 
Providence West Outer Roadway. 
Range Line Street, from Vanwood Way to Business Loop 70. 
Rogers Road. 
Rolling Hills Road. 
Saint Charles Road. 
Southampton Drive, from Providence Road to State Farm Parkway. 
Starke Avenue. 
Trimble Road. 
Vandiver Drive, from Providence Road to Nelwood Drive. 
Waco Road. 
Wyatt Lane, from Rogers Road to Mexico Gravel Road. 
(6)  Forty miles per hour, night and day: 
Battle Avenue , from East St. Charles Road to the north city limit. 
Broadway, from Old 63 to Brickton Road. 
Brown School Road. 
Brown Station Road, from its north intersection with Paris Road to two hundred (200) feet north of Rutledge Drive. 
Chapel Hill Road, from Gillespie Bridge Road to Grant Lane. 
Clark Lane, from seven hundred eighty-five (785) feet west of Hanover Boulevard to Ballenger Lane. 
Discovery Parkway. 
Gans Road. 
Green Meadows Road, from Providence Road to Grindstone Parkway. 
I-70 Drive Southwest, from the west City limit to Stadium Boulevard. 
Maguire Boulevard. 
Mexico Gravel Road, from Vandiver Drive to Ballenger Lane. 
Nifong Boulevard, from Old Millcreek Road to Providence Road. 
Oakland Church Road. 
Old 63, from Stadium Boulevard to Bearfield Road. 
Old Mill Creek Road. 
Paris Road, from Vandiver Drive to Ammonette Street. 
Prathersville Road. 
Roger I. Wilson Memorial Drive. 
Scott Boulevard, from Gillespie Bridge Road to Scotts Boulevard. 
Scotts Boulevard. 
Sinclair Road. 
South Airport Road, from 0.8 miles south of State Route H to Angel Lane. 
Stadium Boulevard, from Industrial Drive to one thousand (1,000) feet south of Broadway. 
Stadium Boulevard, from one thousand (1,000) feet west of Providence Road to three hundred (300) feet east of Old Route 63. 
Vawter School Road, from Scott Boulevard to Old Mill Creek Road. 
(7)  Forty-five miles per hour, night and day: 
Ballenger Lane, from the roundabout at Clark Lane to the roundabout at Mexico Gravel Road. 
Broadway, from Fairview Road to Scott Boulevard. 
Broadway, from Brickton Road to three thousand (3,000) feet east of Roseta Avenue. 
Discovery Drive. 
Huggard Lane. 
I-70 Drive Northwest, from the west City limit to Stadium Boulevard. 
I-70 Drive Southeast, from 63 Connector to Woodridge Drive. 
Lenoir Street. 
New Haven Road, from Warren Drive to the east city limit. 
Nifong Boulevard, from Bearfield Road to Ponderosa Street. 
Paris Road, from five hundred thirty-four (534) feet north of East Brown Station Road to Vandiver Drive. 
Ponderosa Street, from Nifong Boulevard to the south City limit. 
Providence Road, from Blue Ridge Road to Vandiver Drive. 
Range Line Street, from the north City limit to Vanwood Way. 
Richland Road, from Saint Charles Road to the east city limit. 
Scott Boulevard, from Broadway to Gillespie Bridge Road. 
State Farm Parkway. 
State Route K, from the west City limit to State Route 163. 
State Route WW, from three thousand (3,000) feet east of Roseta Avenue to three hundred (300) feet east of Stone Mountain Parkway. 
Strawn Road. 
U.S. 63 Connector. 
Vandiver Drive, from Nelwood Drive to Mexico Gravel Road. 
(8)  Fifty miles per hour, night and day: 
Grindstone Parkway, from State Farm Parkway to Bluff Creek Road. 
Mexico Gravel Road, from the roundabout at Ballenger Lane to three hundred eighty-five (385) feet east of Spring Cress Drive. 
Nifong Boulevard, from State Farm Parkway to Bearfield Road. 
Nifong Boulevard, from five hundred twenty (520) feet east of Buttonwood Drive to State Farm Parkway. 
Paris Road, from five hundred twenty-seven (527) feet north of the U.S. 63 northbound ramps to five hundred thirty-four (534) feet north of East Brown Station Road. 
Providence Road , from Stadium Boulevard to Old Plank Road. 
Stadium Boulevard, from one thousand (1,000) feet south of Broadway to one thousand (1,000) feet west of Providence Road. 
Stadium Boulevard, from the north City limit to Industrial Drive. 
State Route KK. 
(9)  Fifty-five miles per hour, night and day: 
Brown Station Road, from the north City limit to Paris Road. 
I-70 Drive Southeast, from Woodridge Drive to the east City limit. 
Mexico Gravel Road, from three hundred eighty-five (385) feet east of Spring Cress Drive to east City limit. 
Paris Road, from North Browns Station Road to five hundred twenty-seven (527) feet north of the U.S. 63 northbound ramps. 
South Airport Road, from State Route H to 0.8 mile south of State Route H. 
Stadium Boulevard, from three hundred (300) feet east of Old 63 to its eastern terminus. 
State Route B, from four hundred seventy (470) feet north of North Browns Station Road to North Browns Station Road. 
State Route WW, from three hundred (300) feet east of Stone Mountain Parkway to the east City limit. 
(10)  Sixty miles per hour, night and day: 
State Route B, from the north City limit to four hundred seventy (470) feet north of North Browns Station Road. 
(Code 1964, § 12.210; Ord. No. 9872, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 10312, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 10791, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. 10952, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 10994, § 1, 4-21-86; Ord. No. 11204, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 11302, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 11667, § 1, 10-19-87; Ord. No. 11835, § 1, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 12045, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 12931, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 13707 § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 14071, § 1, 6-6-94; Ord. No. 14823, § 1, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 15094, § 1, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 15519, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 15617, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15869, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 15886, § 1, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 16732, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 16919, § 1, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 17031, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17079, § 1, 11-5-01; Ord. No. 17279, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 17630, § 1, 3-17-03; Ord. No. 17821, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 18698, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19690, § 1, 10-1-07; Ord. No. 19895, § 1, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 20156, § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 20376, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 20502, § 1, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 20521, § 1, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 20624, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 20638, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 20700, § 1, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 20797, § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 21355, § 1, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 21490, § 1, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 21981, § 1, 2-17-14; Ord. No. 21998, § 1, 3-17-14; Ord. No. 22600, § 1, 10-5-15 ; Ord. No. 23019, § 1, 12-5-16 ; Ord. No. 23762 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 14-224. - Minimum speed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person unnecessarily to drive at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12.215)  
Sec. 14-225. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 12.220) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.210.  
Secs. 14-226—14-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF THE ROAD; STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS 
 
Sec. 14-236. - Careful, prudent driving. 
(a)  Every person operating or driving a motor vehicle shall drive and operate the same in a careful and prudent manner and shall exercise at all times the highest degree of care in the operation of the same. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle operator is not exercising the highest degree of care if the operator of a moving vehicle engages in any conduct that causes such operator's vision or attention to be obscured, diminished or directed elsewhere than the path of travel or attention of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  By using a mirror to engage in grooming; 
(2)  Reading anything located in the vehicle other than the operation information displayed on vehicle gauges and equipment; 
(3)  Writing or drawing; 
(4)  Manually inputting information into a GPS or mapping device; or 
(5)  Turning one's head substantially away from the path of travel to observe things in the vehicle or outside the vehicle but contrary to the path of travel. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294; Ord. No. 23422 , § 1, 12-18-17)  
Sec. 14-237. - Slowing, stopping and turning signals. 
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of, or turn a vehicle from a street course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then only after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein: 
(1)  Slow or stop. An operator or driver, while stopping, or when checking the speed of his vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles or cycles may reasonably be affected by checking such speed, shall extend his arm at an angle below horizontal so the same may be seen from the rear of his vehicle. 
(2)  Right turn. An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the right shall extend his arm at an angle above horizontal so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway as nearly as practicable to the right side of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(3)  Left turn. An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the left shall extend his arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen from the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of his vehicle shall be near as practicable to the centerline of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(4)  Method. Signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of the type approved by the state highway patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand or arm signal would not be visible both from the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signal shall be given by such light or device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded that a hand or arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside rim of the body, cab or load exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen (14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any trailer which does not interfere with the clear view of the hand signals of the operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this section as far as mechanical signals on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm signal would not be visible from the front and rear of such vehicle, as above provided, shall be applicable to new vehicles registered within the state after the first of January, 1954. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(J))  
Sec. 14-238. - Driving on right side of roadway. 
(a)  Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway except as follows: 
(1)  Overtaking and passing a vehicle or cycle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When placing a vehicle in position for, and when such vehicle is lawfully making a left turn in compliance with provisions of this chapter or traffic regulations thereunder; 
(3)  When the right half of the roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated by markings or signs for one-way traffic. 
(b)  It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or dividing section, or to make any left turn or semicircular or U-turn on any such divided highway, except in a crossover or intersection. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(B), (C))  
Sec. 14-239. - When driving on left side of roadway prohibited. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle or cycle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel, or when approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(H))  
Sec. 14-240. - Overtaking and passing. 
(a)  Rules generally. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and exceptions hereinafter stated: 
(1)  An operator or driver overtaking and desiring to pass a vehicle or cycle shall sound the horn before starting to pass, except in such places where prohibited by ordinance. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle or cycle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(3)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle or cycle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(4)  Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or public road in overtaking and passing other vehicles or cycles proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interference with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle or cycle overtaken. 
(b)  When permitted. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle or cycle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of traffic in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street. 
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under the foregoing conditions when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off of the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow moving vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(F), (G); Ord. No. 9759, § 1, 3-21-83)  
Sec. 14-241. - Two or more lanes of traffic. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, or whenever any one-way street or roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or cycle when the roadway ahead is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding and there is a sign posted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Official signs may be erected or the city traffic engineer may place temporary signs directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating a specified lane to traffic moving in the same direction. The drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(5)  Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and except when a roadway has been divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever possible. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(E))  
Sec. 14-242. - Distance from other vehicles. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle or cycle more closely than is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle or cycle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles to enable any other vehicle or cycle to overtake or pass such vehicles in safety. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(I))  
Sec. 14-243. - Duty to drive on roadway; exception. 
The driver of any vehicle shall at all times maintain and operate such vehicle on the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway unless a movement from the roadway may be made in safety. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(Q))  
Sec. 14-244. - Conduct at intersections, generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle or cycle which has entered the intersection from a different street or highway; provided, however, that there is no form of traffic control at such intersection. 
(b)  When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle or cycle on the right. Paragraph (b) of this section shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of the vehicles is attempting to or is making a left turn. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or cycle approaching from the opposite direction, which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(d)  The driver of any vehicle shall stop as required by this section, at the entrance of a through highway or street, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles or cycles which have entered the intersection on the through highway or street, or which are approaching so closely on the through highway or street as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from an alley or any private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles or cycles approaching on such road or highway. 
(f)  The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into any alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or cycle approaching from the opposite direction when making of such left turn would create a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(K)—(P))  
Sec. 14-245. - Through streets designated. 
The streets shown on the official thoroughfare plan and designated as urban highways, major streets and collector streets, are hereby designated as through streets. Other streets designated as through streets are: 
Broadway, from Providence Road to Highway Business 63. 
Range Line Street, from Rogers Street to Business Loop 70. 
Elm Street, from Providence Road to Hitt Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.245; Ord. No. 10891, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 11856, § 1, 4-18-88) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.255.  
Sec. 14-246. - Other intersections where stop or yield required. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, as prescribed in section 12-249, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(Code 1964, § 12.255; Ord. No. 11856, § 1, 4-18-88) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.265.  
Sec. 14-247. - Stop and yield signs. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(Code 1964, § 12.260) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.270.  
Sec. 14-248. - Vehicle entering stop intersections. 
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver, of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 14-247(b), and after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or cycle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. The word "cycle," as used in this division, shall be defined as in section 14-491. 
(Code 1964, § 12.265; Ord. No. 15897, § 1, 2-15-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.275.  
Sec. 14-249. - Vehicle entering yield intersections. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or cycle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle or cycle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. The word "cycle," as used in this division, shall be defined as in section 14-491. 
(Code 1964, § 12.270) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.280.  
Sec. 14-250. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and cycles approaching on such roadway. The word "cycle," as used in this division, shall be defined as in section 14-491. 
(Code 1964, § 12.275) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.285.  
Sec. 14-251. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or cycles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. The word "cycle," as used in this division, shall be defined as in section 14-491. 
(Code 1964, § 12.280) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.290.  
Sec. 14-252. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11026, § 1, enacted May 5, 1986, repealed § 14-252, pertaining to intersections where through traffic is prohibited, which derived from Code 1964, § 12.301.  
Sec. 14-253. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under, any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1964, § 12.285) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.295.  
Sec. 14-254. - Corner cutting to avoid traffic control devices. 
No person shall drive across any private or public driveway, parking lot, alley or yard in order to avoid stopping at any intersection controlled by an official traffic control device. 
(Ord. No. 19560, § 1, 6-18-07)  
Secs. 14-255—14-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-261. - Required position and method of turning at intersection. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for the right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns: 
a.  On two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
b.  On other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1964, § 12.295) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.215.  
Sec. 14-262. - Authority to place, obedience to turning markers. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated shall conform to that prescribed by law or ordinance except as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the director of public works, is authorized to place temporary markers, signs or barricades within, before or adjacent to any construction site, demolition site or emergency scene, directing traffic around or on a specific course through such scene or site which is other than that prescribed by law or ordinance, when deemed necessary to further public safety, convenience and expedition of traffic, for the duration of such emergency or condition and no longer. 
(c)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1964, § 12.300) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.220.  
Sec. 14-263. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, U-turn or right turn on red, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1964, § 12.305) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.225.  
Sec. 14-264. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, U-turn or right turn on red is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1964, § 12.310) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.230.  
Sec. 14-265. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 12.315) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.235.  
Secs. 14-266—14-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-281. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, so as to create a clear and definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; however, this section shall not apply to any state highway as determined in section 14-61. 
(Code 1964, § 12.505) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.445.  
Sec. 14-282. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1964, § 12.510) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.450.  
Sec. 14-283. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Advertising. 
(3)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(4)  Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use of such vehicle. 
(5)  Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one (1) vehicle to another. 
(6)  Selling goods, merchandise or products of any kind from such vehicle; except mobile food vendors as lawfully permitted in this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 12.515; Ord. No. 22045, § 1, 4-21-14 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.455.  
Sec. 14-284. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking or special parking restrictions upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(c)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking except to receive and discharge children, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle for a longer period than that required to promptly receive or discharge children and it shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period to change the position of a vehicle within the same block. 
(Code 1964, § 12.520) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.460.  
Sec. 14-285. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1964, § 12.530) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.465.  
Sec. 14-286. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of the street. 
b.  On the sidewalk, between a roadway and the property line, or other public property where no provision therefor has been made. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic engineer indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
h.  On any railroad tracks. 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly sign posted). 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
c.  Alongside of or adjacent to any curb when properly marked with official yellow paint. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 12.500) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.440.  
Sec. 14-287. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1964, § 12.535) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.470.  
Sec. 14-288. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 12.540) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.475.  
Sec. 14-289. - No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1964, § 12.545) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.480.  
Sec. 14-290. - Parking, stopping or standing prohibited in fire lanes. 
(a)  When signs have been erected marking such fire lanes, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within such fire lanes. 
(b)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this article and the driver thereof is not present, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered in the records of any city, county or state shall be responsible for such violation when such vehicle was being used with permission. Proof of the ownership as aforesaid shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle with absent driver was being operated with permission of the owner. 
(c)  Members of the fire department or police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a signed fire lane to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department. Such vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with section 14-548. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1615(2)—(4); Ord. No. 10139, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 14-291. - Parking on right side of roadway. 
All vehicles not in motion shall be placed with their right-hand side as near the right hand side of the highway as practicable, except on such streets of the city where vehicles are obliged to move in one (1) direction only or where parking of motor vehicles is regulated by ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(A))  
Sec. 14-292. - Standing or parking close to curb or edge of roadway. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section and sections 14-293, 14-354, 14-371 and 14-372, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be parked or stopped as follows: 
(1)  Where there are adjacent curbs, the vehicle shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb. 
(2)  Where there are no adjacent curbs, the vehicle shall be stopped or parked with its right side as near the right-hand side of the highway as practicable. 
(b)  Except where not prohibited by sign or included as part of a divided roadway, parking may be permitted on the left-hand side of a one-way street as follows: 
(1)  Where there are adjacent curbs, the vehicle shall be stopped or parked with the left-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb. 
(2)  Where there are no adjacent curbs, the vehicle shall be stopped or parked with its left side as near the left side of the highway as practicable. 
(c)  On any street where markings are provided to indicate the limits of a parking stall for vehicles, vehicles shall be parked within the marked limits. 
(Code 1964, § 12.470) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.415.  
Sec. 14-293. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps meeting the following requirements: at least one (1) lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one (1) other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle. 
(c)  Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1964, § 12.490) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.435.  
Sec. 14-294. - Authority to designate bus stops and stands; use generally. 
(a)  The director of public works is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and bus stands on such public streets and parking lots in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop and bus stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or bus stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers and when such stopping does not interfere with any bus waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.565, 12.575; Ord. No. 9749, § 1, 3-9-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 300.505, 300.515.  
Sec. 14-295. - Taxi stands designated. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, the following zones shall be designated as stands for designated vehicles only and no person shall park a vehicle other than a taxi, limousine, bus or STRIPES vehicle between 11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.: 
Broadway, north side, between Waugh Street and a point two hundred eighty (280) feet east of Waugh Street. 
Cherry Street, south side, between Hitt Street and Tenth Street. 
Locust Street, north side, between Ninth Street and Tenth Street. 
Ninth Street, west side, first four spaces south of Elm Street. 
Tenth Street, west side, between Broadway and the alleyway just north of Broadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.566; Ord. No. 14883, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 20388, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 21231, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 22111, § 1, 7-7-14 ; Ord. No. 22372 , § 1, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 22618, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 14-296. - Duties of bus and taxicab operators. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from parking in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations. 
(e)  A transportation network operator shall not stand or park such vehicle in a designated taxicab stand at any time. 
(Code 1964, § 12.570; Ord. No. 22372 , § 1, 2-16-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.510.  
Sec. 14-297. - Moving vehicle from parked position. 
(a)  Angle parked vehicles. A vehicle parked at an angle to the curb on any street in the city shall be backed out at that angle until it has cleared other parked vehicles. The driver of such vehicle shall then proceed in the direction in which he is most nearly headed, provided that no vehicle shall be moved from such parked position unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic upon such street. The driver moving a vehicle from such parked position shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which are in motion upon such street. 
(b)  Parallel parked vehicles. The driver of a vehicle parked parallel to the curb shall not move such vehicle from such parked position unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic upon such street. A driver moving a vehicle from such parked position shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which are in motion on such street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.495)  
Sec. 14-298. - Leaving vehicle unattended with motor running. 
No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended or unattached on the street without first stopping the motor and cutting off the electric current. 
(Code 1964, § 12.640)  
Sec. 14-299. - Registered owner responsible for violations. 
If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this article and the driver thereof is not present, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered in the records of any city, county or state shall be responsible for such violation when such vehicle was being used with permission. Proof of the ownership as aforesaid shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle with absent driver was being operated with permission of the owner. 
(Code 1964, § 12.770)  
Sec. 14-300. - Authority to adopt rules and regulations. 
The city council is hereby authorized to adopt, by resolution, such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 12.815)  
Sec. 14-301. - Rental of on-street metered parking space to banks and savings and loans. 
On-street metered parking spaces shall be available for rental to banks and savings and loans on any street in the central business district, except Broadway, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Metered parking spaces shall be available under the provisions of this section only to banks and savings and loans chartered under the laws of the United States Government or the State of Missouri. 
(2)  Banks and savings and loans desiring such parking spaces shall make application to the director of public works who shall issue a permit designating the location and rental rate of the parking spaces. 
(3)  A maximum of six (6) on-street metered parking spaces may be rented by any one (1) bank or savings and loan when such spaces are available on streets immediately adjacent to and on the same side of the streets as the bank or savings and loan. 
(4)  Banks and savings and loans renting such parking spaces shall pay nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) per space per year. 
(5)  Banks and savings and loans renting such parking spaces shall place hoods on the parking meters at such parking spaces which shall provide that the spaces are paid for by the banks or savings and loans and shall designate the applicable parking restrictions. Parking may be restricted only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. weekdays, and from 9:00 a.m. to noon on Saturdays. The hoods shall designate the hours of parking restrictions, and shall be removed from the meters during all other hours. 
(6)  The City of Columbia shall not be responsible for enforcing parking restrictions during the times the spaces are rented to banks or savings and loans under this section. 
(7)  Spaces rented to banks or savings and loans under this section may be withdrawn by the city manager upon twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the banks or savings and loans which have rented such parking spaces; provided, however, that such banks or savings and loans shall be entitled to a pro rata refund of any prepaid rent. 
(Code 1964, § 12.766; Ord. No. 10182, § 2, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 15518, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 22211, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22288, § 1, 12-1-14, eff. 1-1-15 )  
Sec. 14-302. - Parking of trucks in excess of one ton prohibited on certain streets. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park any truck having a capacity in excess of one (1) ton net weight upon and on the following designated streets: 
Loch Lane, both sides. 
Pannell Street, both sides, between Business Loop 70 and Smith Street. 
Parker Street, both sides, between Vandiver Drive and Northland Drive. 
Rockhill Road, both sides, from Broadway to Fyfer Place. 
White Gate Drive, north side, between Route B and Sylvan Lane. 
(Code 1964, § 12.625; Ord. No. 12422, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 12594, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 15275, § 1, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 14-303. - Truck parking on certain streets prohibited. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park any truck upon any of the following designated streets: 
Forest Avenue, from Providence Road to Grand Avenue. 
(Code 1964, § 12.630)  
Sec. 14-304. - No parking, tow-away zones. 
(a)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth: 
Ash Street, north side, beginning at the west curb of College Avenue thence west one hundred (100) feet. 
Ash Street, south side, from Saint Joseph Street to College Avenue. 
I-70 Drive Southeast, both sides, beginning two thousand (2,000) feet east of Woodridge Drive, thence east six hundred (600) feet. 
Rollins Street, both sides, beginning one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the west curb of Hitt Street and ending four hundred eighty-five (485) feet from the east curb of Missouri Avenue. 
Any roadway signed as a snow route when there is two (2) inches or more of snow on the roadway. 
(b)  Vehicles in violation of this section shall be towed. 
(c)  Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, except that a fine shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12.592; Ord. No. 16048, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 21841, § 1, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 22153, § 1, 8-4-14 )  
Sec. 14-305. - Emergency stopping only. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place as hereinafter provided, except in the event of an emergency: 
State Route 163 (Providence Road), from State Road 740 (Stadium Boulevard) to three thousand two hundred (3,200) feet south of Route 740. 
Vandiver Drive, both sides, from Providence Road to U.S. Highway 63. 
(Code 1964, § 12.591)  
Sec. 14-306. - Contesting a parking ticket. 
A parking ticket may be contested by submitting a written statement to the municipal prosecutor within fifteen (15) days of issuance identifying the ticket and stating the reason that the alleged violation should not be prosecuted. The statement shall contain the name and address of the person contesting the ticket. A separate statement shall be required for each ticket being contested. A written response shall be made to the person contesting the ticket within ten (10) business days of receiving the statement contesting the parking ticket. The response shall state whether the prosecutor is granting or denying the request. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.780, 12.790, 12.795, 12.800, 12.805, 12.810; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 23884 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 14-307. - Impoundment of vehicles for outstanding parking tickets. 
(a)  A vehicle may be impounded if: 
(1)  There are four (4) or more parking tickets issued against the vehicle which remain unpaid, or 
(2)  There has been no appearance or plea made by a party with a valid interest in the vehicle cited for a violation of the parking ordinances contained within this code after having been duly summoned by the judge of the municipal court and for which a warrant for failure to appear has been issued. 
(b)  A vehicle shall not be impounded for unpaid parking tickets under subsection (a)(1) above unless notice of eligibility for towing and impoundment has been affixed to the vehicle at least seventy-two (72) hours before the vehicle is towed. The notice shall state that the vehicle is eligible for towing and impoundment for unpaid parking tickets and shall include contact information for paying or contesting the parking tickets and for requesting a hearing on whether the vehicle is eligible for impoundment. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be impounded under this section unless the vehicle is on a public street, public parking garage or in a public parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 23884 , § 1, 5-20-19; Ord. No. 24078 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 14-308. - Hearing on eligibility for impoundment. 
(a)  The registered owner or any person with an interest in a vehicle who has been given notice that the vehicle is eligible for towing and impoundment tickets under section 14-307(a)(1) may request the municipal court to conduct a hearing to determine whether the vehicle is eligible to be towed and impounded. The request must be in writing and must state why the person requesting the hearing believes the vehicle is not eligible to be towed and impounded. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall set and conduct a hearing on the matter within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a proper request. The court shall promptly notify all parties of the court's determination. 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 24078 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 14-309. - Notice of impoundment. 
(a)  When a vehicle has been impounded under section 14-307(a)(1) for unpaid parking tickets, notice of impoundment shall be mailed to the registered owner no later than the next business day following the impoundment. The notice shall: 
(1)  Identify the vehicle and inform the owner why it was impounded; 
(2)  State where the vehicle is impounded; 
(3)  Inform the owner how the vehicle may be redeemed; 
(4)  Inform the owner that the vehicle is subject to a lien for towing and storage charges; and 
(5)  State that the owner may request a hearing concerning the legality of the impoundment and explain the procedure for requesting a hearing. 
(b)  When a vehicle has been impounded under section 14-307(a)(2), in addition to the above notice requirements, notice of the time and place to appear at the municipal court shall also be provided to the vehicle owner who may enter a plea to any outstanding charges. 
(c)  Notice is not required to be mailed if the identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the appropriate motor vehicle licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 24078 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 14-310. - Redemption of impounded vehicle. 
A vehicle impounded for unpaid parking tickets may be redeemed by its registered owner or a person authorized by the registered owner subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The person redeeming the vehicle shows adequate evidence of a right to possess the vehicle. 
(2)  The person redeeming the vehicle provides a written statement from the municipal court that the vehicle may be redeemed. The court shall provide this statement if all outstanding parking tickets have been paid or if a cash or surety bond has been posted for all unresolved parking tickets or if the court determines that for some other legal reason the vehicle must be allowed to be redeemed. 
(3)  All towing and storage charges have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 14-311. - Hearing on impoundment. 
(a)  The registered owner or any person with an interest in a vehicle impounded for unpaid parking tickets may request the municipal court to conduct a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment. The request must be in writing and must state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the impoundment is invalid or unjustified. Except for good cause, the request for hearing must be filed within thirty (30) days after the vehicle was impounded. 
(b)  If the vehicle has been redeemed, the municipal judge shall set a hearing on the validity of the impoundment within thirty (30) days of receipt of a proper request filed under subsection (a). If the vehicle remains impounded, the municipal judge shall set and conduct a hearing within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the request, not including weekends or city holidays, unless the person requesting a hearing, for good cause, requests a later hearing date. 
(c)  If the municipal judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was invalid or unjustified, the judge shall order the vehicle to be released immediately and the city shall pay the towing charges and storage charges up to the date of the hearing. If these charges have already been paid, the city shall reimburse the person who paid them. 
(d)  If the municipal judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was valid and justified, the vehicle, if still impounded, shall remain impounded until redeemed pursuant to section 14-310 or sold pursuant to state law. 
(e)  This section shall be applicable only to vehicles impounded under section 14-307(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 24078 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 14-312. - Immobilization of vehicles for outstanding parking tickets. 
(a)  A vehicle may be immobilized by means of an immobilization device if: 
(1)  There are four (4) or more parking tickets issued against the vehicle that remain unpaid; or 
(2)  There has been no appearance or plea made by a party with a valid interest in the vehicle cited for a violation of the parking ordinances contained within this code after having been duly summoned by the judge of the municipal court and for which a warrant for failure to appear has been issued. 
An "immobilization device" is a device that can be attached to a motor vehicle to prevent it from being driven. It is a violation of this Code to operate a vehicle secured with an immobilization device. 
(b)  Immobilization by means of an immobilization device shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No vehicle shall be immobilized unless the vehicle is found on a public street, public parking garage or public parking lot. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be immobilized within the traveled portion of any street or portion of any street or sidewalk when the immobilization would create a hazard. 
(3)  If the registered owner or operator of the vehicle fails to pay the outstanding parking tickets or fails to post a cash or surety bond for all unresolved parking tickets within seventy-two (72) hours of installation of an immobilization device, the city may have the vehicle towed to a place of impoundment. 
(4)  Whenever a vehicle has been immobilized by means of an immobilization device, a notice shall be placed on the vehicle stating the time and date the immobilization device was placed on the vehicle, and briefly describing the means of securing removal of the immobilization device within the seventy-two-hour period. 
(c)  The registered owner or operator of an immobilized vehicle may secure removal of the immobilization device within the seventy-two-hour period either by payment of all outstanding parking tickets or by posting a cash or surety bond for all unresolved parking tickets. 
(Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 23233 , § 1, 7-3-17; Ord. No. 23884 , § 1, 5-20-19; Ord. No. 24078 , § 1, 11-4-19)  
Sec. 14-313. - Special residential parking district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within areas zoned for residential uses for the parking of vehicles by persons utilizing adjacent commercial, industrial, educational or institutional uses; to protect certain districts from polluted air, excessive noise, litter and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles; to protect the residents of such districts from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the character of these districts as residential districts; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of residential streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in these districts; and to preserve the safety of children, other pedestrians and traffic in these districts, as well as the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  Residential parking district established. The following parking district is hereby established: 
(1)  North Village Parking District. North Village Parking District shall consist of all residential structures located on Park Avenue with even number addresses from 1110 through 1204, on St. James Street with odd number addresses from 307 through 309, on St. Joseph Street from Park Avenue to Ash Street, on East Ash Street with odd number addresses from 1201 through 1209, on East Walnut Street with odd numbered addresses from 1203 through 1205, and on Hubbell Street from Walnut Street to Ash Street. 
(c)  Posting of signs. In each residential parking district, appropriate signs giving notice of the designation of the residential parking district shall be posted restricting all parking in unmetered spaces to vehicles displaying valid permits or visitor cards for the designated residential parking district. 
(d)  Issuance of parking permits and visitor cards. Each residential unit in the designated residential parking district may be issued a maximum of two (2) permits and one (1) visitor card by the director of public works. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or operator of the vehicle, the residential address, the vehicle make, model and registration number, and the applicant's driver's license number. If the vehicle is not registered to the applicant's address within the parking district, the applicant must provide proof of residence within the designated residential district. 
(e)  Term of parking permits. Except as provided herein, residential parking permits and visitor cards issued pursuant to this section shall be issued for a period of twelve (12) months and must be renewed annually. A tenant residing in the designated area under a shorter term lease shall be issued a permit and visitor card for the term of the lease, which shall be indicated on the application for the permit. The permit and visitor card shall automatically become void when the tenant vacates that location. 
(f)  Exemptions. Any truck or vehicle providing repairs, deliveries or other services to a resident of the area shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Emergency vehicles, utility company vehicles, and vehicles on city or official government business shall also be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Display of parking permit or visitor card. The parking permit shall be displayed in the front window of all vehicles in the upper right corner of the passenger side; or on motorcycles or motor scooters on the rear fender or wheel guard. The visitor card shall be displayed in the front window of the vehicle. 
(h)  New vehicles. If a resident transfers ownership of the vehicle registered under this section, the old permit must be presented before issuance of a new permit. 
(i)  Violations. 
(1)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in an unmetered space on a street within a residential parking district without a valid permit or visitor card properly displayed, or unless the vehicle is exempt under this section. 
(2)  No person shall furnish false information in an application for a permit. 
(3)  No person shall use or display or allow the use or display of a valid residential parking permit or visitor card on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit or visitor card was issued. 
(4)  No person shall use or display a facsimile or counterfeit permit or visitor card. 
(5)  No person shall sell, give or otherwise dispose of a vehicle displaying a permit without destroying that permit, and no subsequent owner of the vehicle shall use a permit issued to a previous owner. 
(6)  No person shall allow a nonresident of a parking district to use or display a residential parking permit. A nonresident of the residential parking district shall only use or display a visitor card while the nonresident is visiting a resident of the designated residential parking district. 
(7)  No person shall knowingly permit any act prohibited under this section, or aid or abet another to do so. 
(8)  Each hour that a violation of this section continues is a separate offense. 
(j)  Penalty. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, except that a fine shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if paid within fifteen (15) days of the violation and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid more than fifteen (15) days after violation. 
(k)  Denial or cancellation of parking permit or visitor card. All permits and visitor cards shall remain the property of the city. The director of public works shall have the power to deny the issuance of a permit or visitor card or cancel an existing permit or visitor card if the applicant causes or permits any of the violations specified in this section or is abusing the rights and privileges granted under this section. It shall be unlawful to use a cancelled permit or visitor card and the holder of a cancelled permit or visitor card shall surrender the permit and visitor card to the director of public works immediately upon request. 
(Ord. No. 21564, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21689, § 1, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 21815, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 14-314. - Central Business District hotel registration zone. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish hotel registration zones for the use of guests and visitors when loading, unloading or registering for a stay in a hotel located within the Central Business District. 
(b)  Central Business District Hotel Registration Zone. The following hotel registration zone is hereby established: 
(1)  Tiger Hotel Registration Zone. The Tiger Hotel Registration Zone shall consist of three (3) parking spaces which shall be located along the west side of Eighth Street from Cherry Street to one hundred sixty-five (165) feet north of Cherry Street. 
(c)  Payment. 
(1)  For each parking space established within the Central Business District Hotel Registration Zone, hotel shall pay city one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) per year payable in advance. 
(2)  All sums collected from hotels for parking spaces in an established hotel registration zone within the Central Business District shall be deposited in the parking facilities revenue account as set forth in section 14-425 of this chapter. 
(3)  Failure to pay. If a hotel in an established hotel registration zone within the Central Business District fails to pay city all sums due for each parking space in hotel's registration zone by January 31 st in any given year, the director of public works is authorized to install parking meters in those designated parking spaces. In order for a hotel to have parking meters removed after failure to pay for parking spaces within its established zone, hotel shall pay all sums due for its parking spaces and all costs associated with city's installation and removal of the parking meters. 
(d)  Posting of signs. In each hotel registration zone established within the Central Business District, appropriate signs giving notice of the designation of the hotel registration zone shall be posted restricting all parking and use of the zone except as provided in this section. 
(e)  [Exceptions.] No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an established hotel registration zone within the Central Business District except for the purpose of registering at the hotel or while engaged in loading or unloading passengers or luggage while staying at the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 21688, § 1, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 14-315. - Metered mobile food vending zones designated. 
The following parking metered spaces are designated as mobile food vending zones: 
Cherry Street , south side, eight (8) spaces between Sixth Street and Seventh Street. 
Locust Street , south side, eight (8) spaces between Ninth Street and Tenth Street. 
Walnut Street , north side, ten (10) spaces between Ninth Street and Tenth Street. 
Walnut Street, north side, seven (7) spaces between Seventh Street and Eighth Street. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 1, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 23901 , § 1, 6-17-19)  
Sec. 14-316. - Reserving parking spaces in metered mobile food vendor zones. 
(a)  To use a metered mobile food vending zone, a mobile food vendor shall be required to lease a meter bag(s) from the public works department using the fee schedule below. Public works may request documentation to verify a mobile food vendor's legal status to engage in business within the city limits of Columbia. 
Daily single meter bag: ..... $10.00 
Daily double meter bag: ..... $20.00 
Monthly single meter bag: ..... $150.00 
Monthly double meter bag: ..... $200.00 
(b)  A mobile food vendor will be required to place a meter bag over a designated parking meter at least four (4) hours before the mobile food vendor intends to use the parking space. 
(c)  Parking spaces in mobile vending zones may not be occupied by a mobile food vendor between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(d)  The meter bag must be removed when a mobile food vendor leaves the parking space. 
(e)  Parking spaces in a mobile food vending zone are available on a first come, first served basis. 
(f)  When a meter bag is placed over a parking meter in a mobile food vendor zone, no vehicle shall park in the reserved space except for the mobile food vendor in possession of the meter bag. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 1, 4-21-14 )  
Secs. 14-317—14-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Sec. 14-321. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1964, § 12.580) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.520.  
Sec. 14-322. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1964, § 12.585) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.525.  
Sec. 14-323. - Parking signs required. 
Whenever, by this division or any ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1964, § 12.586) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.545.  
Sec. 14-324. - Parking prohibited. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block, giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth: 
Aldeah Avenue, west side, between Ash Street and Broadway. 
Alexander Street, west side, between Worley Street and Ash Street. 
Allen Place, both sides. 
Allen Street, both sides, from Bryant Street to Trinity Place. 
Alton Street, north side, between Seventh and Eighth Streets. 
Alton Street, south side, Eighth Street to Range Line. 
Ammonette Street, both sides, between Paris Road and U.S. Business Route 63. 
Ann Street, east side, from Walnut Street to Paris Road. 
Ann Street, west side, from Broadway to Anthony Street. 
Anthony Street, north side, from Ann Street to William Street. 
Anthony Street, north side, between William Street and College Avenue. 
Ash Street, north side, from Seventh Street west to one hundred (100) feet west of the west line of Sixth Street. 
Ash Street, north side, Garth Avenue to Bernadette Drive. 
Ash Street, south side, Garth Avenue, thence west one hundred (100) feet. 
Ash Street, south side, Hirth Avenue to Anderson Avenue. 
Ash Street, south side, from Orr Street to Tandy Avenue. 
Ash Street, south side, from the west curbline of Sixth Street, thence west sixty (60) feet. 
Ash Street, both sides, Bernadette Drive to Heather Lane. 
Ash Street, both sides, from Heather Lane to Fairview Road. 
Ashland Gravel Road, both sides, from College Avenue to Stadium Boulevard. 
Ashley Street, south side, from western terminus to Bowling Street. 
Aztec Boulevard, both sides, from Ballenger Lane to Mohawk Avenue. 
Bass Avenue, north side, entire length. 
Bearfield Road, both sides, from Nifong Boulevard south to city limits. 
Bernadette Drive, both sides, from Beverly Street, thence west to Stadium Boulevard. 
Bernadette Drive, west side, from Worley Street to Beverly Drive. 
Berrywood Drive, north side, from Keene Street to one hundred fifty (150) feet west of the centerline of Arbor Drive. 
Bethel Street, both sides, from South Brookline Drive south to city limits. 
Big Bear Boulevard, during the months of December through March, on both sides from two hundred eight-five (285) feet east of Highway 763 (Rangeline Street) to its eastern terminus. 
Blair Court, west side, entire length. 
Blue Ridge Road, from a point 175 east of Snow Leopard Drive thence east 350 feet. 
Bluegrass Court, west side, from Huntridge Drive south to its terminus. 
Bingham Road, south and east side, from Providence Road to Brandon Road. 
Bouchelle Avenue, north side, from College Avenue thence east eight hundred thirty (830) feet. 
Bouchelle Avenue, south side, from a point eight hundred thirty (830) feet east of College Avenue to William Street. 
Brandon Road, south side, from a point eight hundred (800) feet west of Providence Road to Bingham Road; and on both sides, from Providence Road, thence west eight hundred (800) feet. 
Bright Star Drive, east side, from West Broadway to Mount Carmel Lane. 
Broadway, both sides, eastward from its intersection with College and Price Avenues to Old U.S. Highway 63. 
Broadway, both sides, from Fairview Road to Rothwell Drive. 
Broadway, both sides, from Providence Road to Fourth Street. 
Broadway, north side, from First Street to west City Limits. 
Broadway, south side, beginning at the west curbline of College Avenue, thence west two hundred seventy (270) feet. 
Broadway, south side, between Clinkscales Road and the west city limits. 
Broadway, south side, from Edgewood Avenue to Clinkscales Road. 
Broadway, south side, between Edgewood Avenue and Providence Road. 
Brown Station Road, both sides, from State Route B to East Brown Station Road. 
Burnam Road, both sides, from Providence Road to Birch Road. 
Business Route 63, both sides, from Business Loop 70 to Route AC. 
Business Loop 70, both sides. 
Buttonwood Drive , both sides, from a point eight hundred twenty-five (825) feet north of Nifong Boulevard to a point seven hundred seventy-five (775) feet east of Providence Road outer roadway. 
Calvert Drive, south side, from Nelwood Drive to its west terminus. 
Campusview Drive, north side, between Carter Lane and UMC Drive. 
Campusview Drive, south side, from Carter Lane thence east three hundred (300) feet. 
Cherry Street, north side, beginning at the east curbline of Sixth Street and extending east ninety-three (93) feet. 
Cherry Street, north side, from Second Street to Providence Road. 
Christian Fellowship Road, south side, from Scott Boulevard, thence west to its terminus. 
Clark Lane (State Route PP), both sides, from U.S. 63 Connector to Crump Lane. 
Clarkson Road, north and east side, from Burnam Road to its terminus. 
Clarkson Road, west side, from Burnam Street, thence north and west sixty (60) feet. 
Cliff Drive, north side, at the northernmost intersection of Cliff Drive and Rockhill Road, thence continuing on the same side of the street, the length of Cliff Drive to its southernmost intersection with Rockhill Road. 
Clinkscales Road, west side, from Broadway to Worley Street. 
Clinkscales Road, west side, from I-70 Drive Southwest to Patsy Lane. 
College Avenue, both sides, from Walnut Street to Stadium Boulevard. 
Conley Avenue, north side, between Hitt Street and Maryland Avenue and between Sixth Street and Fourth Street. 
Conley Avenue, south side, from Maryland Avenue to Hitt Street. 
Conley Avenue, south side, between Fourth and Fifth Streets. 
Corporate Plaza Drive, both sides, entire length. 
Creasy Springs Road, east side, from Wingham Drive thence north two hundred (200) feet. 
Creekwood Parkway, east side, from Clark Lane, thence north three hundred forty (340) feet. 
Creekwood Parkway, west side, from Clark Lane to Penn Terrace. 
Crestmere Avenue, north side, from East Parkway Avenue to Garth Avenue. 
Curtis Avenue, east side, between Kentucky Boulevard and Burnam Avenue. 
Dakota Avenue, north side, from a point opposite the east curb of Grand Avenue, thence east one hundred sixty (160) feet. 
Dorsey Street, east side, between Bass Avenue and Anthony Street. 
East Bingham Road, north side, from Providence Road to four hundred (400) feet west of Wayne Road. 
East Brown Station Road, both sides, from Brown Station Road to Alpine Drive. 
East Ridgeley Road, both sides, from Wayne Road, thence west three hundred (300) feet. 
East Walnut Street, both sides, from U.S. Highway Business 63 East to Hinkson Creek. 
Edgewood Avenue, east side, between Stewart Road and Lathrop Road. 
Edgewood Avenue, west side, between Broadway and Lathrop Road. 
El Cortez Drive, north side, beginning at the west curbline of Balboa Lane, thence east to the west line of Old Route K (Highway 163 west service road). 
El Cortez Drive, south side, beginning at the east curbline of Madrid Lane, thence east to Route K. 
Elm Street, north side, between Hitt Street and Providence Street. 
Elm Street, south side, between Hitt Street and Sixth Street. 
Elm Street, south side, between Fifth Street and Providence Road extending three hundred ninety-two feet (392) feet from Providence Road to Fifth Street. 
Executive Drive, east side, between Southampton Drive and North Cedar Lake Drive. 
Fairview Road, both sides, from Broadway to West Worley Street. 
Fairview Road, both sides, from Rollins Road to a point two hundred fifty (250) feet north thereof. 
Fairview Road, east side, from Rollins Road south 400 feet. 
Fairview Road, west side, from Yorktown Drive to Rollins Road. 
Fay Street, east side, between Wilkes Boulevard and Smith Street. 
Fay Street, east side, from Hinkson Avenue, thence north two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
Fellows Place, south and east side, from Rock Quarry Road for its entire length. 
Flora Drive, north side, from Olive Street northeast to its terminus. 
Forum Boulevard, east side, from Green Meadows Road to Mill Creek, and west side, from Green Meadows Road to 300 feet north of Mill Creek. 
Forum Katy Parkway, both sides, from Forum Boulevard east to its terminus. 
Foxfire Drive, north side, from Carter Lane, thence east to its terminus. 
Garden Drive, west side, between Morning Glory Drive and Jonquil Place. 
Garth Avenue, both sides, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of its intersection with Business Loop 70 to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of such intersection. 
Garth Avenue, east side, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Business Loop 70 to Texas Avenue. 
Garth Avenue, east side, between Crestmere Avenue and Business Loop 70. 
Garth Avenue, east side, from a point eighty (80) feet south of the south curb line of Parkade Boulevard, thence north two hundred seventy (270) feet. 
Garth Avenue, west side, between Stewart Road and Business Loop 70. 
Garth Avenue, both sides, from Thurman Street to Blue Ridge Road. 
Gary Street, north side, from Clinkscales Road to Atkins Drive. 
Gary Street, south side, from Pershing Road to Clinkscales Road. 
Glenwood Avenue, west side, between Ash Street and Broadway. 
Gordon Street, north side, from Paris Road to U.S. Highway 63 South. 
Grant Lane, both sides, from a point one hundred (100) feet south of Frontenac Place to the intersection with Scott Boulevard. 
Greeley Drive, south side, for its entire length. 
Guitar Street, both sides, for its entire length. 
Hamilton Way, north side, between Hitt Street and Waugh Street. 
Hartley Court, both sides, from Richardson Street, thence north one hundred seventy (170) feet. 
Heather Lane, east side, from Broadway to Ash Street. 
Hickman Avenue, north side, between Seventh and Third Streets. 
High Street, east side, between University Avenue and Wilson Avenue. 
Hillside Drive, east side, from Broadway to Sunset Lane. 
Hirth Street, east side, between Worley Street and Ash Street. 
Hitt Street, both sides, from a point seventy-five (75) feet south of the south curbline of University Avenue, thence south five hundred forty-four (544) feet. 
Hitt Street, east side, between Broadway and Locust Street. 
Hitt Street, east side, from the south curbline of Porter Street, thence south sixty (60) feet. 
Hitt Street, east side, between Rollins Street and Porter Street. 
Hitt Street, west side, between Broadway and Cherry Street. 
Hitt Street, west side, from University Avenue to Rollins Street. 
Hitt Street, west side, Rollins Street to Porter Street. 
Hubbel Drive, east side, between Walnut and Ash Streets. 
Hunt Avenue, west side, between Worley Street and Business Loop 70. 
Huntridge Drive, south side, for its entire length. 
I-70 Drive Southeast, both sides, beginning two thousand (2,000) feet east of Woodridge Drive, thence east six hundred (600) feet. 
Isherwood Drive, west side, from Pioneer Drive to Mexico Gravel Road. 
Jamesdale Road, north side, from Brown Station Road east to terminus. 
Jewell Avenue, east side, Business Loop 70 to Forest Avenue. 
Keene Street, both sides, from I-70 Drive Southwest to St. Charles Road, except a ten-minute zone on the west side, beginning one hundred ninety (190) feet north of Lansing Avenue, thence north seventy-five (75) feet. 
Kentucky Avenue, north side, from Maryland Avenue to Providence Road. 
Kentucky Avenue, south side, entire length. 
Kuhlman Court, west side, and on the circle, a distance of four hundred eight (408) feet. 
Lake Street, both sides, between Virginia Avenue and Hitt Street. 
Lake Valley Lane, both sides, from Southampton Drive south to city limits. 
Lansing Avenue, both sides, from Keene Street to Portland Street. 
Lansing Avenue, south side, from Portland Street to Dene Drive. 
LaSalle Place, west side, from Allen Street to Worley. 
Lawnridge Court, at the west terminus around the cul-de-sac. 
Lawrence Place, west side, from University Avenue, thence north to its terminus. 
Lee Street, east side, between Wilson Avenue and Bouchelle Avenue. 
Leeway Drive, north side, from Brown Station Road to Spring Hill Road. 
LeMone Industrial Boulevard, both sides, for its entire length. 
LeRail Drive, both sides, from Westbrook Way, thence west six hundred forty (640) feet. 
Locust Street, both sides, from Providence Road to Fourth Street. 
Locust Street, south side, from sixty (60) feet west of the west curbline of College Avenue to College Avenue. 
Locust Street, south side, from one hundred thirty (130) feet west of the west curbline of Waugh Street to Waugh Street. 
Lowry Street, both sides, from Ninth Street to Hitt Street. 
Madison Street, east side, from Business Loop 70 south 250 feet. 
Maguire Boulevard, beginning at the northeast corner of the south intersection with LeMone Industrial Boulevard, thence east and north two thousand three hundred twenty-five (2,325) feet. 
Maguire Boulevard, beginning at the southeast corner of the south intersection with LeMone Industrial Boulevard, thence east, north and west to the north intersection with LeMone Industrial Boulevard. 
Manor Drive, west side, from Broadway to Manor Court. 
Maryland Avenue, east side, between Conley Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Maryland Avenue, east side, from Kentucky Boulevard north one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
Maryland Avenue, west side, beginning at Rollins Street, thence south seven hundred sixty (760) feet; and beginning eight hundred eighty (880) feet south of Rollins Street, thence south to Kentucky Avenue. 
Maryland Avenue, west side, from Conley Avenue to Rollins Street. 
Matthews Street, west side, between Paquin Street and University Avenue. 
McBaine Avenue, west side, between Ash Street and Broadway. 
Melbourne Street, east side, between Walnut Street and Windsor Street. 
Melbourne Street, east side, between Windsor Street and Hinkson Avenue. 
Melbourne Street, west side, from Windsor Street to one hundred fifty-two (152) feet south of Windsor Street. 
Melbourne Street, west side, from ninety two (92) feet north of Walnut Street to Walnut Street. 
Mexico Gravel Road, both sides, from State Route B (Paris Road) east to East Henley Drive. 
Missouri Avenue, east side, between Conley Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Missouri Avenue, west side, from Conley Avenue to Rollins Street. 
Moon Valley Road, both sides, from Green Valley Drive to its south terminus. 
Morningside Drive, east side, from Wilson Avenue to south terminus. 
Moss Street, east side, from Gordon Street to McAlester Street. 
Mount Carmel Lane, north side, from Scott Boulevard to Bright Star Drive. 
Mount Vernon Street, west side, between Paris Road and Amelia Street. 
Nelwood Drive, east side, from Vandiver Drive north to one hundred sixty (160) feet south of Mulberry Road. 
Nelwood Drive, east side, from a point opposite the south curb of Calvert Drive, thence north one hundred sixty (160) feet. 
Nifong Boulevard, both sides, from Ponderosa Drive, thence south and west one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet. 
Ninth Street, west side, from Park Avenue south one hundred (100) feet. 
North Boulevard, both sides, from Eighth Street to Range Line Street. 
North Boulevard, south side, from Eighth Street to Coats Street. 
North Brown Station Road, both sides, from the north city limit to State Route B. 
North Cedar Lake Drive, south side, from South Commercial Drive east 550 feet. 
Oakwood Drive, northwest side, and in the cul-de-sac. 
Old Providence Road (west frontage road of Highway 163), east side, Highway 163 South to Hinkson Creek. 
Orange Street , south side, from Mikel Street to Madison Street. 
Orr Street, east side, from Walnut Street to Park Avenue. 
Otto Court, both sides, from Tenth Street to its eastern terminus. 
Pannell Street , east side, from a point one hundred five (105) feet south of Smith Street, thence south one hundred thirty (130) feet. 
Pannell Street, west side, from Smith Street, thence south three hundred fifty (350) feet. 
Pannell Street, both sides, from Wilkes Boulevard to its southern terminus. 
Paquin Street, south side, from College Avenue to sixty (60) feet west of Matthews Street. 
Paquin Street, north side, from sixty (60) feet east of Matthews Street to Hitt Street. 
Paris Court, west side, from Paris Road, thence south to its terminus. 
Paris Road, east side, from Ammonette Street to Business Loop 70. 
Paris Road, east side, from Gordon Street to Ammonette Street. 
Paris Road, south and east sides, from Orr Street to Price Avenue. 
Paris Road, south and east sides, between Price Avenue and Hinkson Avenue. 
Paris Road, southeast side, from one hundred twenty-five (125) feet north of William Street to one hundred (100) feet south of William Street. 
Paris Road, west side, from Price Avenue to William Street. 
Paris Road, west side, from William Street to Business Loop 70. 
Paris Road, both sides, from Business Loop 70 to the north city limits. 
Park Avenue, south side, between Eighth and Rogers Streets. 
Park de Ville Drive, east side, between Ash Street and a point five hundred fifty (550) feet south of Ash Street. 
Parkade Boulevard, east side, between Business Loop 70 and a point three hundred (300) feet north therefrom. 
Parkade Boulevard, west side, between Business Loop 70 and U.S. Interstate 70. 
Parkade Drive, both sides, beginning at the north curb of Business Loop 70, thence north three hundred (300) feet. 
Parkridge Drive, east side, from Parkridge Court, thence north to the cul-de-sac. 
Pendleton Street, both sides, east of LaSalle Place. 
Pendleton Street, south side, between Third and Fourth Streets. 
Pendleton Street, south side, from LaSalle Place to Garth Avenue. 
Pershing Road, east side, from the north line of Pearl Avenue extended to the south line of Again Street. 
Poplar Avenue, west side, between Business Loop 70 and Lakeview Avenue. 
Porter Street, both sides, from College Avenue to Ashland Gravel Road. 
Porter Street, north side, College Avenue to Virginia Avenue. 
Porter Street, north side, between Highway 763 and Ashland Gravel Road. 
Porter Street, north side, between Hitt Street and Virginia Avenue. 
Porter Street, south side, from Hitt Street to Virginia Avenue. 
Porter Street, south side, from Virginia Avenue to College Avenue. 
Portland Street, both sides, from Keene Street to Berrywood Drive. 
Pratt Street, north side, from Ripley Street to Melbourne Street. 
Price Avenue, both sides, from Tandy Avenue to the north line of Broadway. 
Primrose Drive, north side, between Garden Drive and Stadium Boulevard. 
Proctor Drive, north and east sides, from a point two hundred seventy-four (274) feet west of Bear Creek Drive to a point five hundred sixty-eight (568) feet west and north of Bear Creek Drive. 
Providence Road, both sides, from Mick Deaver Memorial Drive to the north city limits. 
Rain Forest Parkway, north side, from Providence Road to Monsoon Lane. 
Rainbow Trout Drive, north side, from Scott Boulevard to a point two hundred (200) feet west of Scott Boulevard. 
Range Line, both sides, from Business Loop 70 to the north city limits. 
Range Line, east side, from a point opposite the south curb line of Alton Avenue, thence south four hundred twenty-five (425) feet. 
Range Line, west side, between Rogers Street and Business Loop 70. 
Redbud Lane, turn-around area at west end. 
Ridgemont, south side, from Highridge Drive, thence east eight hundred sixty (860) feet. 
Ridgeway Avenue, west side, from Ash Street to Worley. 
Ripley Street, west side, from Broadway to Walnut Street. 
Rock Hill Road, west side, from University Avenue, thence south to Cliff Drive. 
Rogers Street, both sides, Eighth Street to Range Line Street. 
Rollins Road, both sides, from a point one hundred (100) feet east of Hulen Drive to a point fifty (50) feet west of East Lake Drive. 
Rollins Road, north side, between Fairview Road and Concord Street. 
Rollins Road, south side, from Eastlake Drive to Fairview Road. 
Rollins Street, north side, entire length. 
Rollins Street, south side, from College Avenue, thence west one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
Rollins Street, south side, from College Avenue to William Street. 
Rollins Street, south side, from Maryland Avenue to College Avenue. 
Rollins Street, south side, from Providence Road to Maryland Avenue. 
Rosemary Lane, north side, between College Avenue and William Street. 
Ross Street, north side, from Lee Street to William Street. 
Ross Street, south side, from William Street east to Crescent Road. 
Route B, east side, between Nelwood Drive and Mexico Gravel Road. 
Route 63 North, both sides, between Business Loop 70 and U.S. Interstate Highway 70. 
Route 740, both sides, from Interstate 70 to Business Route 63 South. 
Route 740, both sides, from Providence Road to its eastern terminus. 
Route 740, both sides, from Worley Street to Route TT (Broadway). 
Sandifer Avenue, southwest side, entire length. 
Santana Circle, east side, entire length. 
Santana Lane, east side, entire length. 
Savoy Drive , south side, from a point four hundred (400) feet west of Napa Drive, thence west three hundred sixty (360) feet. 
Scott Boulevard, both sides, from Wales Drive to Route K. 
Sexton Road, south side, between Third Street and Business Loop 70. 
Sierra Madre, at the south terminus south of Miramar Lane around the cul-de-sac. 
Silvey Street, both sides, from Broadway (Route TT) to Worley Street. 
Smiley Lane, both sides, between U.S. 763 (Rangeline Street) and the western terminus of Smiley Lane. 
Smiley Lane, north side, from Derby Ridge Road west three hundred (300) feet. 
Smith Street, north side, from Pannel Street to Fay Street. 
Southampton Drive, both sides, from Providence Road to its western terminus. 
Southpark Drive, west side, College Avenue to Ashland Road. 
Southridge Drive, both sides, between Woodland Drive and a point seventy-five (75) feet west therefrom. 
Spencer Street, east side, from Worley Street to I-70 Drive Southwest. 
Spruce Drive, north side, from Oakland Gravel Road, thence east to its terminus. 
Stadium Boulevard, both sides, from Interstate 70 north to Parkside Drive. 
State Route 63 South, both sides, from the centerline of Interstate 70, thence south one thousand (1,000) feet. 
Stevendave Drive, south side, from Murrell Drive to Waterloo Drive. 
Stewart Road, north side, between Fifth Street and the M.K.T. Railroad tracks. 
Stewart Road, south side, between Fifth and Sixth Streets. 
Stewart Road, both sides, from Providence Road to West Boulevard. 
Sunflower Street, both sides, Barberry Avenue north to Primrose Drive. 
Sunset Lane, south side, between West Boulevard and Tracy Drive. 
Switzler Street, south side, from Providence Road to Trinity Place. 
Switzler Street, south side, from LaSalle Place to Garth Avenue. 
Tandy Avenue, both sides, entire length. 
Texas Avenue, north side, from Garth Avenue to its western terminus. 
Texas Avenue, north side, from Providence Road west eight hundred (800) feet. 
Texas Avenue, south side, from Garth Avenue to Providence Road. 
Thilly Avenue, east side, from Lathrop Road to Stewart Road. 
Thilly Avenue, east side, from Lathrop Road south to its terminus. 
Tiger Avenue , (both sides) Rollins Street to one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Kentucky Boulevard. 
Trinity Place, west side, from Park Avenue to Pendleton Street. 
Trinity Place, east side, from Park Avenue to Pendleton Street. 
Turner Avenue, both sides, from Tiger Avenue to Providence Road. 
Towne Drive, west side, from White Gate Drive to Clark Lane. 
University Avenue, both sides, from College Avenue, thence west two hundred (200) feet. 
University Avenue, north side, from College Avenue to Rockhill Road. 
University Avenue, north side, between Ninth Street and College Avenue. 
Vandiver Drive, both sides, from Providence Road to U.S. Highway 63. 
Virginia Avenue, east side, from Porter Street north seven hundred (700) feet. 
Virginia Avenue, west side, entire length. 
Waco Road, both sides, from Brown Station Road to Paris Road. 
Wales Drive, both sides, entire length. 
Walnut Street, both sides, from Orr Street to Old 63. 
Washington Avenue, west side, from Wilkes Boulevard to Hickman Avenue. 
Waterloo Drive, south side, from three hundred forty (340) feet south of Stevendave Drive to Ballenger Lane. 
Waterloo Drive, west side from Stevendave Drive, thence south three hundred forty (340) feet. 
Watson Place, east side, entire length. 
Waugh Street, west side, from a point two hundred sixty-eight (268) feet south of Broadway to Paquin Street. 
Wayne Road, both sides. 
West Boulevard, both sides, from two hundred (200) feet north of Worley Street to two hundred (200) feet south of Worley Street. 
West Boulevard South, both sides, from High Ridge Drive to a point one hundred (100) feet south of Hatton Drive. 
West Boulevard, both sides, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of Broadway to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Broadway. 
Westmount Avenue, east side, entire length. 
Westwind Drive, east and north sides, for its entire length. 
Westwinds Drive, north side, from three hundred (300) feet west of St. Andrews Street to two hundred fifty (250) feet east of St. Andrew Street. 
White Gate Drive, north side, between Sylvan lane and Country Side lane. 
White Gate Drive, south side, between Route B and Sylvan Lane. 
Wilkes Boulevard, south side, between Eighth Street and Rangeline Street. 
William Street, both sides, between Broadway and Walnut. 
William Street, east side, between Broadway and Rollins Street. 
William Street, west side, between Broadway and Bass Avenue. 
William Street, both sides, from Windsor Street to Paris Road. 
Willis Avenue, both sides, entire length. 
Wilson Avenue, north side, entire length. 
Wilson Avenue, south side, within seventy-five (75) feet of the east curb of College Avenue. 
Windsor Street, south side, between Price Avenue and Ann Street. 
Woodrail Avenue, north side, between Woodkirk Drive and Woodbine Drive. 
Woodrail Terrace, east side, beginning at a point four hundred ninety (490) feet south of the northeast corner of the west intersection of Woodrail Terrace with Woodrail Avenue, thence continuing south, east and north around Woodrail Terrace two hundred sixty-five (265) feet. 
Woodrail Terrace, west side, beginning at the west intersection with Woodrail Avenue, thence continuing the entire length of the same side of the street to its east intersection with Woodrail Avenue. 
Woodrow Street, west side, from Paris Road to McAlester Street. 
Worley Street, both sides, from two hundred (200) feet west of Garth Avenue to two hundred (200) feet east of Garth Avenue. 
Worley Street , both sides, from one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Park De Ville Drive to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet east of Park De Ville Drive. 
Worley Street, both sides, from two hundred (200) feet west of West Boulevard to two hundred (200) feet east of West Boulevard. 
Worley Street, south side, McBaine Avenue to West Boulevard. 
Second Street, east side, from Broadway to Cherry Street. 
Fourth Street, both sides, between Stewart Road and Conley Avenue. 
Fourth Street, east side, between Conley Avenue and Turner Avenue. 
Fifth Street, both sides, between Stewart Road and Turner Avenue. 
Fifth Street, east side, between Elm Street and Locust Street. 
Fifth Street, west side, between Turner Avenue and Rollins Street. 
Fifth Street, east side, from Stewart Road, north a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
Fifth Street, west side, from Stewart Road, north a distance of four hundred fifty (450) feet. 
Sixth Street, east side, from Stewart Road to Conley Avenue. 
Sixth Street, east side, between Elm Street and Stewart Road. 
Seventh Street, east side, from Walnut Street, thence south to the alley between Walnut and Broadway. 
Seventh Street, west side, from Business Loop 70 to Nebraska Avenue. 
Eighth Street, west side, from Wilkes Boulevard to North Boulevard. 
Eighth Street, both sides, from Park Avenue to Wilkes Boulevard. 
Ninth Street, east side, between Elm Street and Conley Avenue. 
Ninth Street, east side, between Park Avenue and Rogers Street. 
Ninth Street, west side, beginning fifty-four (54) feet south of the south curbline of Locust Street, thence south twenty (20) feet. 
Ninth Street, west side, from University Avenue to Conley Avenue. 
Tenth Street, east side, beginning at the east-west alley between Broadway and Walnut Streets, thence south twenty-six (26) feet. 
(Code 1964, § 12.590; Ord. No. 9717, § 1, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 9825, § 1, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 9929, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 10019, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 10139, § 1, 4-2-84; Ord. No. 10166, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 10269, § 1, 8-20-84; Ord. No. 10325, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 10374, § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 10687, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 10712, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 10713, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 10731, 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 10792, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. 10809, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 10923, § 1, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 11138, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 11303, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 11463, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 11490, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 11650, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 11668, § 1, 10-19-87; Ord. No. 11688, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 11742, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 11855, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 11938, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 11956, § 1, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 11996, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 12046, § 1, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 12158, § 1, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 12237, § 1, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 12256, § 1, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 12328, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 12357, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 12596, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 12721, § 1, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 12739, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 12826, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 12855, § 1, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 13122, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 13188, § 2, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 13335, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 13408, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 13409, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 13525, § 1, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 13576, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 13585, § 1, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 13772, § 1, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 13798, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14023, § 1, 4-18-94; Ord. No 14076, § 1, 6-6-94; Ord. No. 14123, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 14124, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 14250 § 1, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 14255 § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 14294 § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 14574 § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 14692 § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 14763 § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 14838 § 1, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 14980, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15274, § 1, 7-7-97; Ord. No. 15297, § 1, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 15310, § 1, 8-18-97; Ord. No. 15368, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 15855, § 1, 1-4-99; 15810, § 1, 11-16-98; Ord. No. 15906, § 1, 3-1-99; Ord. No. 16326, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 16353, § 1, 2-21-00; Ord. No. 16536, § 1, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 16537, § 1, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 16570, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 16601, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 16602, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 16684, § 1, 12-4-00; Ord. No. 16732, § 1, 1-20-01; Ord. No. 16733, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 16835, § 1, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 16968, § 1, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 17032, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 17318, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 17376, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 17751, § 1, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 17935, § 1, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 17981, § 1, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 18236, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18571, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 18720, § 1, 10-3-05; Ord. No. 18844, § 1, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 19477, § 1, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 19689, § 1, 10-1-07; Ord. No. 19933, § 1, 6-2-08; Ord. No. 20035, § 1, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 20128, § 1, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 20157, § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 20321, § 1, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 20340, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 20363, § 1, 8-3-09; Ord. No. 20441, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 20492, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 20503, § 1, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 20679, § 1, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 20699, § 1, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 20713, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 20755, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 20851, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 20896, § 1, 3-7-11; Ord. No. 20980, § 1, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 21046, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21083, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21112, § 1, 10-17-11; Ord. No. 21213, § 1, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 21276, § 1, 4-2-12; Ord. No. 21277, § 1, 4-2-12; Ord. No. 21300, § 1, 4-16-12; Ord. No. 21540, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 21721, § 1, 6-17-13; Ord. No. 21762, § 1, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 21773, § 1, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 21842, § 1, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 21858, § 1, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 21956, § 1, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 22130, § 1, 7-21-14 ; Ord. No. 22242, § 1, 10-6-14 ; Ord. No. 22385 , § 1, 3-16-15; Ord. No. 22496, § 1, 7-6-15 ; Ord. No. 22513, § 1, 7-20-15 ; Ord. No. 22605, § 1, 10-5-15 ; Ord. No. 23123 , § 1, 3-20-17; Ord. No. 23279 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 23432 , § 1, 1-2-18; Ord. No. 23628 , § 1, 9-4-18; Ord. No. 23810 , § 1, 3-18-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo, § 300.530.  
Sec. 14-325. - Same—Between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.: 
Birch Road, both sides, from Burnam Road to Bingham Road. 
Brandon Road, north side, from a point eight hundred (800) feet west of Providence Road to Bingham Road. 
Burnam Road, both sides, from Birch Road west five hundred (500) feet. 
Clarkson Road, south and west side, from Burnam Road for its entire length. 
East Bingham Road, north side, from four hundred (400) feet west of Wayne Road to Ridgeley Road. 
East Ridgeley Road, both sides, from three hundred (300) feet west of Wayne Road to Bingham Road. 
(Code 1964, § 12.610; Ord. No. 9929, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 11529, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 15524, § 1, 3-2-98; Ord. No. 16565, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 20128, § 1, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 14-326. - Same—Between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: 
North Boulevard, north side, from Eighth Street to Coats Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.619)  
Sec. 14-326.1. - Same—Between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Park Avenue, south and east side, from Providence Road to Ash Street. 
(Ord. No. 12593, § 2, 4-16-90)  
Sec. 14-327. - Same—At all times; Sundays excepted. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time, except as may be herein provided on Sunday, upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth: 
Short Street, both sides, except that parking shall be permitted on the east side thereof on Sunday. 
(Code 1964, § 12.600) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.535.  
Sec. 14-328. - Same—Between 7:30 am. and 6:00 p.m.; Sundays excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sunday: 
Beverly Street, both sides, from Interstate 70 service road, north to Bernadette Drive. 
Berrywood Drive, south side, from Keene Street to Portland Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.605(B); Ord. No. 15025, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 16536, § 1, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 23123 , § 1, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 14-328.1. - Same—Between 7:00 am. and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except on Sunday: 
Eighth Street, east side, from Wilkes Boulevard to North Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 16536, § 1, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 20699, § 1, 8-2-10)  
Sec. 14-329. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 12855, adopted Jan. 22, 1991, deleted § 14-329, which prohibited parking between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays, and derived from Code 1964, § 12.605(A).  
Sec. 14-330. - Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays excepted: 
Ann Street, west side, from Anthony Street to University Avenue. 
Calvin Drive, both sides, from East Walnut Street north to its terminus. 
Cliff Drive, north side, from Ann Street to a point two hundred ninety (290) feet east of Ann Street. 
Cliff Drive, south side, from forty-five (45) feet east of Ann Street to Rockhill Drive. 
Coats Avenue, east side, from Fairview Avenue to North Boulevard. 
William Street, west side, from Bass Avenue to University Avenue. 
William Street, west side, from Bouchelle Avenue to Rollins Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.615; Ord. No. 13525 § 1, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 13984 § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 16536, § 1, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 19035, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 21956, § 1, 1-21-14)  
Sec. 14-331. - Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays excepted: 
Lakeview Avenue, both sides, between Edison Street and a point one hundred (100) feet west of Popular Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.616)  
Sec. 14-332. - Same—Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays excepted: 
Clinkscales Road, east side, between Worley and Broadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.617)  
Sec. 14-332.1. - Same—Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when Columbia public schools are in session. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., when Columbia public schools are in session: 
Coats Street, east side, from Fairview Avenue to North Boulevard. 
Executive Drive, west side, from Southampton Drive to Corporate Plaza Drive. 
Fairview Avenue, north side, from Seventh Street to Eighth Street. 
Rogers Street, south side, from Circus Avenue to Eighth Street. 
(Ord. No. 20680, § 1, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 20850, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 22192, § 1, 9-2-14 )  
Sec. 14-333. - Same—Between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m.; between 3:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m.; Saturdays, Sundays, other days school not in session excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and other days school is not in session excepted: 
Rogers Street, south side, between Circus and Eighth Streets. 
(Code 1964, § 12.618)  
Sec. 14-333.1. - Same—Between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Park Avenue, north side, from Trinity Place to a point one hundred thirty (130) feet west of Trinity Place. 
(Ord. No. 12357, § 1, 9-18-89)  
Sec. 14-333.2. - Same—Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Lynn Street, north and south sides, between Garth Avenue and McBaine Avenue. 
Oak Street, east and west sides, between Worley Street and Sexton Road. 
(Ord. No. 16253, § 1, 11-15-99)  
Sec. 14-333.3. - Same—Between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Park Avenue, north side, from Providence Road to Trinity Place. 
(Ord. No. 12357, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 16253, § 1, 11-15-99)  
Sec. 14-333.4. - Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; days school is not in session excepted. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed within each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; days school is not in session excepted: 
Austin Avenue, south side, from Grand Avenue to Providence Road. 
Forest Avenue, north side, from Grand Avenue to Providence Road. 
Peach Way, both sides, entire length. 
(Ord. No. 16388, § 1, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 16897, § 1, 5-21-01; Ord. No. 17237, § 1, 4-1-02)  
Sec. 14-334. - Parking time limited in designated places. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block or designated city parking lot giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period of time hereinafter set forth. Changing of the position of a vehicle from one (1) point directly to another within the same block or parking lot shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(1)  Two-hour parking limit: 
Poplar Street, east side, from Business Loop 70 to Lakeview Avenue, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(2)  Thirty-minute parking limit: 
Pannell Street, east side, Business loop 70 to Smith Street. 
Park Avenue, north side, from Eighth Street west one hundred (100) feet, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Ripley Street, east side, from a point fifteen (15) feet south of Windsor Street, thence south sixty (60) feet, between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(3)  Ten-minute parking limit: 
Keene Street, west side, beginning at a point one hundred ninety (190) feet north of the north curbline of Lansing Avenue, thence north seventy-five (75) feet. 
Lee Street, west side, from Wilson Avenue south one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Three-hour parking limit: 
Park Avenue, south side, Providence Road to Seventh Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Fifth Street, both sides, Ash Street to Park Avenue, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(5)  Twenty-four minute parking limit: 
Walnut Street, south side, from the east curbline of Sixth Street, thence to a point sixty-five (65) feet east thereof. 
(6)  Twenty minute parking limit: Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when Columbia public schools are in session: 
Locust Street, south side, from Waugh Street to sixty (60) feet west of the west curbline of College Avenue. 
Waugh Street, east side, from Locust Street to three hundred fifty (350) feet south of the south curbline of Locust Street, except that vehicles displaying hang tags 1 through 10 issued by Locust Street Expressive Arts School are allowed to park for twenty-four (24) hours. 
(7)  Twenty minute parking limit: Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when Stephens College Children's School is in session: 
Melbourne Street, west side, from one hundred fifty-two (152) feet south of Windsor Street to ninety-two (92) feet north of Walnut Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.620; Ord. No. 10548, § 1, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 10549, § 1, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 10668, § 1, 8-5-85; Ord. No. 10767, § 1, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 10917, § 2, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 4-21-86; Ord. No. 11078, § 1, 6-2-86; Ord. No. 11147, § 1, 8-4-86; Ord. No. 11489, § 1, 5-19-87; Ord. No. 11855, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 12414, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 12595, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 14390 § 1, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 14883 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 20679, § 1, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 21083, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21523, § 1, 12-3-12; Ord. No. 21541, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 23684 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 14-335. - Reserved parking for police vehicles. 
(a)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the east side of Sixth Street, from the south curbline of Walnut Street to a point sixty-five (65) feet south thereof. The police department shall pay the parking utility a fee of nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) per year (or monthly proration thereof) for this space. 
(b)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the twenty-five (25) foot section of curb on the east side of Ninth Street between Broadway and Walnut immediately south of the east-west alley. The police department shall pay the parking utility a fee of nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) per year (or monthly proration thereof) for this space. 
(c)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the south side of Paquin Street, from the west curbline of Matthews Street to a point eighty-five (85) feet west thereof. 
(d)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the west side of Tenth Street from the curbline of Alley A to a point twenty-three (23) feet north thereof. 
(e)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the east side of Tenth Street, between the Bank of America parking lot to a point twenty-three (23) feet north thereof. 
(f)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the west side of Ninth Street, from the south curbline of Elm Street to a point thirty-eight (38) feet south thereof. 
(g)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the north side of Parkade Boulevard from a point one hundred sixty-five (165) feet east of Bear Creek Drive to a point one hundred ninety (190) feet east of Bear Creek Drive. 
(h)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a Columbia Police Department vehicle at any time on the west side of Richmond Avenue from the north curbline of Burnam Avenue to a point sixty (60) feet north thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12642, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 15518, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 16318, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 20442, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 20987, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 21132, § 1, 11-7-11; Ord. No. 22152, § 1, 8-4-14 ; Ord. No. 22211, § 1, 9-15-14, eff. 1-1-15 )  
Sec. 14-336. - No parking except school buses. 
When signs are erected, placed or installed giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle other than a school bus within or upon any of the streets or places hereinafter set forth: 
Hickman Avenue, south side, Seventh Street to Eighth Street, between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and other days school is not in session excepted. 
Hickman Avenue, south side, Fifth Street to Seventh Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., and between 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and other days school is not in session excepted. 
(Ord. No. 14390 § 1, 3-6-95)  
Secs. 14-337—14-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 14-351. - Authority to designate curb loading zones. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours, if applicable, during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1964, § 12.550)  
Sec. 14-352. - Application for curb loading zones. 
The director of public works may designate a curb loading zone in a parking meter zone upon the request of any persons or entities who make application for such zone. Such application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a fee of nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) per parking space per annum (or monthly proration thereof). The director of public works, upon designating a zone pursuant to an application, may, by general regulations, impose conditions upon the use of such zone. Every such designation shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. The director of public works shall keep a permanent record of all current zones designated under this section. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to confer upon any applicant an exclusive right to use a loading zone designated pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1964, § 12.555; Ord. No. 15518, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 22211, § 1, 9-15-14, eff. 1-1-15 )  
Sec. 14-353. - Standing in curb loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and loading of property or persons in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(Code 1964, § 12.560)  
Sec. 14-354. - Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to curb. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1964, § 12.485) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.430.  
Sec. 14-355. - No pick-up or drop-off zones. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, the following zones shall be designated as no pick-up or drop-off zones and no person driving a motor vehicle shall drop-off or pick-up passengers, between 10:00 p.m. and 2:30 a.m., in any place marked as a no pick-up or drop-off zone: 
Broadway, both sides, between Seventh Street and Short Street. 
Cherry Street, both sides, between Ninth Street and Tenth Street. 
Hitt Street, both sides, between Broadway and Cherry. 
Ninth Street, both sides, between Walnut Street and University Avenue. 
Sixth Street, both sides, between Broadway and Walnut Street. 
Tenth Street, both sides, between Broadway and Locust Street. 
(Ord. No. 21231, § 1, 2-6-12)  
Secs. 14-356—14-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ANGLE PARKING 
 
Sec. 14-371. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place pavement or curb markings indicating parking stalls or spaces. Vehicles shall be parked or stopped within such stalls or spaces in the direction of flow of the traffic or at an angle indicated by the markings. 
(b)  The city council shall determine, by ordinance, upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the state highway commission has determined, by resolution or order entered in its minutes, that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(c)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any streetcar tracks. 
(Code 1964, § 12.475)  
Sec. 14-372. - Obedience to angle parking signs or markers. 
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1964, § 12.480) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.425.  
Sec. 14-373. - Forty-five-degree angle parking. 
All vehicles shall be parked at an angle of approximately forty-five (45) degrees to the curb and headed into the curb on the following named streets: 
Ash Street, south side, between Seventh Street and Ninth Street. 
Broadway, north side, between Fourth Street and Tenth Street. 
Broadway, south side, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street, and between Sixth Street and Waugh Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.471; Ord. No. 15379, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 21475, § 1, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 14-374. - Thirty-degree angle parking. 
All vehicles shall be parked at an angle of approximately thirty (30) degrees to the curb and headed into the curb on the following named streets: 
Broadway, north side, between Tenth Street and Hitt Street. 
Broadway, south side, between Fifth Street and Sixth Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.472)  
Sec. 14-375. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21475, § 1, adopted October 15, 2012, repealed § 14-375, which pertained to forty-five-degree back-in angle parking and derived from Ord. No. 20364, § 1, 8-3-09.  
Secs. 14-376—14-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 14-391. - Hourly parking; fees for parking structures. 
(a)  Designation of municipal parking structures. Hourly parking shall be available in spaces clearly designated for hourly parking in the following parking structures as set forth in this section: 
Plaza Municipal Parking Garage located at the southwest corner of Walnut Street and Eighth Street; 
Short Street Municipal Parking Garage located at the southeast and southwest corners of Short Street and Walnut Street; 
Fifth and Walnut Municipal Parking Garage located at the southeast corner of Walnut Street and Fifth Street; 
Sixth and Cherry Municipal Parking Garage located at the southwest corner of Cherry Street and Sixth Street; 
Eighth and Cherry Municipal Parking Garage located at the northeast corner of Cherry Street and Eighth Street; 
Tenth and Cherry Municipal Parking Garage located at the southeast corner of Cherry Street and Tenth Street. 
(b)  Days and times hourly parking rates apply in parking structures. Hourly parking fees shall be assessed in all municipal parking structures between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, with the exception of city designated holidays. 
(c)  Hourly rate for parking structures equipped with a gate arm. In all municipal parking structures equipped with a gate arm at the entrance and exit, the hourly parking fees shall be levied at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) for every two (2) hours or any portion thereof; provided however, any vehicle parked in a parking structure less than one (1) hour shall not pay a fee for such parking. 
(d)  Hourly rate for parking structures without a gate arm system. In all municipal parking structures which are not equipped with a gate arm system, the hourly parking fees shall be levied at a rate equivalent to twenty-five cents ($0.25) per half hour. 
(e)  Payment. Payment requirements and methods of accepted payment shall be conspicuously posted at the entrance to each parking structure to give the user sufficient notice of payment obligations prior to entering the parking structure. All parking fees at parking structures equipped with a gate arm system shall be paid upon exit of the parking structure at the structure exit gate pursuant to the posted instructions. All parking fees for hourly parking at a parking structure without a gate arm system shall be paid upon parking the vehicle before the user leaves the parking structure. 
(f)  Lost ticket. A user who does not have a time-stamped entry card to determine the hourly parking fees due and payable upon exiting any parking structure equipped with a gate arm system shall be assessed a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(g)  Limitation on hourly parking in parking structure. No vehicle shall remain in an hourly parking space within a parking structure for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours without exiting the structure and re-entering the structure. 
(h)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person who does not otherwise hold a permit to park in a parking structure to park in any municipal parking structure without payment of the fees set forth herein and in the manner set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 12709, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 13983 § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 14515, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 14691, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 14809 § 1, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 14882 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 15732, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 17011, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 20986, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 21045, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21906, § 1, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 24131 , § 1, 12-16-19) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 12709, adopted Aug. 20, 1990, repealed former § 14-391 and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The repealed provisions pertained to coupon parking and derived from Code 1964, § 12.763; an ordinance Nov. 15, 1982; Ord. No. 10767, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 1985; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1986; and Ord. No. 11740, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 1988.  
Sec. 14-392. - Unmetered municipal parking lots. 
(a)  When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized officer or employee of the city or other authorized person, to park a vehicle at any time upon the following described property owned by the city: 
(1)  Water and Light building lot. At Seventh Street, north of and adjacent to the eastwest alley. 
(2)  Grissum Building lot. On the north side of Lakeview Avenue, adjacent to and west of the Grissum Building. 
(3)  Public Works storage lot. Located adjacent to and south of Chestnut Street and east of the MKT Railroad right-of-way. 
(4)  Worley Street property. At the northwest corner of Worley Street and West Boulevard North. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the hereinafter listed municipal parking lots, unless a parking sticker sold or issued under the authority of section 14-393 of these ordinances shall be conspicuously displayed and permanently affixed to such vehicle. 
(1)  Municipal Building lot. The south thirty (30) feet of the west one hundred (100) feet of the paved area south of the municipal building and the paved area immediately east of such building. 
(2)  Fire, Police Building lot. At the southeast corner of Sixth Street and Walnut, and northeast of the Fire—Police Building. 
(3)  Eighth and Ash rental lot. At the northwest corner of Eighth and Ash Streets, and the southwest corner of Eighth Street and Park Avenue. 
(4)  Municipal Lot No. 7. Located north of Ash Street, between Eighth and Ninth Streets. 
(Code 1964, § 12.635; Ord. No. 14882 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 17159, § 1, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 14-393. - Parking fees for unmetered off-street facilities. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the rates for a parking permit to park a single vehicle in an unmetered parking space designated for permit parking in the following municipal parking structures: 
Eighth Street and Cherry Street Garage, and 
Eighth Street and Walnut Street Plaza Garage, 
for a non-reserved parking space permit shall be: 
$100.00 per month, 
$295.00 per quarter, or 
$1,105.00 per year; and 
for a reserved parking space permit shall be: 
$140.00 per month. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the rates for a parking permit to park a single vehicle in an unmetered parking space designated for permit parking in the following municipal parking structures: 
Tenth Street and Cherry Street Garage, 
Sixth Street and Cherry Street Garage, 
Fifth Street and Walnut Street Garage, and 
Short Street Garage, 
for a non-reserved parking space permit shall be: 
$80.00 per month, 
$235.00 per quarter, or 
$885.00 per year; and 
for a reserved parking space permit shall be: 
$120.00 per month. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the rates for a parking permit to park a single vehicle in a reserved or non-reserved unmetered parking space designated for permit parking in the following municipal surface parking lots: 
Armory Parking Lot, 
Municipal Parking Lot, located on Walnut Street, south side, between Tenth Street and Short Street (a/k/a Municipal Lot No. 3), 
Ninth Street and Ash Street Parking Lot (a/k/a Municipal Lot No. 7), and 
Wabash Parking Lot, 
shall be: 
$75.00 per month, 
$220.00 per quarter, or 
$830.00 per year. 
(d)  The yearly permit rate for any municipal parking structure, and municipal parking lot, will be discounted by five (5) percent when purchased in groups of five (5) or more by any one (1) individual, business or agency. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, business or agency charging for the use of a permitted parking space to sell a radio frequency identification (RFID) parking permit, or permit issued under subsection (c) of this section, that has been purchased from the city for more than the original purchase amount. The individual, business, or agency shall be required to prorate the annual amount of such permit for the actual number of months utilized by the subsequent purchaser. In addition to any other penalties provided by this code, a violation of this subsection will result in the revocation of the purchased parking permit. 
(f)  A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed for replacement or non-return of each radio frequency identification (RFID) hangtag which is issued to a holder of a non-reserved or reserved parking permit. 
(g)  All persons, including city employees, who have purchased a parking permit in an unmetered off-street facility will be provided an unlimited use bus pass for no additional charge. 
(h)  No person shall park in a reserved or non-reserved permit parking space without a hangtag or sticker appropriately affixed to the vehicle. Members of the police department and any other agents of the city assigned to traffic duty or parking enforcement are hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed at the owner's expense any vehicle found parked or maintained in violation of these provisions. 
(i)  The city manager may authorize the use of hard-surfaced, city-owned property for temporary public parking lots. Parking spaces on temporary public parking lots shall be rented only on a monthly basis at the rate of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per month. 
(j)  The director of public works may issue special daily parking permits for unmetered off-street parking facilities to licensed businesses that need additional parking for their customers or guests. The director is authorized to make rules governing the issuance and revocation of such permits. The fee for these special daily parking permits shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the parking meter hood daily rate under section 14-424(a)(1). If a business obtains more than twenty (20) permits for a single day, an additional discount of five (5) percent for each additional ten (10) permits shall apply up to a maximum discount of fifty (50) percent of the parking meter hood daily rate under section 14-424(a)(1). 
(k)  Whenever it is determined by the city manager that the city or its parking utility would benefit from the long-term lease of certain parking spaces, the city manager is authorized to enter into negotiations to lease between five (5) and thirty (30) off-street parking spaces to any particular lessee under terms and conditions that the city manager deems advisable provided that: 
(1)  The annual rate per leased parking space is equal to the rate charged for parking spaces located on the upper-most uncovered floors of existing city parking garages no matter where the leased space is located; provided that, if covered space is leased, the annual rate per leased parking space shall be the rate charged for covered floors of existing city parking garages. No discount shall be given for leasing five (5) or more spaces. 
(2)  The city retains the right to change the location of the leased spaces at any time dependent upon the needs of the city; however, if the city determines it is necessary to move the leased spaces to another city lot, the lessee shall have the right to terminate the lease effective as of the date of relocation. 
All leases of long-term parking spaces shall be approved by the city council prior to becoming effective. 
(Code 1964, § 12.765; Ord. No. 9873, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 10340, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 10416, § 1, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 10548, § 1, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 10668, § 1, 8-5-85; Ord. No. 10767, § 1, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 10917, § 12, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 10924; § 1, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 11376, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 11740, § 2, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 11743, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 11857, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 12708, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 12709, § 2, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 12787, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 13983 § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 14515, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 14516, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 14691, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 15732, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 15856, § 1, 1-4-99; Ord. No. 16148, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 16223, § 1, 11-1-99; Ord. No. 17011, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17145, § 1, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 19036, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 19766, § 1, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 19819, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 20047, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20522, § 1, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 20577, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 20986, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 21045, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21428, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 21801, § 1, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13; Ord. No. 21857, § 1, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 22211, § 1, 9-15-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 22573, § 1, 9-21-15, eff. 1-1-16 ; Ord. No. 23301 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23342 , § 1, 10-16-17, eff. 1-1-18; Ord. No. 23965 , § 1, 8-19-19; Ord. No. 24028 , § 1, 9-16-19; Ord. No. 24071 , § 1, 11-4-19) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 23342, § 1, adopted October 16, 2017, states, "This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after January 1, 2018.  
Sec. 14-394. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21259, § 1, passed March 5, 2012, repealed § 14-394, which pertained to reserved parking; county vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 11785, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 13073, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14461, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 14882, § 1, 6-17-96.  
Sec. 14-395. - Reserved parking; city vehicles. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in the following designated municipal parking lot spaces except clearly marked city vehicles: 
(1)  Municipal parking lot, the west three (3) spaces located south of the parking plaza and north of the alley north of Broadway between Seventh and Eighth Streets. 
(Ord. No. 14461, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 14882, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 21195, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 12709, adopted Aug. 20, 1990, repealed former § 14-395, which pertained to a two-hour parking fee for certain unmetered off-street facilities and derived from Ord. No. 11857, § 1(14-394), adopted April 18, 1988. Ord. No. 14461, § 1, inserted a new section and was enacted 4-17-95.  
Sec. 14-396. - Violations. 
(a)  Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, except that a fine shall not be less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within fifteen (15) days of the violation and not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) if paid more than fifteen (15) days after violation. 
(b)  Each hour that a violation of this division continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14882 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 22210, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 14-397. - Special events. 
The city manager may lease or authorize the use of off-street parking facilities for special events if the manager determines that: 
(a)  The special event would not interfere with the primary function of the parking facility during those hours when parking fees are charged; 
(b)  No structural alterations would be required and no structural or cosmetic damage would be likely to occur to the facility; 
(c)  The facility is large enough to accommodate the event; 
(d)  The event would not place a significant burden upon the police, fire, public works or other city departments which may be called upon to police, monitor or clean up after the event; and 
(e)  The organizers of the event have sufficient insurance coverage to protect the city from any damage or injury claims arising out of the event. 
(Ord. No. 16129, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Secs. 14-398—14-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 14-411. - Installation; hours of operation; parking time limited. 
Parking meters shall be installed and maintained on the streets and off-street parking lots set forth in this division, and no person shall, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for off-street parking and 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. for on-street parking, on any day except Sundays and public holidays, park a vehicle in any parking space on such street alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed, for a period of time longer than is indicated in this division for any street or off-street parking facility or lot established in this division. 
(Code 1964, § 12.675; Ord. No. 22211, § 1, 9-15-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 22288, § 1, 12-1-14, eff. 1-1-15 )  
Sec. 14-411.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22193, § 1, adopted September 2, 2014 , repealed § 14-411.1, which pertained to disabled parking in parking meter zones and derived from Ord. No. 14142, § 1, 7-18-94.  
Sec. 14-412. - Changing from one (1) metered parking space to another in the same block or city parking lot deemed one (1) continuous period of time. 
(a)  For purposes of this division, a change of the position of a vehicle from one (1) metered parking space to another metered parking space within the same block or city parking lot shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period of time. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, a "metered parking space" is defined as any parking space alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed. 
(Code 1964, § 12.676)  
Sec. 14-413. - Rates. 
(a)  Parking meter rates are hereby established for parking meter zones as set forth in this division. The period of parking time received for each coin of a specific denomination shall be shown on the parking meter. Rates for parking meter zones as shown by sections of this division are: 
(1)  Five (5) minutes for each five cents ($0.05): 
a.  One-hour parking meter zone, section 14-416.1. 
b.  Two-hour parking meter zone, section 14-416. 
c.  Four-hour parking meter zone, section 14-415. 
d.  Five-hour parking meter zone, section 14-414.1. 
(2)  Five (5) minutes for each five cents ($0.05): Ten-hour parking meter zone, section 14-414. 
(3)  Five (5) minutes for each five cents ($0.05): Twenty-four minute parking meter zone, section 14-417. 
(4)  Except that the parking meter rate for all City of Columbia parking meters located in the campus area shall be one dollar ($1.00) per hour for all periods of time between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except on Sundays and holidays. 
(b)  A veteran displaying special license plates issued under RSMo § 301.145, 301.443, 301.451 or 301.456, or a veteran who is a Bronze Star recipient who displays a placard issued by the director of revenue under RSMo § 304.725, may park a motor vehicle, weighing not more than six thousand (6,000) pounds gross weight, without charge, in any metered parking space. This subsection does not exempt a vehicle displaying the special license plates or placard from complying with other city parking regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 12.681; Ord. No. 10341, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 14515, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 17011, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 20986, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 21182, § 1, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 21801, § 2, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 14-414. - Ten-hour zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking space on the following designated streets or off-street parking lots alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a ten-hour parking meter is installed, for a longer period of time than ten (10) hours at the rate established in section 14-413: 
Alley between Sixth Street and Seventh Street , bordered by Ash Street and Walnut Street. 
Ash Street, both sides, Fourth to Fifth Streets. 
Ash Street, south sides, Fifth to Sixth Streets. 
Ash Street, both sides, Ninth to Tenth Streets. 
Ash Street, both sides, Sixth Street to Seventh Street. 
Ash Street, north side, between Orr Street and St. James Street. 
Ash Street, north side, from a point one hundred fifty feet (150) west of College Avenue to St. Joseph Street. 
Conley Avenue, south side, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street. 
Locust Street, both sides, between Tenth Street and Hitt Street. 
Locust Street, north side, between Hitt Street and Waugh Street. 
Matthews Street, east side from Paquin Street to University Avenue. 
Municipal parking lot , on the southeast corner of the Broadway and Providence Road intersection. 
North Fourth Street, both sides, Broadway to Walnut Street. 
North Fifth Street, both sides, Walnut to Ash Streets. 
North Seventh Street, both sides, Ash Street to Park Avenue. 
Park Avenue, north side, from Tenth Street to Rogers Street. 
Park Avenue, south side, from Seventh Street to Eighth Street. 
St. James Street, west side, from a point one hundred forty (140) feet south of Park Avenue to Ash Street. 
St. Joseph Street, east side, between Park Avenue and Ash Street. 
Walnut Street, both sides, from a point, one hundred fifty-six (156) feet east of Providence Road to Fifth Street. 
Walnut Street, both sides, between First Street and Providence Road. 
Waugh Street, west side, from Broadway thence south two hundred sixty-eight (268) feet. 
First Street, both sides, between Broadway and Ash Street. 
Second Street, both sides, from Broadway to Walnut. 
(Code 1964, § 12.721; Ord. No. 10029, § 12-19-83; Ord. No. 10326, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 10412, § 1, 1-17-85; Ord. No. 11259, § 1, 10-20-86; Ord. No. 11820, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 14388 § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 14516, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 15250, § 2, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 15766, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 20200, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 20679, § 1, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 21564, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21750, § 1, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 ; Ord. No. 22536, § 1, 8-3-15 ; Ord. No. 23708 , § 1, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-414.1. - Five-hour zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking spaces on the following designated streets alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a five-hour parking meter is installed for a longer period of time than five (5) hours at the rate established in section 14-413: 
Conley Avenue, south side, Fifth Street to Tiger Avenue. 
Elm Street, south side, beginning from a point three hundred ninety-two (392) feet from Providence Road to Fifth Street. 
Hitt Street, both sides, Locust Street to University Avenue. 
Hitt Street, east side, Rollins Street north to one hundred ninety-five (195) feet north of Conley Avenue; and west side, Rollins Street north to the "closed campus" zone. 
Paquin Street, south side, from Hitt Street to Waugh Street. 
Paquin Street, north side, from Matthews Street to College Avenue. 
Stewart Road, north side, Fifth Street to Sixth Street and south side from Fourth Street to Fifth Street. 
University Avenue, south side, Hitt Street to two hundred (200) feet west of College Avenue. 
Waugh Street, east side, from Locust Street to E. Broadway. 
Fifth Street, west side, Locust Street to four hundred fifty (450) feet north of Stewart Road. 
Fifth Street, east side, from Elm Street to two hundred fifty (250) feet north of Stewart Road. 
Sixth Street, west side, from Stewart Road to Conley Street. 
Sixth Street, west side, from Elm Street six hundred fifty-five (655) feet south. 
Sixth Street, west side, from Stewart Road one hundred sixty-one (161) feet north. 
Tenth Street, west side, from Park Avenue to Rogers Street and east side from a point seventy-two (72) feet north of Park Avenue and Rogers Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12-712; Ord. No. 10341, § 1, 10-15-8; Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 15811, § 1, 11-16-98; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 17376, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 17395, § 1, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 18844, § 1, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 19818, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 20472, § 1, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 20492, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 20755, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 20981, § 1, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 ; Ord. No. 23279 , § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 14-415. - Four-hour zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking space on the following designated streets or off-street parking lots, alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a four-hour parking meter is installed for a longer period of time than four (4) hours at the rate established in section 14-413: 
Elm Street, south side, between Sixth Street and Fifth Street. 
Hitt Street, west side, between Cherry and Locust Streets. 
Locust Street , both sides, from Fifth Street to Sixth Street. 
Locust Street, both sides, between Sixth and Seventh Streets. 
Locust Street, both sides, between Seventh and Eighth Streets. 
Municipal parking lot adjacent to the Gentry Building on the southwest corner of the Seventh Street and Broadway, excepting the three (3) spaces at the southwest corner of the Gentry Building and one (1) space at the southeast corner of the Gentry Building which shall be reserved for authorized city vehicles only and posted as such. 
Fourth Street , both sides, from Cherry Street to Locust Street, except the eighty (80) feet north of Locust Street. 
Fifth Street , both sides, between Walnut Street and Broadway. 
Seventh Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Walnut Street. 
Seventh Street, both sides, between Elm and Locust Streets. 
Eighth Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Park Avenue. 
Ninth Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Park Avenue. 
Tenth Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Park Avenue. 
Tenth Street, both sides, between Elm and Locust Streets. 
(Code 1964, § 12.711; Ord. No. 10687, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 11741, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 12710, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 13074, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 15250, § 1, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 15766, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 16408, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 17376, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 )  
Sec. 14-416. - Two-hour zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking space on the following designated streets or off-street parking lots, alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed, for a longer period of time than two (2) hours at the rate established in section 14-413, except for a mobile food vendor with a meter bag issued by the public works department: 
Ash Street, both sides, Seventh to Eighth. 
Ash Street, north side, Eighth to Ninth. 
Broadway, north side, from First Street to Providence Road. 
Broadway, both sides, from Fourth Street to Waugh Street. 
Broadway, north side, from Hitt Street to College Avenue, except the first five (5) spaces west of Short Street. 
Broadway, south side, from Hitt Street to Short Street. 
Cherry Street, both sides, between Fourth Street and Hitt Street. 
Elm Street , north side, between Tenth Street and Hitt Street. 
Locust Street, both sides, between Eighth Street and Tenth Streets. 
Locust Street, north side, between Fourth and Fifth Streets. 
Locust Street, north side, between Waugh Street and College Avenue. 
Municipal parking lot, Wabash lot, located east of Tenth Street and south of Ash Street, including only those spaces on the south side of the lot lying immediately north of the alley. 
Orr Street, east side, between Ash Street and Park Avenue. 
Orr Street, west side, between Walnut Street and Park Avenue. 
St. James Street, east side, between Park Avenue and Ash Street. 
University Avenue, south side, between Ninth Street and Hitt Street. 
Walnut Street, both sides, between Sixth Street and Orr Street. 
Walnut Street, south side, from the west curbline of Orr Street extended south, thence to a point seventy (70) feet west of the west curbline of Short Street. 
Fourth Street, both sides, from Broadway to Cherry Street. 
Fourth Street, both sides, from Locust Street north eighty (80) feet. 
Fourth Street , east side, Walnut Street to Ash Street. 
Fourth Street , west side, Ash Street south to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Walnut Street. 
Fifth Street , both sides, between Broadway and Locust Street. 
Sixth Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Elm Street. 
Seventh Street, both sides, between Walnut Street and Locust Street. 
Seventh Street, east side, from Broadway north to the alley north of Broadway. 
Eighth Street, both sides, between Walnut Street and Elm Street. 
Eighth Street, east side, between Walnut Street and Ash Street. 
Ninth Street, both sides, between Walnut Street and Elm Street. 
Ninth Street, east side between Ash Street and Walnut Street. 
Ninth Street, west side, from Elm Street three hundred ninety-two (392) feet south. 
Ninth Street, west side, from University Avenue two hundred forty-two (242) feet north. 
Ninth Street, west side, between the alley south of Ash Street and Walnut Street. 
Tenth Street, both sides, between Ash Street and Locust Street. 
Tenth Street, east side, from Park Avenue to a point seventy-two (72) feet north of Park Avenue. 
(Code 1964, § 12.701; Ord. No. 9977, § 1, 10-17-83; Ord. No. 10029, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 10326, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 11259, § 2, 10-20-86; Ord. No. 11310, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 11741, § 2, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 11784, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 11820, § 2, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 12710, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 13074, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14388, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 14461, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 14516, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 15766, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 16408, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 17395, § 1, 7-5-02; Ord. No. 18776, § 1, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 20075, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 21564, § 1, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21992, § 1, 3-3-14; Ord. No. 22045, § 1, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 ; Ord. No. 23761 , § 1, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 23965 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 14-416.1. - One-hour zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking space on the following designated streets or off-street parking lots, alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed, for a longer period of time than one (1) hour at the rate established in section 14-413: 
Ash Street, north side, from College Avenue to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west. 
Ash Street, south side, Eighth to Ninth. 
(Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 21045, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21564, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Sec. 14-417. - Twenty-four minute zones. 
No person shall, during the hours set forth in this division, park a vehicle in any parking space in any of the following designated street locations, alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed for a longer period of time than twenty-four (24) minutes at the rate established by section 14-413. Twenty-four-minute parking meter zones established by this section shall be applicable within and shall supersede parking meter zones established in sections 14-414 through 14-416 in the event of conflict. 
Broadway, south side, from a point one hundred fifteen (115) feet east of the east curbline of Sixth Street, thence east twenty-four (24) feet. 
Cherry Street, north side, from the west curbline of Seventh Street, thence to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet west thereof. 
Cherry Street, north side, from a point one hundred seventy (170) feet east of the east curbline of Seventh Street, thence east twenty (20) feet. 
Cherry Street, north side, from a point eighty-five (85) feet east of the east curbline of Eighth Street, thence east forty-two (42) feet. 
City Hall Annex parking lot, spaces north of drive-through facility. 
Parking lot, north of the Daniel Boone Building, east of Seventh Street, and south of the alley north of Broadway. 
Walnut Street, north side, from a point eighty-five (85) feet east of the east curbline of Eighth Street, thence east forty-two (42) feet. 
Walnut Street, both sides, from Fifth Street to Sixth Street. 
Walnut Street, south side, from the east curbline of Sixth Street, thence to a point sixty-five (65) feet east thereof. 
Walnut Street, south side, from a point thirteen (13) feet east of the east curbline of Ninth Street, thence east twenty-four (24) feet. 
North Fourth Street, west side, Walnut Street to one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Walnut Street. 
Seventh Street, west side, from a point eighty (80) feet south of the south curbline of Broadway, thence south forty (40) feet. 
Eighth Street, east side, from the north line of the alley south of Broadway, thence north twenty-five (25) feet. 
Eighth Street, east side, from a point one hundred ten (110) feet south of the south curbline of Locust Street, thence south twenty-five (25) feet. 
Eighth Street, west side, from Elm Street north sixty (60) feet. 
Eighth Street, west side, from a point twenty-five (25) feet south of the south curbline of Locust Street, thence south twenty-five (25) feet. 
Ninth Street, west side, from Ash Street south to the alley south of Ash Street. 
(Code 1964, § 12.691; Ord. No. 10341, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 10412, § 1, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 10548, § 1, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 12538, § 1, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 12642, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 13074 § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14223 § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14461 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 18776, § 1, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 19818, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 21045, § 1, 8-15-11)  
Sec. 14-418. - Payment for parking when vehicle is parked. 
The driver of every vehicle which shall be parked, during the time when the time limit parking regulations are in effect, in a parking space alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed and maintained, shall immediately, upon parking such vehicle, pay for such parking, as stated on the meter, according to the length of time to be parked in such space. 
(Code 1964, § 12.730; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 )  
Sec. 14-419. - Parking limited as indicated by meter. 
No vehicle shall be parked in a parking space alongside of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed and maintained for a longer period of time than the time limit indicated by such meter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.735; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 )  
Sec. 14-420. - Parking after time expired. 
No vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space along side of, next to, in front of, or behind which a parking meter is installed and maintained after payment for such space has expired. 
(Code 1964, § 12.740; Ord. No. 14882 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 22473, § 1, 6-15-15 )  
Sec. 14-421. - Depositing coin to extend legal parking time prohibited. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter a coin for the purpose of extending the parking time limit in any zone beyond the time limit fixed in this division for parking in such parking space. 
(Code 1964, § 12.745)  
Sec. 14-422. - Depositing of slugs, damaging, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States, and no person shall willfully mar, deface, tamper with, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed and maintained within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12.750)  
Sec. 14-423. - Parking meter hoods—Generally. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place parking meter hoods on any parking meters in the parking meter district when such parking meters are not to be used and parking is to be prohibited on the street because of emergency or other reason, as provided in this chapter. When such parking meter hoods are in place, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in the parking meter space. 
(Code 1964, § 12.755)  
Sec. 14-424. - Same—Special hoods. 
(a)  The city manager may authorize the issuance of marked parking meter hoods to the following persons at the rates stated herein, which shall be in lieu of meter charges: 
(1)  Contractors and service agencies, who exhibit a need to park vehicles at specific meter locations in order to perform their work—Ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(2)  Private utilities companies, for the parking of service vehicles identifiable as such by color or signs—Ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(3)  Churches and any business that establishes a business-related need for the issuance of such hoods—Ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(4)  Handicapped persons, who establish an employment need for the issuance of such hood and who either are nonambulatory or who present a physician's certificate of need with respect to their handicap—Two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per day or fifty dollars ($50.00) per month. 
(b)  The city manager may, by regulations, impose conditions and limitations upon the issuance and use of such hoods. The city manager may also withdraw or revoke hoods issued hereunder, provided that any prepayments are refunded pro rata. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the authority to issue annual and/or monthly parking hoods to service agencies, private utility companies, theater operators and funeral home operators who establish a reasonably definite basis of estimating their annual use of such hoods. The minimum fee for issuance of annual hoods shall be sixty cents ($0.60) per estimated hour of usage, provided that the minimum annual hood fee shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) payable in advance. The monthly fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(d)  The city manager shall have the authority to issue parking hoods to the chief of police for the use of volunteer police workers while working in the police building and for use by the municipal court bailiff for duties relating to transporting inmates to and from municipal court. The police department shall pay the parking utility a monthly fee of sixty cents ($0.60) per estimated hour of hood usage. 
(e)  The city manager shall have the authority to issue parking hoods to not-for-profit organizations, without charge, when the city manager determines that waiver of the rental fee is in the public interest and that doing so would contribute to the public awareness of, accessibility to, participation in, and support for the artistic, cultural or charitable development in the city and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. 
(Code 1964, § 12.756; Ord. No. 11311, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 12643, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 15518, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 16523, § 1, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 20986, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 21309, § 1, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 22573, § 1, 9-21-15, eff. 1-1-16 )  
Sec. 14-425. - Use of revenue. 
All sums collected from the use of parking meters shall be paid to the parking facilities revenue account. 
(Code 1964, § 12.760)  
Sec. 14-426. - Violations. 
(a)  Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, except that a fine shall not be less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within fifteen (15) days of the violation and not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) if paid more than fifteen (15) days after the violation. 
(b)  Each hour that a violation of this division continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14882 § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 19250, § 1, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 20869, § 1, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 22210, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Secs. 14-427—14-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DISABLED PARKING 
 
Sec. 14-441. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Physically disabled. Any natural person with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk, as determined by a licensed physician as follows: 
(1)  The person cannot walk fifty (50) feet without stopping to rest; or 
(2)  The person cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; or 
(3)  Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the person's forced respiratory expiratory volume for one (1) second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one (1) liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than sixty (60) mm/hg on room air at rest; or 
(4)  Uses portable oxygen; or 
(5)  Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in severity as class III or class IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association; or 
(6)  Is severely limited in his ability to walk due to an arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition. 
Properly marked as reserved for disabled parking only. Any parking space or any area adjacent to a parking space which is indicated by a sign upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of accessibility in white on a blue background and appropriate wording to indicate the space is reserved for the exclusive use of parking or accessing vehicles displaying a distinguishing license plate or card. 
(b)  All signs provided for in this division shall conform to the size requirements and posting rules and guidelines established by the uniform Traffic Control Manual unless these standards are modified by the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1610; Ord. No. 10121, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 11368, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 13878 § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 14599, § 1, 8-21-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-442. - Repealed by Ord. No. 13878 § 1, 11-15-93.  
Sec. 14-442.1. - City shall provide adequate markings. 
(a)  Upon notice from any business, organization or individual that they wish to designate disabled parking spaces upon property owned or controlled by them, the traffic engineer is hereby authorized to meet and confer with the requesting party to determine the exact location and number of disabled parking spaces desired. 
(b)  The traffic engineer shall thereafter post the agreed upon disabled spaces with legally adequate signs and shall further mark the spaces so that the posting and marking conforms to the requirements of law. 
(c)  The cost of posting and marking disabled parking spaces shall be charged to the requesting party and said cost shall be paid prior to the posting and marking. This charge shall not exceed the actual cost to the city of marking the space. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an improperly marked disabled parking space upon any property owned or controlled by them. In addition to any other penalty imposed by law, the city traffic engineer is authorized to abate a violation of this subsection by removing or painting out the illegal parking space markings. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1625; Ord. No. 10121, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 11035, § 1, 5-5-86)  
Sec. 14-443. - Violations; parking prohibited without display of permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit any vehicle to remain in any parking space properly marked as reserved for disabled parking only, unless such vehicle shall display a valid state disabled license plate or placard issued under the provisions of Section 301.142 et seq., RSMo. 1978, or any other state, or a valid handicapped license plate issued by the Veterans Administration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to permit a vehicle under that person's control to block access to any parking space properly marked as reserved for disabled parking or to block access in any manner to any ramp, entrance or loading area designed or marked for disabled access and use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle properly marked under this section to park such vehicle in a space reserved for disabled parking unless there is a physically disabled occupant in the vehicle at the time of parking or when a physically disabled person is being delivered or collected by a properly marked vehicle which is parked for the sole use of the physically disabled person. 
(d)  The registered owner of any motor vehicle found to be illegally parked in violation of subsection (a) of this provision or blocking access in violation of subsection (b) shall be deemed to be responsible for such violation. This presumption shall be rebuttable. 
(e)  The violations detailed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall be applicable whether such violations occur on private or public property so long as the public or private spaces are properly marked in the manner set forth herein, and so long as the ramp, entrance or style is clearly marked in a manner readily visible to the public at large. 
(f)  Violation of the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12.1630; Ord. No. 10121, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 11368, § 2, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 13878 § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 14853 § 1, 5-20-96)  
Sec. 14-444. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16077, § 1, adopted July 6, 1999, repealed § 14-444, which pertained to towing and derived from Code 1964, § 12.1640.  
Sec. 14-445. - Meter Parking. 
(a)  Any licensed driver with a vehicle registered in his or her name which displays a current handicapped or disabled license plate or hangtag who has a disability which prevents placement of a coin in a parking meter or operation of a parking meter may purchase a sticker or other device from the City authorizing the person to park in a metered space without depositing the necessary coins in a meter. 
(1)  The person may make application for the sticker or device with the public works department. 
(2)  Application for a sticker or device must be accompanied by a signed physician's statement certifying that the individual has a disability which prevents the placement of a coin in a parking meter or the operation of the meter and indicating whether the disability is permanent or temporary and, if temporary, stating when such disability is expected to end. 
(3)  The sticker or device shall be valid for one (1) year. Applications for renewal of the sticker or device shall be accompanied by sufficient information to allow City staff to determine whether the original disability still exists. 
(b)  The fee for a sticker or device allowing parking at a meter without depositing a coin shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(c)  Stickers or devices authorized by this section shall be displayed on the windshield of the vehicle in the upper left corner. 
(d)  Stickers or devices authorized by this section shall not be transferrable. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the person to whom the sticker or device is issued to use the sticker or device to park at a meter and not deposit the required coins. 
(e)  Vehicles displaying an authorized sticker or device remain subject to all other parking ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 14853 § 1, 5-20-96)  
Secs. 14-446—14-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS 
 
Sec. 14-461. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 12.120) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.130.  
Sec. 14-462. - Manual and specifications for traffic control devices. 
Except as otherwise allowed by ordinance, all traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway commission or resolution adopted by the legislative body of the city. Except as otherwise allowed by ordinance, all signs or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1964, § 12.125; Ord. No. 14474, § 1, 5-1-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.135.  
Sec. 14-463. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.130) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.140.  
Sec. 14-464. - Official traffic control devices—When required for enforcement purposes. 
No provisions of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1964, § 12.135) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.145.  
Sec. 14-465. - Same—Presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1964, § 12.140) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.150.  
Sec. 14-466. - Traffic control signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1) at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 14-470, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 14-470, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown except as provided in subsection (3)b. of this section. 
b.  The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red signal, may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection, except that the state highway commission with reference to an intersection involving a state highway, and local authorities with reference to an intersection involving other highways under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions so require. Such prohibition shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 14-470, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  Application. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1964, § 12.145) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.155.  
Sec. 14-466.1. - Automated traffic control systems; violations and penalties. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to promote public safety at intersections controlled by automated traffic control signals. A violation of this section will be an infraction and civil in nature with limited sanctions consisting of fines only which are punitive in order to garner compliance with the city's traffic regulations. No points are to be assessed upon a conviction of this ordinance, nor will jail time be a consideration of punishment. This is a strict liability offense and no regard is given as to the offender's state of mind at the time of the violation. 
(b)  The following definitions apply to this section: 
Automated traffic control system means a system consisting of devices with one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with traffic control signals as defined in section 14-466 to automatically produce photographs, a video tape or other recorded images of motor vehicles approaching and within an intersection in violation of this section. 
Automated traffic control system records means photographs, video tape or other recorded images of motor vehicles approaching and within an intersection in violation of this section. 
Owner means a registered owner or owners of a motor vehicle, or a lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six (6) months or more as shown by the records of the state department of revenue. 
(c)  Any automated traffic control system installed on a street or a highway in the city shall meet applicable requirements established by the State of Missouri. 
(d)  The following rules apply in all prosecutions for violations of this section that are based on automated traffic control system records: 
(1)  Upon the filing of information in municipal court, the court clerk shall issue a summons with a court date pursuant to Missouri Supreme Court Rule 37. The court clerk shall serve the summons on the owner of the vehicle involved in the alleged violation of this section by sending the summons by first class mail to the owner at the owner's last known address. The court clerk shall mail the summons within sixty (60) days after the alleged violation. The court clerk shall include the following in the mailing: 
a.  The summons; 
b.  A copy of the violation notice; 
c.  A copy of the recorded image or images of the alleged violation, which forms the basis for the information; and 
d.  A copy of the supplemental violation notice described in subsection (c)(2). 
(2)  The supplemental violation notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  A statement that the automated traffic control system record will be submitted as evidence in the municipal court trial of the violation of this section; and 
b.  A statement that if, at the time and place of the violation, the motor vehicle was within the intersection pursuant to the following justifications, the court or the prosecutor may terminate the prosecution of the owner. The justifications for termination of prosecution include: 
i.  The traffic control signal was not in a proper position so that it was sufficiently observable by an ordinarily observant person; 
ii.  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or fire department official; 
iii.  The operator of the motor vehicle was yielding the right-of-way to an approaching emergency vehicle; 
iv.  The motor vehicle was part of a funeral procession pursuant to RSMo § 194.503; 
v.  The motor vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle operating in compliance with RSMo § 304.022; 
vi.  The motor vehicle or license plates were stolen and the vehicle was being operated without permission of the owner, provided the theft was timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or 
vii.  Ownership of the vehicle had been transferred prior to the violation. 
(3)  A violation notice and summons mailed under this section is presumed to have been received by the owner on the fifth day after the date the violation notice is mailed. 
(4)  Liability for a violation of this section is based on ownership of the vehicle without regard to operation except as provided by RSMo § 304.120.4. If the owner of a vehicle is claiming the exception under RSMo § 304.120.4, the owner must furnish the name, address, and operator's license number of the person renting or leasing the motor vehicle at the time of the violation within thirty (30) days from the time of receipt of written request for such information. 
(5)  If, at the time and place of the violation, the motor vehicle was operated under one of the justifications contained within paragraph (d)(2)b. above, the owner may submit information to that effect by affidavit, on a form provided by the city, before the municipal court proceeding, or under oath at the municipal court proceeding. If an owner furnishes satisfactory evidence pursuant to this subsection, the court or the prosecutor may terminate the prosecution of the owner. The prosecutor may initiate prosecution against a person clearly identified in the evidence as the operator of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(e)  All automated traffic control systems must be identified by appropriate advance warning signs conspicuously posted not more than three hundred (300) feet from the location of the automated traffic control system location. 
(f)  Violation. Except as provided in this section, a person commits the infraction of this public safety ordinance when a motor vehicle of which that person is the registered owner is present in an intersection while the traffic control signal for the intersection is emitting a steady red signal for the direction of travel or orientation of that vehicle in or through the intersection, unless the motor vehicle is in the process of making a lawful turn, or unless the motor vehicle entered the intersection while the traffic control signal for the intersection was not emitting a steady red signal for the direction of travel or orientation of that vehicle in or through the intersection and the motor vehicle did not obstruct the passage of other motor vehicles or pedestrians. 
(g)  Penalty. The penalty for a violation of this infraction shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The judge of the municipal court shall set the fine amount upon the court's violations bureau schedule. Additionally, as operation is not an element in the violation of this section, no report to the Missouri Department of Revenue is authorized as the violation is deemed a non-moving violation. Under no circumstances may a person be imprisoned for a violation of this section; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the judge's authority for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 19165, § 1, 8-21-06; Ord. No. 20370, § 1, 8-3-09; Ord. No. 21785, § 1, 8-19-13)  
Sec. 14-467. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad crossings shall be governed by the rules set forth in section 14-246 of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 12.155) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.165.  
Sec. 14-468. - Lane direction control signals, generally. 
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
(Code 1964, § 12.160) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.170.  
Sec. 14-469. - Temporary traffic lanes. 
The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway, and all police officers may direct traffic in conformance with such signs. When such authorized signs have been erected designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the intersection given by such signs. 
(Code 1964, § 12.294(D))  
Sec. 14-470. - Pedestrian control signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian control signals are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Steady WALK or WALKING PERSON symbol conforming to those allowed by section 14-462. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Flashing DON'T WALK or flashing UPRAISED HAND conforming to those allowed by section 14-462. Indicates that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already started to cross on the steady WALK or WALKING PERSON symbol signal indication shall proceed out of the traveled way and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(3)  Steady DON'T WALK or UPRAISED HAND symbol conforming to those allowed by section 14-462. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal. 
(4)  If a pedestrian signal has number indication of the general time available for the pedestrian to complete a crossing movement (commonly referred to as a Pedestrian Countdown Timer), the pedestrian signal shall conform to those allowed by section 14-462 or the current Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Code 1964, § 12.150; Ord. No. 18131, § 1, 6-21-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.160.  
Sec. 14-471. - Designation of crosswalks; establishment of safety zones. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1964, § 12.190) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.195.  
Sec. 14-472. - Traffic control for street construction and maintenance operations. 
(a)  Manual and specifications for devices at worksites. All traffic control signs, signals, barricades and devices used at construction and maintenance worksites within city street rights-of-way shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the director of public works and filed in the office of the city clerk. The manual shall serve as the instrument to govern the necessity for and placement of traffic control devices at worksites. 
(b)  Responsibility of director of public works. The director of public works or a designated representative shall be responsible for providing all inspections required to determine that construction and maintenance operations within the city street rights-of-way are conducted in accordance with the provisions of the "Traffic—Control Manual for Street Construction and Maintenance Operations," and is hereby granted authority to make and adopt such rules and regulations as deemed necessary to implement and carry out the purpose of the manual not inconsistent therewith. Rules and regulations so made and adopted shall be in writing and shall make reference to this section for their authority. They shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public works. 
(c)  Stop work orders. The director of public works or an authorized agent shall have authority to stop work whenever any worksite within the city street rights-of-way is found in violation of the provisions of the manual or the applicable regulations, plans or specifications approved and/or adopted by the director of public works under the provisions of this section. Any person directed to stop work and who shall not stop or who shall continue to work in violation of this section shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. Whenever the director or authorized agent directs work to be stopped, the permittee shall, as soon as possible, be advised of the reasons for work stoppage and of the necessary revisions in the work site traffic control which must be made prior to permitting work to continue. 
(d)  Appeals. Any provision of the "Traffic Control Manual for Street Construction and Maintenance Operations," may be appealed in writing to the director of public works stating the regulation appealed and the reasons therefor. The city traffic engineer will then provide supporting evidence in favor of or against such appeal. Within three (3) working days of the date the appeal is received, the director of public works shall advise the appealer, in writing, of a decision. This decision shall be final. 
(Code 1964, § 12.126; Ord. No. 9880, § 1, 7-18-83; Ord. No. 21579, § 1, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 14-473. - School zones designated. 
All streets and parts of streets adjacent to any school property are hereby declared to be established as school zones between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when designated by placing signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 12.195)  
Sec. 14-474. - Authority to establish play streets; vehicles restricted. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.175, 12.180) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 300.185, 300.190.  
Sec. 14-475. - Authority to establish zones of quiet. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish zones of quiet near hospitals, as he may deem necessary. 
(b)  Such zones of quiet shall be designated by placing signs or markings at conspicuous places in the street. 
(c)  The use of horns and other sound devices on all vehicles is prohibited in such zones of quiet. 
(Code 1964, § 12.185)  
Sec. 14-476. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1964, § 12.165) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.175.  
Sec. 14-477. - Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof 
(Code 1964, § 12.170) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.180.  
Sec. 14-478. - Possession of official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
No person shall possess any City of Columbia official traffic control device or any City of Columbia railroad sign or signal without lawful authority and the written consent of the official having jurisdiction for placing or erecting such signs. 
(Ord. No. 18961, § 1, 3-20-06)  
Secs. 14-479—14-490. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CYCLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Motorcycles, motor scooters and motorbikes, § 14-526 et seq. 
State Law reference— Bicycle equipment, RSMo. § 307.180 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-491. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "cycle" shall mean any device upon which a person may ride; propelled by human power, having two (2) or more wheels, and any electrically-assisted pedal powered cycle, excluding wheelchairs and pedal trolleys. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1400; Ord. No. 14598, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 17642, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-492. - Compliance required; scope of article. 
(a)  It is an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  No parent or guardian of any person under sixteen (16) years of age shall authorize or knowingly permit any such person to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The regulations of this article shall apply to cycles and motor propelled scooters as defined in section 14-1 whenever such cycles and motor propelled scooters are operated on any street or public path set aside for the exclusive use of cycles and motor propelled scooters, subject to the exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1400; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-493. - Minimum size cycle permitted on street; age of operator of cycle and motor propelled scooter. 
(a)  No person less than nine (9) years of age shall propel a cycle having a wheel diameter of less than twenty (20) inches on any city street or thoroughfare unless supervised by such person's parents or other responsible adult. 
(b)  No person less than sixteen (16) years of age shall ride a motor propelled scooter on any city street, sidewalk or thoroughfare. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1401; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-494. - License—Required. 
No person who resides in the city shall ride or propel a cycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of cycles unless such cycle has been licensed and a license or permanent stamp is attached thereto, as provided herein. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1410) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 14-495. - Same—Application; assignment. 
(a)  Application for a cycle license shall be made to a designee of the city manager upon forms provided by the city. 
(b)  Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed cycle the licensee shall, upon proper application, have such license transferred to the new owner. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1420)  
Sec. 14-496. - Same—Inspection of cycles; denial of license. 
A designee of the city manager shall inspect each cycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any cycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1450)  
Sec. 14-497. - Same—Issuance. 
(a)  Authority. A designee of the city manager, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a cycle license which shall be effective for the life of the cycle. 
(b)  Proof of ownership. No license shall be issued for any cycle when there is reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to possession of such cycle. 
(c)  Records. A designee of the city manager shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the number on the frame of the cycle for which issued. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1430)  
Sec. 14-498. - Same—Attachment of license or stamp. 
(a)  Upon issuing a cycle license, a designee of the city manager shall attach to the frame of the cycle a license bearing the license number assigned to the cycle and the name of the city, or shall affix a permanent stamp to the cycle frame just above the fork on the right side or under the bottom bracket. 
(b)  No person shall remove a license from a cycle unless the cycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1440)  
Sec. 14-499. - Cycle transfers. 
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any cycle to report such sale or transfer to the designee of the city manager, together with the name and address of the person to whom such cycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five (5) days of the date of such sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such cycle to apply for a transfer of registration thereof within five (5) days of such sale or transfer. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1460)  
Sec. 14-500. - Rental agencies. 
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any cycle for rent unless the cycle is licensed and a license is attached thereto as provided herein, and such cycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment required in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1470)  
Sec. 14-501. - Traffic laws apply to cycle riders and motor propelled scooters. 
Every person riding a cycle or motor propelled scooter upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the operator of a motor vehicle as provided by RSMo. Ch. 304, and all amendments from time to time made thereto, and as provided by this chapter applicable to the driver or operator of a motor vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and section 14-5 except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.375, 12.1480; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-502. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a cycle or motor propelled scooter shall obey instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a cycle or motor propelled scooter shall disobey the direction of any such sign. A person may dismount from the cycle or motor propelled scooter to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1490; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-503. - Riding conduct, generally. 
(a)  Seat. A person propelling a cycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  Number of riders. No cycle or motor propelled scooter shall be used to carry more persons at one (1) time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(c)  Riding to right; riding abreast. Every person operating a cycle or motor propelled scooter at less than the posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one (1) proceeding in the same direction, except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles. 
(d)  Speed. No person shall operate a cycle or motor propelled scooter at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under conditions then existing. 
(e)  Age—For major thoroughfares. No person less than nine (9) years of age shall ride a cycle on any major thoroughfare unless accompanied by such person's parents or other responsible adult. 
(f)  Same—Night, any street. No person less than nine (9) years of age shall ride a cycle at night on any street or thoroughfare unless accompanied by such person's parents or other responsible adult. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.375(2), 12.1500; Ord. No. 17496, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-504. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a cycle or motor propelled scooter emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1510; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-505. - Carrying articles. 
No person operating a cycle or motor propelled scooter shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from having both hands free and available to control the cycle. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1530; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-506. - Parking. 
No person shall park a cycle or motor propelled scooter upon a street or upon the sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct the flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1540; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-507. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a cycle or motor propelled scooter upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  The designee of the city manager is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk prohibiting the riding of cycles or motor propelled scooters thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a cycle or motor propelled scooter upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1550; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-508. - Required equipment. 
(a)  Brakes. Each person operating a cycle or motor propelled scooter shall have that cycle or motor propelled scooter equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable its operator to stop the bicycle or motor propelled scooter within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(b)  Lights. Each person operating a cycle on a street or highway during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall have his cycle equipped with the following: 
(1)  A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in reflective surface area, on the rear which shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600) feet. 
(3)  Essentially colorless or amber reflectors on both front and rear surfaces of all pedals. Each pedal reflector shall be recessed below the plan of the pedal or reflector housing. Each reflector shall be at least ninety one-hundredths (90/100) square inches in projected effective reflex area, and must be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred (200) feet. 
(4)  A side-facing essentially colorless or amber reflector visible on each side of a wheel mounted on the wheel spokes of the front wheel within three (3) inches of the inside of the wheel rim and a side-facing essentially colorless or red reflector mounted on the wheel spokes of the rear wheel within three (3) inches of the inside of the wheel rim or continuous retro-reflective material on each side of both tires which shall be at least three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) of an inch wide. All such reflectors or retro-reflective tire sidewalls shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at three hundred (300) feet. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1560; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 14-509. - Use of helmets. 
(a)  No person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall ride a cycle within the city limits as an operator or passenger without properly wearing an approved bicycle helmet securely fastened by chin or neck strap. 
(b)  An approved bicycle helmet is headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standard for protective helmets set by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission federal safety standards. 
(c)  No parent, custodian, or legal guardian of a person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall allow that person to ride or be a passenger on a cycle within the city limits as set out in this ordinance without wearing an approved bicycle helmet. This is an offense of absolute liability. 
(Ord. No. 17642, § 1, 4-7-03)  
Sec. 14-510. - Penalties. 
Any person sixteen (16) years of age or older who violates any provision of this act is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such an infraction does not constitute a crime, and conviction shall not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a criminal offense. If any person under sixteen (16) years of age violates any provision of this act in the presence of a peace officer possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal laws of the state or for violation of ordinances of counties or municipalities of the state, such officer may impound the cycle involved for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the child riding it or to its owner. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1570; Ord. No. 17642, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 23713 , § 2, 11-19-18)  
Secs. 14-511—14-525. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTOR BIKES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Cycles generally, § 14-491 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-526. - Manner of operation, generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate or manage any motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bike other than in a seated position thereon with one (1) leg on either side thereof, except that the provisions of this article shall not apply to vehicles with three (3) or more wheels. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1600)  
Sec. 14-527. - Riding on motorcycles. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat, if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  No person shall ride a motorcycle on any street without having his hands upon the handlebars, nor shall any person ride a motorcycle upon any sidewalk, walkway or footpath within the city. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12.365, 12.370) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.345.  
Sec. 14-528. - Safety equipment required of operators and passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or occupy as a passenger, any motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bike upon any public street, alley, or other thoroughfare, or in any public park within the city unless such person, while riding, is wearing a safety helmet or headgear with a chin strap affixed thereto and securely fastened beneath the chin. The minimum protective standards for such safety helmet or headgear shall be determined by the director of traffic. In determining such minimum protective standards for such safety helmets or headgear, such director may use the American Standards Association specifications for protective headgear for vehicular users, as approved by the American Standards Association, now in effect, or as hereafter amended by such association. Such minimum protective standard specifications shall be currently maintained by such director and made available at all times for public inspection. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1580)  
Sec. 14-529. - Agents renting, leasing or lending. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to rent, lease or lend any motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bike to any person without first requiring that such person and/or passenger be equipped with a safety helmet or headgear, the minimum standards for which have been determined by the city traffic director, as provided for in section 14-528. 
(Code 1964, § 12.1590)  
Secs. 14-530—14-545. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 14-546. - Abandoning property; parking for longer than twenty-four hours. 
No person owning or having care or custody of any motor vehicle, trailer or all-terrain vehicle shall abandon the same on any street, alley or public place, nor shall such person leave the same standing thereon for longer than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1964, § 12.645; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99)  
Sec. 14-547. - Leaving unlicensed wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street or public property. 
No person shall leave any unlicensed, partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, highway or public property within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12.650; Ord. No. 14564, § 1, 7-17-95)  
Sec. 14-548. - Impounding of abandoned or illegally parked vehicles—Authorized. 
Any police officer or parking enforcement officer may have removed to a suitable place any vehicle parked or left standing on a street, highway or public property for longer than twenty-four (24) hours, or any vehicle parked contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Unclaimed vehicles shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1964, § 12.670; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99)  
Sec. 14-549. - Same—Conditions for impounding abandoned property. 
(a)  Any members of the police department may authorize a towing company to remove to a place of safety: 
(1)  Any vehicle on the right-of-way of an interstate highway, freeway or state highway left unattended for more than ten (10) hours, provided that a commercial motor vehicle under state law not hauling waste designated as hazardous under federal law, may only be removed after the owner or owner's representative has had a reasonable opportunity to contact a towing company of choice. 
(2)  Any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any highway or bridge, or a vehicle left in a position or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or removal. 
(3)  Any vehicle left unattended upon a street and so parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or causes any other safety hazard. 
(4)  Any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter, or is lost, stolen or unclaimed. 
(5)  Any vehicle when the person operating the vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required to take the person into custody and when such person is unable to arrange for the timely removal of the vehicle. 
(6)  Any vehicle left unattended on a street or parking lot in any area marked as a fire lane, or as a bus stop or bus stand where parking is prohibited and where such property or vehicle interferes with entry by a bus. 
(7)  Any vehicle which, due to any state law or city ordinance, is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding traffic or parking violations. 
(8)  Any vehicle left unattended in violation of a state law or city ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the law, or when such property is left unattended in any parking space clearly marked as reserved for disabled parking only or is found blocking any ramp, entrance or stile designed and designated for disabled access. 
(b)  Abandoned property shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(c)  The city may immediately remove or have removed any abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled property, spilled cargo or other personal property from any roadway or highway in the city if the abandoned property, cargo or personal property is creating a traffic hazard because of its position upon or in relation to the roadway or highway. 
(d)  The owner or person in possession of any abandoned property, cargo or personal property, when such must be removed from or near a roadway under this section shall be responsible for payment of all reasonable charges for removal, towing and storage of such abandoned property, cargo or personal property. 
(e)  Members of the police department authorizing towing under this section shall make such reports as are required by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 12.660; Ord. No. 9749, § 1, 3-9-83; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99) 
State Law reference— RSMo 1996 § 304.155.  
Sec. 14-550. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles on private property. 
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than seventy-two (72) hours; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than seventy-two (72) hours; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12.655)  
Sec. 14-551. - Illegal parking on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle upon any privately owned land without the permission of the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee of such land. 
(b)  At the request of the person in possession of the real property, any member of the police department may authorize a towing company to tow the vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section from the property in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The abandoned property is left unattended for more than 48 hours; or 
(2)  In the judgement of the member of the police department, the abandoned property constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use of the real property by the person in possession. 
(Code 1964, § 12.665; Ord. No. 16077, § 1, 7-6-99) 
State Law reference— RSMo §§ 304.157, 304.158.  
Secs. 14-552—14-575. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 14-576. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to the provisions of sections 14-466 and 14-470 of this chapter and the restrictions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 12.425; Ord. No. 14598, § 1, 8-21-95)  
Sec. 14-577. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in paragraph (b) of section 14-581. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 12.430(1), (3), (4)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.375(1), (3).  
Sec. 14-578. - Leaving curb suddenly or entering path of vehicle. 
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(Code 1964, § 12.430(2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.375(2).  
Sec. 14-579. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalks. 
(Code 1964, § 12.435) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.380.  
Sec. 14-580. - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1964, § 12.440) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.385.  
Sec. 14-581. - When to yield right-of-way. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a road at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the conditions stated in section 14-582 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
(Code 1964, § 12.445) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.390.  
Sec. 14-582. - Prohibited crossing places. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. 
(c)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any street designated by ordinance. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices, and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1964, § 12.450) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.395.  
Sec. 14-583. - Manner of walking along roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks with the proper curb cuts and cross slopes are provided which are in compliance with 39 CFR 1191, Appendix A, Chapter 14, Public rights-of-way, as published June 20, 1994, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to move along and upon the adjacent roadway. 
(c)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking or moving along and upon a highway, unless obstructed, shall walk or move only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above subsections, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk or move upon any roadway in any manner which obstructs the flow of other traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 12.460; Ord. No. 14598, § 1, 8-21-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.405.  
Sec. 14-584. - Obedience to bridge and railroad signals. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1964, § 12.455)  
Sec. 14-585. - Duty of drivers to exercise care. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 12.465) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 300.410.  
Sec. 14-586. - Solicitation of contributions or business on roadways. 
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting contributions or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 13172 § 1, 12-2-91)  
Secs. 14-587—14-610. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - INTOXICATION RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 14-611. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "drive", "driving", "operates" or "operating" means physically driving or operating a motor vehicle. 
(b)  As used in this article, a person is in an "intoxicated condition" when such person is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or drug, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13450, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 17051, § 1, 10-1-01)  
Sec. 14-612. - Driving while intoxicated. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if such person operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(b)  Driving while intoxicated is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13450, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 17051, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 23371 , § 2, 11-6-17)  
Sec. 14-613. - Driving with excessive blood alcohol content. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol content" if such person operates a motor vehicle with eight-hundredths of one (1) percent or more by weight of alcohol in such person's blood. 
(b)  Driving with excessive blood alcohol content is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13450, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 17051, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 23371 , § 2, 11-6-17)  
Sec. 14-614. - Driving a commercial motor vehicle with excessive blood alcohol content. 
A person commits the offense of "driving a commercial motor vehicle with excessive blood alcohol content" if such person operates a commercial motor vehicle with four-hundredths of one (1) percent or more by weight of alcohol in such person's blood. 
(Ord. No. 13450, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 17051, § 1, 10-1-01)  
Sec. 14-615. - Chemical tests for alcohol content of blood. 
As used in this article, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of sections 577.020 to 577.041 RSMo. 
(Ord. No. 13450, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 17051, § 1, 10-1-01)  
Sec. 14-616. - Reimbursement of costs; schedule of costs. 
(a)  Upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty of violating any provision of this article, the court may, in addition to imposition of other penalties and costs provided by law, order the convicted person to reimburse the law enforcement agency which made the arrest for the costs associated with such arrest. Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical test to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the cost of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody. When the convicted person was arrested by a member of the City of Columbia Police Department, the reimbursement ordered by the municipal judge shall be treated as court costs. 
(b)  Based on a review of Columbia Police Department statistics, the council determines that the average cost of an intoxication related traffic offense is one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). When the person convicted of violating any provision of this article was arrested by a member of the City of Columbia Police Department, the court may order reimbursement based on the scheduled cost of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) or order the costs reduced if it determines that the costs are excessive. 
(Ord. No. 13512, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 14163 § 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 16419, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 19251, § 1, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 14-617. - Repealed by Ord. No. 14163 § 2, 8-1-94. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14163 § 2, adopted on August 1, 1994 repealed § 14-617 concerning schedule of costs. Section 14-617 formerly derived from Ord. No. 13512 § 1, adopted November 16, 1992.  
Secs. 14-618—14-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PEDAL TROLLEY 
 
Sec. 14-650. - Operation of a pedal trolley on certain roadways. 
No person shall operate a pedal trolley except on streets where the posted speed limit is twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less; provided, however, that pedal trolleys may cross a street at an intersection when the cross street has a posted speed limit of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. Pedal trolley operation is limited to the streets and alleys within the area described as: being bounded on the north by Park Avenue; on the south by Elm Street; on the west by Providence Road; and on the East by College Avenue. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall operate a pedal trolley on Providence Road and College Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 14-651. - Pedal trolley safety and equipment standards. 
No person shall operate a pedal trolley on any street unless the pedal trolley meets the following minimum equipment and safety standards: 
(1)  Seating for all passengers in accordance with the rated seating capacity of the pedal trolley set forth in the manufacturer's specifications for the pedal trolley. 
(2)  Tires shall be of a size appropriate for the pedal trolley with no mismatched tires. There shall be no cuts to the tire, localized worn spots that expose the ply, or visible tread wear indicators. 
(3)  A fully operational horn, bell or other audible signaling device. 
(4)  Front and rear braking system must be capable of being manipulated by the driver from driver's normal position of operation and capable of causing a pedal trolley with a loaded passenger compartment to come to a complete stop in a linear path of motion. The braking system controlling the rear wheels shall be hydraulic or mechanical disc or drum brakes, which are unaffected by rain or wet conditions. 
(5)  A secondary or emergency brake system. 
(6)  Mirrors affixed to the pedal trolley and so adjusted as to reveal the street behind and be visible from the operator's seat. 
(7)  Every pedal trolley, when in use on a street or highway during the period from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead shall be equipped with, and have in operation, headlights, taillights, turn signals and brake lights as provided by state law for motor vehicles or as approved by the director of the department of public safety for the state of Missouri pursuant to director's authority under RSMo. § 307.030. 
(8)  Operational brake lights, turn signals and tail lamps as required by state law that are applicable to motor vehicles. 
(9)  Reflectors on the front of the pedal trolley frame, and a red reflector mounted on each side of the rear of the pedal trolley, at least one (1) inch from the outer edge and centered. 
(10)  Reflectors on the spokes of the wheels of the pedal trolley. 
(11)  Reflective tape on the sides of the pedal trolley frame. 
(12)  A reflective slow moving triangle as required by RSMo. § 307.127. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 14-652. - Limitation on pedal trolley size. 
No person shall operate, on any street, a pedal trolley that: 
(1)  Is wider than seven (7) feet at its widest point; 
(2)  Is longer than twenty-two (22) feet at its longest point; or 
(3)  Carries fifteen (15) or more passengers, not including the operator. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 14-653. - Applicability of traffic regulations to pedal trolleys. 
Every person operating the steering or braking of a pedal trolley upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by this code or other traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application. A person operating the steering or braking of a pedal trolley upon a roadway shall observe all traffic laws and local ordinances regarding the rules of the road. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 14-654. - Left turns prohibited from Broadway. 
Unless directed to do so by a lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire official, no person operating or driving a pedal trolley shall turn left onto any street or parking lot from Broadway. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 2, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Chapter 15 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, §§ 114—118. 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-8; administration generally, Ch. 2; guards and security patrol officers, § 13-46 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, RSMo. Ch. 479. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Municipal court and municipal division of the circuit court. A division of the circuit court of the circuit in which the city is located, served by a municipal judge selected by the city council pursuant to the requirements of the charter and ordinances of the city to have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all violations against the ordinances of the municipality. 
Municipal judge and judge of the municipal division of the circuit court. The person selected by the city council pursuant to the requirements of the charter and ordinances of the city to serve as judge of the municipal division of the circuit court. 
(Code 1964, § 7.005)  
Sec. 15-2. - Jurisdiction; change of venue. 
The municipal division of the circuit court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all violations against the charter and the ordinances of the city. There shall be no change of venue or other transfer of cases to other divisions except as provided by the laws of the state. This section shall in no way be construed to remove or limit a defendant's right to trial by jury. 
(Code 1964, § 7.025)  
Sec. 15-3. - Rules governing procedure and practice. 
The rules governing the procedure and practice in the municipal court shall be those established and promulgated by the Supreme Court of Missouri on July 1, 1959, and such subsequent rules as the supreme court shall from time to time establish and promulgate; and any provision of this chapter which shall be in conflict with such rules is hereby repealed. 
(Code 1964, § 7.075)  
Sec. 15-4. - Courtrooms. 
The city council shall, by resolution, designate the place in which the municipal court shall sit, and shall provide a suitable courtroom in which the municipal court shall be held. 
(Code 1964, § 7.040) 
State Law reference— Municipality to provide courtroom, RSMo. § 479.060(1), (2).  
Sec. 15-5. - Sessions. 
The municipal court shall be open every day except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays; provided, however, that the municipal judge shall have the authority to cancel municipal court for a date certain by giving proper notice to the court personnel, the city prosecutor, and heads of departments of the city, when the judge determines that the judicial business on such date will be slight and that rescheduling cases will create no hardship on any party. 
(Code 1964, § 7.045; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-6. - Warrants; generally. 
All warrants issued by a municipal judge shall be directed to the chief of police or any other police officer of the municipality, or to the sheriff of the county. The warrants shall be executed by the chief of police, police officer or sheriff at any place within the limits of the county, and not elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for warrants in criminal cases, and, when so endorsed, shall be served in other counties, as provided for in warrants in criminal cases. 
(Code 1964, § 7.065)  
Sec. 15-7. - Warrant authority; procedures. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall have authority to issue search warrants for searches or inspections to determine the existence of violations of any of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. The municipal judge shall also have authority to issue warrants for the entry onto property to seize property or to otherwise enforce any of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Warrants and searches or inspections made pursuant thereto shall conform to and be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Any police officer, deputy, code enforcement official or prosecuting attorney of the city may make application for the issuance of a warrant. 
(2)  The application shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  State the time and date of the making of the application; 
c.  Identify the property or places to be entered, searched or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
d.  State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant to search for violations of this Code of Ordinances or to show that entry or seizure is authorized by this Code and that due process has been afforded prior to the entry or seizure; 
e.  Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and 
f.  Be filed in the municipal division of the Boone County, Missouri, Circuit Court. 
(3)  The application shall be supplemented by written affidavits verified by oath or affirmation. Such affidavits shall be considered in determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of the warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description of the property or places to be entered or searched. Oral testimony shall not be considered. 
(4)  The judge shall hold a nonadversary hearing to determine whether sufficient facts have been stated to justify the issuance of a warrant. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavits that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations of this Code, or that entry or seizure is authorized by this Code, a warrant shall immediately be issued to allow such search, entry or seizure. The warrant shall be issued in the form of an original and two (2) copies. 
(5)  The application and any supporting affidavits and a copy of the warrant shall be retained in the records of the municipal judge. 
(6)  The warrant shall: 
a.  Be in writing and in the name of the issuing authority; 
b.  Be directed to any police officer or deputy in the city; 
c.  State the time and date the warrant is issued; 
d.  Identify the property or places to be searched, entered or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
e.  In the case of a search warrant, command that the described property or places be searched and that any photographs of violations found thereon or therein be brought, within ten (10) days after filing of the application, to the judge who issued the warrant, to be dealt with according to law; and 
f.  Be signed by the municipal judge, with the title of office indicated. 
(7)  A warrant issued under this section may be executed only by a police officer or deputy of the city. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search or entry or seizure commanded. 
(8)  A warrant shall be executed as soon as practicable and shall expire if it is not executed and the return made within ten (10) days after the date of the making of the application. 
(9)  After execution of the warrant, the warrant, with a return thereon signed by the officer making the search, entry or seizure, shall be delivered to the judge who issued the warrant. The return shall show the date and manner of execution and the name of the possessor and of the owner of the property or places searched, entered or seized, when the possessor and owner are not the same person, if known. 
(10)  A warrant shall be deemed invalid: 
a.  If it was not issued by a judge of the municipal division of the Boone County, Missouri, Circuit Court; or 
b.  If it was issued without a written application having been filed and verified; or 
c.  If it was issued without probable cause; or 
d.  If it was not issued with respect to property or places within the city; or 
e.  If it does not describe the property or places to be searched, entered or seized with sufficient certainty; or 
f.  If it is not signed by the judge who issued it; or 
g.  If it was not executed within the time prescribed by subsection (b)(8) of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.070; Ord. No. 14914, § 8-5-96; Ord. No. 15468, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-8. - Complaint required following arrest. 
The chief of police or other police officer of the city shall, without a warrant, arrest any person who commits an offense in the presence of such officer, but such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the municipal judge. 
(Code 1964, § 7.060; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-9. - City prosecutor. 
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the city to prosecute the violations of the municipality's ordinances before the municipal judge. The salary or fees of the attorney and necessary expenses incurred in such prosecutions shall be paid by the municipality. 
(Code 1964, § 7.050; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-10. - Informations. 
All prosecutions for violation of municipal ordinances shall be instituted by informations and may be based upon a complaint. Proceedings shall be in accordance with the supreme court rules governing practice and procedure in proceedings before municipal judges. 
(Code 1964, § 7.055)  
Sec. 15-11. - Trial by jury. 
(a)  Any person charged with the violation of a municipal ordinance shall be entitled to a trial by jury, as in prosecutions for misdemeanors before an associate circuit judge. 
(b)  Whenever a defendant accused of a violation of a municipal ordinance has the right to a trial by jury and demands such trial by jury, the municipal judge shall certify the case to the presiding judge of the circuit court serving the city for assignment in the manner provided by state law. Proceedings in the case shall be had as if the case was originally commenced under the practice and procedure applicable before circuit judges with there being no right of trial de novo; but the sufficiency of plaintiff's petition shall be adjudged according to the procedures under chapter 517, RSMo. 
(Code 1964, § 7.080)  
Sec. 15-12. - Witnesses. 
(a)  Summons; oral notification. It shall be the duty of the municipal judge to summon all persons whose testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial, and to enforce their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before associate circuit judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be continued by a municipal judge it shall not be necessary to summon any witnesses who may be present at the continuance; but the municipal judge shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend before the judge on the day set for trial to testify in the case, and enter the names of such witnesses on the docket, which oral notice shall be valid as a summons. 
(b)  Police officer or other officer as witness. In prosecutions before the municipal judge for misdemeanors arising under ordinances of the city, any police officer or other executive officer shall be a competent witness in the case but no such police officer or executive officer shall be entitled to any witness fee in such case. 
(c)  Arresting officers to attend as witnesses without summons. Officers shall attend, upon notice, as witnesses against persons whom they have caused to be arrested, without being summoned to do so; and, upon failure to appear at the time of the trial, may be attached and punished for contempt as witnesses summoned. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7.085, 7.090, 7.095; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 ) 
State Law reference— Summoning of witnesses, RSMo. § 479.160.  
Sec. 15-13. - Service on city. 
Notices and processes arising in the municipal court which are necessary to be served on the city shall be served on the city prosecutor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.100)  
Sec. 15-14. - Affidavit by city. 
Whenever any affidavit shall become necessary to be made on the part of the city, the city prosecutor shall cause the same to be made by some person to whom the facts are known. 
(Code 1964, § 7.105)  
Sec. 15-15. - Ordinances as evidence. 
In the trial of municipal ordinance violation cases, a copy of a municipal ordinance which is certified by the clerk of the municipality shall constitute prima facie evidence of such ordinance. If such certified copy is on file with the clerk serving the judge hearing the case and readily available for inspection by the parties, the judge may take judicial notice of such ordinance without further proof. 
(Code 1964, § 7.110)  
Sec. 15-16. - Complaints to be transferred to prosecuting attorney. 
If, in the progress of any trial before the municipal judge, it shall appear that the accused ought to be put on trial for an offense against the criminal law of the state, and not cognizable before the municipal judge, the judge shall immediately stop all further proceedings before the municipal court and shall cause the complaint to be made to the prosecuting attorney within the county, and the accused shall thereupon be proceeded against in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 7.115; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 497.170.  
Sec. 15-17. - Trial de novo. 
In any case tried before the municipal judge, except where there has been a plea of guilty or the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant shall have a right to trial de novo before a circuit judge or upon assignment before an associate circuit judge. An application for a trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after judgment and shall be filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by supreme court rule. 
(Code 1964, § 7.140) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.200(2).  
Sec. 15-18. - Parole or probation. 
(a)  Any judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in the judge's judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before such judge. When a person is placed on probation, the person shall be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which the person is being released. 
(b)  In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of probation, the court may order conditions which the court believes will serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim, in an amount to be determined by the judge; and 
(2)  The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public or charitable purpose, or purposes, as determined by the judge. 
(c)  A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free work. If a person does so, the court shall decide the extent or duration of sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment accordingly. 
(d)  The court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term. 
(Code 1964, § 7.145; Ord. No. 17922, § 1, 12-1-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.190.  
Sec. 15-19. - Costs—Enumerated. 
(a)  Court costs. The municipal judge may assess against each defendant who pleads guilty or is found guilty (except when the defendant is found by the judge to be indigent and unable to pay) the following court costs: Fees set pursuant to Section 514.015, Revised Statutes of Missouri, and service charges, witness fees and jail cost authorized by statute. 
(b)  Warrant fees. When the municipal judge issues a warrant for the arrest of any defendant or witness to compel attendance in municipal court, the judge may assess a warrant fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Law enforcement training. In all cases filed by the city prosecutor for violation of any of the ordinances of the city except nonmoving traffic violations, a surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be assessed against a defendant who pleads guilty or is found guilty, for training law enforcement officers. Such surcharge shall be collected along with the fine assessed by the court and shall be deposited with the director of finance who shall place such costs in a special account to be used for training law enforcement officers. 
(d)  State law enforcement training. In all cases filed by the city prosecutor for violation of any of the ordinances of the city except non-moving traffic violations, a surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) shall be assessed against a defendant who pleads guilty or is found guilty, for law enforcement training purposes. Such surcharge shall be collected and shall be deposited with the director of finance, who shall send such funds monthly to the state treasury to the credit of the "Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission Fund." 
(e)  Inmate prisoner detainee security surcharge. In all cases filed by the city prosecutor for violation of any of the ordinances of the city, a surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be assessed against a defendant who pleads guilty or is found guilty. This surcharge shall be collected and deposited with the director of finance who shall place the funds in a special account to be called the "Inmate Prisoner Detainee Security Fund." Funds in this account may be used only for acquiring, developing and maintaining biometric verification and information sharing systems, for expenses related to detention of prisoners and for any other purpose allowed by RSMo § 488.5026. 
(Code 1964, § 7.120; Ord. No. 13386, § 1, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 13893 § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 15018, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 15126, § 1, 1-21-97; Ord. No. 16590, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 21535, § 1, 12-3-12, eff. 1-1-13) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Court costs, filing fees, RSMo. § 479.260; similar provisions §§ 302.137, 429.260, 479.261, 491.280, 514.005, 590.140 and 595.045.  
Sec. 15-20. - Same—When prosecution is without cause. 
If the defendant is acquitted, the informant may be adjudged to pay the costs, if it appears to the satisfaction of the court that the prosecution was instituted vexatiously or without probable cause. 
(Code 1964, § 7.125)  
Sec. 15-21. - Same—When deposit of costs required. 
The city counselor may, when the counselor is not satisfied that the information is made for the purpose of public justice, or that the evidence is sufficient to obtain the conviction of the accused, require the prosecuting witness to deposit with the municipal court a sufficient amount of money for the payment of all costs that may accrue, or else, give bond and security for the costs; and in such case, if the accused by [is] acquitted, the court shall render judgment against the prosecuting witness for costs. 
(Code 1964, § 7.130; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-22. - Forfeiture of bonds. 
In case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a municipal judge, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the judge shall cause the same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them in the name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be on the transcript of the proceedings before the municipal judge. All monies recovered in such actions shall be paid over to the municipal treasury to the general revenue fund of the municipality. 
(Code 1964, § 7.135) 
State Law reference— similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.210.  
Sec. 15-23. - Payment of fines on installment basis. 
When a fine is assessed for violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the discretion of the judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as the judge may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 7.150; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.240.  
Sec. 15-24. - Failure or refusal to pay fines or costs. 
Subject to the conditions of Missouri Supreme Court Rule 37.65, upon failure or refusal by any person, who has been convicted in the municipal court and fined by the municipal judge for violation of any ordinance of the city, to pay such fine, the court may order, except in cases of indigency, that the defendant be confined until the fine and costs are fully paid, or if the fine is not paid, then for every ten dollars ($10.00) of such judgment the defendant shall serve one day in jail or other place of confinement, not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1964, § 7.155; Ord. No. 23371 , § 3, 11-6-17)  
Sec. 15-25. - Accounting for fines and costs; monthly report. 
The municipal judge shall cause the clerk, within the first ten (10) days of every month, to make out a list of all the cases heard or tried before the judge during the preceding month, giving in each case the name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of costs, the names of defendants committed and the cases in which there was an application for trial de novo, respectively. Such clerk or the judge shall verify such lists and statements by affidavit, and file the same forthwith with the clerk of the municipality, who shall lay the same before the governing body of the municipality at its first session thereafter; providing, that the city council hereby designates the finance director its agent and delegates to such finance director the duty to receive and review such verified lists and statements. The official collecting fines shall, within the ten (10) days aforesaid, pay to the municipal treasurer the full amount of all fines collected during the preceding month if not previously paid to the municipal treasurer. 
(Code 1964, § 7.160; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-26. - Disposition of fines and costs. 
All fines and costs paid into the municipal court shall be paid to and deposited not less frequently than monthly into the municipal treasury. 
All fines, penalties and forfeitures arising out of violations of ordinances of the city shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.165) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.080(1).  
Sec. 15-27. - Place of imprisonment. 
In all cases where any person is in the charge of or in the custody of the chief of police or members of the police department, either before or after trial, such person shall be kept and held at the Boone County jail or at such other place as the chief of police may designate, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 7.170)  
Sec. 15-28. - Working prisoner. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted in the municipal court and sentenced by the municipal judge for violation of any ordinance of the city, whether the punishment be by fine or imprisonment or by both, may be put to work to perform labor on the public streets, highways, alleys, or other public works or buildings of the city. It shall be deemed a part of the judgment and sentence of the court that such prisoner may be worked as herein provided. The chief of police shall have power and be authorized to have or cause all such prisoners to work out the full number of days for which they have been sentenced. 
(b)  If the punishment is by fine and the fine be not paid, then for every ten dollars ($10.00) of such judgment the prisoner shall work one day. 
(Code 1964, § 7.175)  
Sec. 15-29. - Chief of police to designate work and discharge. 
In all cases where the defendant is required to work out the whole or any part of the fine and costs imposed on such defendant, the chief of police shall designate the kind of work required of the prisoner, and it shall be such labor as the health and strength of the prisoner will permit, not exceeding eight (8) hours per day. On performance of the required amount of labor, the prisoner shall be discharged from custody by the chief of police, who shall make return on the execution of such shall be done at the direction, and under the supervision, of the chief of police, or designee. 
(Code 1964, § 7.180; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Secs. 15-30—15-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Judge, § 115; salary of judge to be provided for by ordinance, § 116. 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipality's authority to provide for selection, tenure and compensation, RSMo. § 479.020(1). 
 
Sec. 15-46. - Selection, qualification and term of office. 
The municipal judge shall be selected by the council, a majority vote of all members being required for such selection. Selection shall be for a term of four (4) years, and the judge shall serve until a successor is selected and qualified. The judge shall have been a resident of the city for at least two (2) years prior to selection, and a duly licensed attorney of the state for at least three (3) years prior to selection. The judge shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and no person shall serve as municipal judge after attaining the age of seventy-five (75). The judge shall not hold any other office in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.010; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.020(6), (7).  
Sec. 15-47. - Duties and powers. 
The municipal judge shall be a conservator of the peace. The judge shall keep a docket in which every case and proceeding therein commenced shall be entered and kept together with such other records as required. Such docket and records shall be records of the circuit court. The judge shall deliver such docket and records and all books and papers pertaining to such office to any successor in office or to the presiding judge of the circuit. The judge shall have the power to administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and judgments made by such judge, and may fine or imprison for contempt committed before such judge while holding court, in the same manner and to the same extent as a circuit judge. 
(Code 1964, § 7.035; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 )  
Sec. 15-48. - Removal from office. 
The municipal judge may be removed from office for cause in the manner provided for removal by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.015) 
Charter reference— Removal, § 115.  
Sec. 15-49. - Disqualification procedures. 
A municipal judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which the judge is in anywise interested, or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest or prejudice of the judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall be entitled to file more than one affidavit or disqualification in the same case. 
(Code 1964, § 7.030; Ord. No. 22444, § 1, 5-18-15 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 479.220.  
Sec. 15-50. - Associate municipal judges. 
(a)  There shall be at least three (3) associate municipal judges to hear and decide cases in the City of Columbia municipal division of the circuit court. An associate municipal judge shall act as municipal judge when the municipal judge is absent, disabled or disqualified. Associate municipal judges shall also hear and decide cases assigned to them by the municipal judge. 
(b)  Associate municipal judges shall be licensed to practice law in Missouri for at least three (3) years prior to appointment and shall be residents of Missouri. 
(c)  The city council shall appoint associate municipal judges, by resolution, to terms of no more than four (4) years. The resolution appointing an associate municipal judge shall specify the length of the judge's term of office. The city council, by resolution, may remove any associate municipal judge from office. 
(d)  Compensation for associate municipal judges shall be determined under the rules and procedures set forth in Chapter 19 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 7.020; Ord. No. 17604, § 1, 3-3-03) 
State Law reference— Procedure in absence of judge, RSMo. § 479.230. 

Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, §; 1-8; administration generally, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; civil defense, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF OFFENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-16. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Code of Offenses of the City of Columbia, Missouri, " hereinafter referred to in this article as "this article." 
(Code 1964, § 7.400)  
Sec. 16-17. - Definitions. 
In this article, unless the context requires a different definition, the following shall apply: 
Affirmative defense. The phrase "affirmative defense" means: 
(1)  The defense referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless supported by evidence; and 
(2)  If the defense is submitted to the trier of fact the defendant has the burden of persuasion that the defense is more probably true than not. 
Agent. "Agent" means any director, officer or employee of a corporation or unincorporated association or any other person who is authorized to act in behalf of the corporation or unincorporated association. 
Burden of injecting the issue. The phrase "the defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue" means: 
(1)  The issue referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless supported by evidence; and 
(2)  If the issue is submitted to a trier of fact any reasonable doubt on the issue requires a finding for the defendant on that issue. 
Coercion. Coercion means a threat, however communicated: 
(1)  To commit any crime; or 
(2)  To inflict physical injury in the future on the person threatened or another; or 
(3)  To accuse any person of any crime; or 
(4)  To expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or 
(5)  To harm the credit or business repute of any person; or 
(6)  To take or withhold action as a public servant, or to cause a public servant to take or withhold action; or 
(7)  To inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor. 
A threat of accusation, lawsuit or other invocation of official action is not coercion if the property sought to be obtained by virtue of such threat was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which the accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful service. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification as to any threat. 
Confinement. A person is in "confinement" when he is held in a place of confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court, and remains in confinement until: 
(1)  A court orders his release; or 
(2)  He is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or otherwise; or 
(3)  A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine him authorizes his release without guard and without condition that he return to confinement. 
A person is not in confinement if: 
(1)  He is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or 
(2)  He is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having the legal power and duty to transport him to or from a place of confinement. 
Consent. Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied. Assent does not constitute consent if: 
(1)  It is given by a person who is legally incompetent to authorize the conduct charged to constitute the offense and such incompetence is manifest or known to the actor; or 
(2)  It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect, or intoxication, is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct charged to constitute the offense; or 
(3)  It is induced by force, duress or deception. 
Custody. A person is in custody when he has been arrested but has not been delivered to a place of confinement. 
Forcible compulsion means either: 
(1)  Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or 
(2)  A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear of death, serious physical injury or kidnapping of himself or another person. 
High managerial agent. "High managerial agent" means an officer of a corporation or any other agent in a position of comparable authority with respect to the formulation of corporate policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate employees. 
Incapacitated. "Incapacitated" means that physical or mental condition, temporary or permanent, in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act. A person is not "incapacitated" with respect to an act committed upon him if he became unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act, after consenting to the act. 
Law enforcement officer. "Law enforcement officer" means any public servant having both the power and the duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this city. 
Offense. "Offense" means any misdemeanor or infraction. 
Physical injury. "Physical injury" means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition. 
Place of confinement. "Place of confinement" means any building or facility and the grounds thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged with or convicted of a crime be held. 
Police dog. A dog trained to obey the commands of a police officer which is maintained and utilized by the Columbia Police Department or other law enforcement agency. 
Public servant. "Public servant" means any person employed in any way by the government of this city who is compensated by the government by reason of his employment and includes, but is not limited to, legislators, jurors, members of the judiciary and both regular and special or reserve law enforcement officers. It does not include witnesses. 
Serious physical injury. "Serious physical injury" means physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7.440, 7.445, 7.450, 7.590(3); Ord. No. 14512, § 2, 6-5-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-18. - Classification of offenses. 
(a)  An offense defined by this article for which a sentence of imprisonment is authorized, shall constitute a "misdemeanor." 
(b)  An offense defined by this article constitutes an "infraction" if it is so designated or if no other sentence than a fine or fine and forfeiture or other civil penalty is authorized upon conviction. 
(c)  An infraction does not constitute a crime and conviction of an infraction shall not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a crime. 
(Code 1964, § 7.410) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 556.016, 556.021.  
Sec. 16-19. - Offenses must be defined by ordinance. 
No conduct constitutes an offense unless made so by this article or other applicable ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 7.415) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 556.026.  
Sec. 16-20. - Application to offenses committed before and after enactment. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall govern the construction and punishment for any offense defined in this code and committed after March 19, 1979, as well as the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. 
(b)  Offenses defined outside of this article and not repealed shall remain in effect, but unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this article shall not govern the construction of any such offenses, nor shall the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such offenses be affected. 
(c)  The provisions of this article do not apply to or govern the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to March 19, 1979, or the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of law existing at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this article had not been enacted. 
(Code 1964, § 7.420) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 556.031.  
Sec. 16-21. - Time limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, prosecutions for offenses must be commenced within the following periods of limitation: 
(1)  For any misdemeanor, one year; 
(2)  For any infraction, six (6) months. 
(b)  If the period prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section has expired, a prosecution may nevertheless be commenced for: 
(1)  Any offense a material element of which is either fraud or a breach of fiduciary obligation within one year after discovery of the offense by the aggrieved party or by a person who has a legal duty to represent an aggrieved party and who is himself not a party to the offense, but in no case shall this provision extend the period of limitation by more than three (3) years; and 
(2)  Any offense based upon misconduct in office by a public officer or employee at any time the defendant is in public office or employment or within two (2) years thereafter, but in no case shall this provision extend the period of limitation by more than three (3) years. 
(c)  An offense is committed either when every element occurs, or, if a legislative purpose to prohibit a continuing course of conduct plainly appears, at the time when the course of conduct or the defendant's complicity therein is terminated. Time starts to run on the day after the offense is committed. 
(d)  A prosecution is commenced when an information is filed. 
(e)  The period of limitation does not run: 
(1)  During any time when the accused is absent from the state, but in no case shall this provision extend the period of limitation otherwise applicable by more than three (3) years; or 
(2)  During any time when the accused is concealing himself from justice either within or without this state; or 
(3)  During any time when a prosecution against the accused for the offense is pending in this state. 
(Code 1964, § 7.425) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 556.036.  
Sec. 16-22. - Imitation on conviction for multiple offenses. 
When the same conduct of a person may establish the commission of more than one offense he may be prosecuted for each such offense. He may not, however, be convicted of more than one offense if: 
(1)  One offense is included in the other, as defined in section 16-23; or 
(2)  Inconsistent findings of fact are required to establish the commission of the offenses; or 
(3)  The offenses differ only in that one is defined to prohibit a designated kind of conduct generally and the other to prohibit a specific instance of such conduct; or 
(4)  The offense is defined as a continuing course of conduct and the person's course of conduct was uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific periods of such conduct constitute separate offenses. 
(Code 1964, § 7.430) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 556.036.  
Sec. 16-23. - Conviction of included offenses. 
(a)  A defendant may be convicted of an offense included in an offense charged in the indictment or information. An offense is so included when: 
(1)  It is established by proof of the same or less than all the facts required to establish the commission of the offense charged; or 
(2)  It is specifically denominated by ordinance as a lesser degree of the offense charged; or 
(3)  It consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged or to commit an offense otherwise included therein. 
(b)  The court shall not be obligated to charge the jury with respect to an included offense unless there is a basis for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting him of the included offense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.435) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 556.046.  
Secs. 16-24—16-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SENTENCING PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Authorized dispositions. 
(a)  Every person found guilty of an offense defined by this article shall be dealt with by the court in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whenever any person has been found guilty of a misdemeanor in this Code, the court shall make one or more of the following dispositions of the offender in any appropriate combination. The court may: 
(1)  Sentence the person to a term of confinement as authorized by sections 16-41 through 16-43. 
(2)  Sentence the person to pay a fine as authorized by sections 16-66 through 16-70. 
(3)  Suspend the imposition of sentence, with or without placing the person on probation. 
(4)  Pronounce sentence and suspend its execution, placing the person on probation. 
(5)  Impose a period of detention as a condition of probation, as authorized by section 16-54. 
(c)  Whenever any person has been found guilty of an infraction, the court shall make one or more of the following dispositions of the offender in any appropriate combination. The court may: 
(1)  Sentence the person to pay a fine as authorized by sections 16-66 and 16-67. 
(2)  Suspend the imposition of sentence, with or without placing the person on probation. 
(3)  Pronounce sentence and suspend its execution, placing the person on probation. 
(d)  Whenever any organization has been found guilty of an offense, the court shall make one or more of the following dispositions of the organization in any appropriate combination. The court may: 
(1)  Sentence the organization to pay a fine as authorized by sections 16-66 through 16-70; 
(2)  Suspend the imposition of sentence, with or without placing the organization on probation; 
(3)  Pronounce sentence and suspend its execution, placing the organization on probation; 
(4)  Impose any special sentence or sanction authorized by law. 
(e)  Whenever any person shall have been found guilty of violating any ordinance involving the possession of marijuana or hashish, in addition to or in lieu of any other punishment, the court shall require the offender to attend and complete a drug education program where a suitable program exists. Persons required to attend a drug education program pursuant to this paragraph may be charged a reasonable fee to cover the costs of such program. 
(f)  This article shall not be construed to deprive the court of any other authority which has, or may be, conferred by law to decree a forfeiture of property, suspend or cancel a license, remove a person from office, or impose any other civil penalty. An appropriate order exercising such authority may be included as part of any sentence. 
(Code 1964, § 7.455; Ord. No. 10638, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 557.011.  
Sec. 16-32. - Classification of offenses for purposes of sentencing. 
(a)  Misdemeanors are classified for the purpose of sentencing into the following three (3) categories: 
(1)  Class A misdemeanors; 
(2)  Class B misdemeanors; and 
(3)  Class C misdemeanors. 
(b)  Infractions are not further classified. 
(Code 1964, § 7.460) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 557.016.  
Sec. 16-33. - Application of provisions to offenses outside of this article. 
The provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, definition, defense, principles of liability, sentencing and penalty provisions, shall have no effect on or application to any offense defined outside of this article unless such provision shall specifically state that it shall have effect and application beyond this article or unless an offense defined outside of this article shall specifically state that a provision of this article shall have effect on or application to that offense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.465)  
Sec. 16-34. - Presentence investigation and report. 
(a)  When a probation officer is available to the court, the officer shall, if directed by the court, make a presentence investigation and report to the court before any authorized disposition under section 16-31. 
(b)  The report shall not be submitted to the court or its contents disclosed to anyone until the defendant has pleaded guilty or been found guilty. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed as to require the appointment of a probation officer. 
(d)  The presentence investigation report shall be prepared, presented and utilized as provided by rule of court except that no court shall prevent the defendant or the attorney for the defendant from having access to the complete presentence investigation report and recommendations before any authorized disposition under section 16-31. 
(e)  The defendant shall not be obligated to make any statement to a probation officer in connection with any presentence investigation hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 7.470) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 557.026.  
Secs. 16-35—16-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONFINEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, adopted November 6, 2017, amended §§ 16-41—16-43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 3, §§ 16-41—16-43, pertained to imprisonment, and derived from §§ 7.475, 7.480, 7.485 of the 1964 Code. 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Sentence of confinement; incidents. 
(a)  The authorized terms of confinement, including both confinement and conditional release terms are: 
(1)  For a class A misdemeanor, a term not to exceed one year. 
(2)  For a class B misdemeanor, a term not to exceed six (6) months. 
(3)  For a class C misdemeanor, a term not to exceed fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  A sentence of confinement for a misdemeanor shall be for a definite term and the court shall commit the defendant to the county jail or other authorized penal institution for the term of defendant's sentence or until released under procedures established elsewhere by law. 
(c)  A sentence of confinement for a term of years shall consist of a confinement term and a conditional release term. The conditional release term of any term imposed under section 16-31 shall be one-third for terms of one year or less. 
(d)  "Conditional release" means the conditional discharge of a prisoner by the court subject to conditions of release that the court deems reasonable to assist the offender to lead a law-abiding life, and subject to the supervision under the court. The conditions of release shall include avoidance by the offender of any other crime, federal or state offenses as defined by ordinances of this city and shall prohibit technical violations of offender's probation and parole. 
(Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 558.011.  
Sec. 16-42. - Concurrent and consecutive terms of confinement. 
(a)  Multiple sentences of confinement shall run concurrently unless the court specifies that they shall run consecutively. 
(b)  If a person who is on probation, parole or conditional release is sentenced to a term of confinement for an offense committed after the granting of probation or parole or after the start of such person's conditional release term, the court shall direct the manner in which the sentence or sentences imposed by the court shall run with respect to any resulting probation, parole or conditional release revocation term or terms. If the subsequent sentence to confinement is in another jurisdiction, the court shall specify how any resulting probation, parole or conditional release revocation term or terms shall run with respect to the foreign sentence of confinement. 
(Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 558.026.  
Sec. 16-43. - Calculation of terms of confinement; credit for jail time awaiting trial. 
(a)  A person convicted of a Code violation in this city shall receive as credit toward service of a sentence of confinement all time spent by such person in jail because of awaiting trial for such crime. Time required by law to be credited upon some other sentence shall be applied to that sentence alone, except that: 
(1)  Time spent in jail awaiting trial for an offense because of a detainer for such offense shall be credited toward service of a sentence of confinement for that offense even though the person was confined awaiting trial for some unrelated bailable offense; and 
(2)  Credit for jail time shall be applied to each sentence if they are concurrent. 
(b)  The officer required by law to deliver a convicted person to jail shall endorse upon the commitment papers the period of time to be credited as provided in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  If a sentence of confinement is vacated and a new sentence is imposed on the defendant for the same offense, the new sentence is calculated as if it had commenced at the time the vacated sentence was imposed, and all time served under the vacated sentence shall be credited against the new sentence. 
(d)  If a person serving a sentence of confinement escapes from custody, the escape interrupts the sentence. The interruption continues until the person is returned to the institution in which the sentence was being served. 
(Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 558.031.  
Secs. 16-44—16-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROBATION 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Eligible for probation, when. 
The court may place a person on probation for a specified period upon conviction of any offense or upon suspending imposition of sentence if, having regard to the nature and circumstances of the offense and to the history and character of the defendant, the court is of the opinion that: 
(1)  Institutional confinement of the defendant is not necessary for the protection of the public; and 
(2)  The defendant is in need of guidance, training or other assistance which, in his case, can be effectively administered through probation supervision. 
(Code 1964, § 7.490) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 559.012.  
Sec. 16-52. - Terms of probation. 
(a)  Unless terminated as provided in section 16-56, the terms during which probation shall remain conditional and be subject to revocation are: 
(1)  A term not less than six (6) months and not to exceed two (2) years for a misdemeanor. 
(2)  A term not less than six (6) months and not to exceed one year for an infraction. 
(b)  The court shall designate a specific term of probation at the time of sentencing or at the time of suspension of imposition of sentence. 
(Code 1964, § 7.495) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 558.016.  
Sec. 16-53. - Conditions of probation. 
(a)  The conditions of probation shall be such as the court in its discretion deems reasonably necessary to ensure that the defendant will not again violate the law. When a defendant is placed on probation, he shall be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he is being released. 
(b)  The court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term. 
(Code 1964, § 7.500) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 559.021.  
Sec. 16-54. - Detention condition of probation. 
(a)  Except in infraction cases, when probation is granted, the court, in addition to conditions imposed under section 16-53, may require as a condition of probation that the defendant submit to a period of detention in an appropriate institution at whatever time or intervals within the period of probation, consecutive or nonconsecutive, the court shall designate. 
(b)  In misdemeanor cases, the period of detention under this section shall not exceed the shorter of fifteen (15) days or the maximum term of imprisonment authorized for the misdemeanor by division 3 of this article. 
(c)  If probation is revoked and a term of imprisonment is served by reason thereof, the time spent in jail or other institution as a detention condition of probation shall be credited against the prison or jail term served for the offense in connection with which the detention condition was imposed. 
(Code 1964, § 7.505) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 559.026.  
Sec. 16-55. - Transfer to another court. 
Jurisdiction over a probationer may be transferred from the court which imposed probation to a court having equal jurisdiction over offenders in any other part of the state, if any, with the concurrence of both courts. Retransfers of jurisdiction may also occur in the same manner. The court to which jurisdiction has been transferred under this section shall be authorized to exercise all power permissible under this chapter over the defendant, except that the term of probation shall not be terminated without the consent of the sentencing court. 
(Code 1964, § 7.510) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 559.031.  
Sec. 16-56. - Duration of probation; revocation. 
(a)  A term of probation commences on the day it is imposed. Multiple terms of probation, whether imposed at the same time or at different times, shall run concurrently. Terms of probation shall also run concurrently with any federal or other state jail, prison, probation or parole term for another offense to which the defendant is or becomes subject during the period, unless otherwise specified by the court. 
(b)  The court may terminate a period of probation and discharge the defendant at any time before completion of the specific term fixed under section 16-52 if warranted by the conduct of the defendant and the ends of justice. Procedures for termination and discharge may be established by rule of court. 
(c)  If the defendant violates a condition of probation at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term, the court may continue him on the existing conditions, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or, if such continuation, modification, or enlargement is not appropriate, may revoke probation and order that any sentence previously imposed be executed. If imposition of sentence was suspended, the court may revoke probation and impose any sentence available under section 16-83. The court may mitigate any sentence of imprisonment by reducing the prison or jail term by all or part of the time the defendant was on probation. 
(d)  Probation shall not be revoked without giving the probationer notice and an opportunity to be heard on the issues of whether he violated a condition of probation and, if he did, whether revocation is warranted under all the circumstances. 
(e)  At any time during the term of probation the court may issue a notice to the probationer to appear to answer a charge of a violation, and the court may issue a warrant of arrest for the violation. Such notice shall be personally served upon the probationer. The warrant shall authorize the return of the probationer to the custody of the court or to any suitable detention facility designated by the court. 
(f)  Any probation officer, if he has probable cause to believe that the probationer has violated a condition of probation, may arrest the probationer without a warrant, or may deputize any other officer with the power of arrest to do so by giving him a written statement of the circumstances of the alleged violation, including a statement that the probationer has, in the judgment of the probation officer, violated the conditions of his probation. The written statement, delivered with the probationer to the official in charge of any jail or other detention facility, shall be sufficient authority for detaining the probationer pending a preliminary hearing on the alleged violation. 
(g)  If the probationer is arrested under the authority granted in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, he shall have the right to a preliminary hearing on the violation charged. He shall be notified immediately in writing of the alleged probation violation. If he is arrested in the jurisdiction of the sentencing court, and the court which placed him on probation is immediately available, the preliminary hearing shall be heard by the sentencing court. Such preliminary hearings shall be conducted as provided by rule of court. If it appears that there is probable cause to believe that the probationer has violated a condition of his probation, or if the probationer waives the preliminary hearing, the judge shall order the probationer held for further proceedings in the sentencing court. If probable cause is not found, this shall not bar the sentencing court from holding a hearing on the question of the probationer's alleged violation of a condition of probation nor from ordering the probationer to be present at such a hearing. Provisions regarding release on bail of persons charged with offenses shall be applicable to probationers arrested and ordered held under this provision. 
(h)  Upon such arrest and detention, the probation officer shall immediately notify the sentencing court and shall submit to the court a written report showing in what manner the probationer has violated the conditions of probation. Thereupon, or upon arrest by warrant, the court shall cause the probationer to be brought before it without unnecessary delay for a hearing on the violation charged. Revocation hearings shall be conducted as provided by rule of court. 
(i)  The power of the court to revoke probation shall extend for the duration of the term of probation designated by the court and for any further period which is reasonably necessary for the adjudication of matters arising before its expiration, provided that some affirmative manifestation of an intent to conduct a revocation hearing occurs prior to the expiration of the period and that every reasonable effort is made to notify the probationer and to conduct the hearing prior to the expiration of the period. 
(Code 1964, § 7.515) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 559.036.  
Secs. 16-57—16-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FINES 
 
Sec. 16-66. - Fines for misdemeanors and infractions. 
Except as otherwise provided for an offense outside this Code, a person who has been convicted of an ordinance violation which has been classified as either a misdemeanor or infraction under this Code may be sentenced to pay a fine which does not exceed: 
(1)  For a class A misdemeanor, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); 
(2)  For a class B misdemeanor, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(3)  For a class C misdemeanor, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); 
(4)  For an infraction, four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(Code 1964, § 7.520; Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 560.011.  
Sec. 16-67. - Fines for corporations. 
(a)  A sentence to pay a fine, when imposed on a corporation for an offense defined in this article or for any offense defined outside this article for which no special corporate fine is specified, shall be a sentence to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not exceeding: 
(1)  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), when the conviction is for a misdemeanor. 
(2)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00), when the conviction is of an infraction. 
(b)  In the case of an offense defined outside this article, if a special fine for a corporation is expressly specified in the ordinance that defines the offense, the fine fixed by the court shall be an amount within the limits specified in the ordinance that defines the offense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.525; Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 560.021.  
Sec. 16-68. - Imposition of fines. 
(a)  In determining the amount and the method of payment of a fine, the court shall, insofar as practicable, proportion the fine to the burden that payment will impose in view of the financial resources of an individual. The court shall not sentence an offender to pay a fine in any amount which will prevent the offender from making restitution or reparation to the victim of the offense. 
(b)  When any other disposition is authorized by statute, the court shall not sentence an individual to pay a fine only unless, having regard to the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and character of the offender, it is of the opinion that the fine alone will suffice for the protection of the public. 
(c)  The court shall not sentence an individual to pay a fine in addition to any other sentence authorized by section 16-31 unless: 
(1)  The defendant has derived a pecuniary gain from the offense; or 
(2)  The court is of the opinion that a fine is uniquely adapted to deterrence of the type of offense involved or to the correction of the defendant. 
(d)  When an offender is sentenced to pay a fine, the court may provide for the payment to be made within a specified period of time or in specified installments. If no such provision is made a part of the sentence, the fine shall be payable forthwith. 
(e)  When an offender is sentenced to pay a fine, the court shall not impose at the same time an alternative sentence to be served in the event that the fine is not paid. The response of the court to nonpayment shall be determined only after the fine has not been paid, as provided in section 16-69. 
(Code 1964, § 7.530; Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 560.026.  
Sec. 16-69. - Response to nonpayment. 
(a)  When an offender sentenced to pay a fine defaults in the payment of the fine or in any installment, the court upon motion of the city counselor or upon its own motion may require the offender to show cause why the court should not confine the offender for nonpayment. The court may issue a warrant of arrest or a summons for the offender's appearance. 
(b)  Following an order to show cause under paragraph (a) of this section, unless the offender shows that such default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the sentence of the court, or not attributable to a failure to make a good faith effort to obtain the necessary funds for payment, the court may order the defendant confined for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days if the fine was imposed for conviction of a misdemeanor or infraction. The court may provide in its order that payment or satisfaction of the fine at any time will entitle the offender to release from such confinement or, after entering the order, may at any time reduce the sentence for good cause shown, including payment or satisfaction of the fine. 
(c)  If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine is excusable under the standards set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the court may enter an order allowing the offender additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the fine or of each installment, or revoking the fine or the unpaid portion in whole or in part. 
(d)  When a fine is imposed on a corporation it is the duty of the person or persons authorized to make disbursement of the assets of the corporation and their superiors to pay the fine from the assets of the corporation. The failure of such persons to do so shall render them subject to confinement under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 
(e)  Upon default in the payment of a fine or any installment thereof, the fine may be collected by any means authorized for the enforcement of money judgments. 
(Code 1964, § 7.535; Ord. No. 23371 , § 4, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 560.031.  
Sec. 16-70. - Revocation of a fine. 
A defendant who has been sentenced to pay a fine may at any time petition the sentencing court for a revocation of a fine or any unpaid portion thereof. If it appears to the satisfaction of the court that the circumstances which warranted the imposition of the fine no longer exist or that it would otherwise be unjust to require payment of the fine, the court may revoke the fine or the unpaid portion in whole or in part or may modify the method of payment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.540) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 560.036.  
Secs. 16-71—16-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY 
 
Sec. 16-81. - Voluntary act. 
(a)  A "voluntary act" is: 
(1)  A bodily movement performed while conscious as a result of effort or determination; or 
(2)  An omission to perform an act of which the actor is physically capable. 
(b)  A person is not guilty of an offense unless his liability is based on conduct which includes a voluntary act. 
(c)  Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procures or receives the thing possessed, or having acquired control of it was aware of his control for a sufficient time to have enabled him to dispose of it or terminate his control. 
(d)  A person is not guilty of an offense based solely upon an omission to perform an act unless the law defining the offense expressly so provides, or a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise imposed by law. 
(Code 1964, § 7.545(1), (3), (4)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.011.  
Sec. 16-82. - Culpable mental state—Defined. 
(a)  A person "acts knowingly, " or with knowledge: 
(1)  With respect to his conduct or to attendant circumstances when he is aware of the nature of his conduct or that those circumstances exist; or 
(2)  With respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is practically certain to cause that result. 
(b)  A person "acts purposely, " or with purpose, with respect to his conduct or to a result thereof when it is his conscious object to engage in that conduct or to cause that result. 
(c)  A person "acts recklessly" or is reckless when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow and such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(d)  A person "acts with criminal negligence" or is criminally negligent when he fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow, and such failure constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(e)  Except as provided in section 16-84, a person is not guilty of an offense unless he acts with a culpable mental state, that is, unless he acts purposely or knowingly or recklessly or with criminal negligence, as the statute defining the offense may require with respect to the conduct, the result thereof or the attendant circumstances which constitute the material elements of the crime. 
(Code 1964, § 7.550) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.016.  
Sec. 16-83. - Same—Application. 
(a)  If the definition of an offense prescribes a culpable mental state but does not specify the conduct, attendant circumstances or result to which it applies, the prescribed culpable mental state applies to each such material element. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 16-84, if the definition of an offense does not expressly prescribe a culpable mental state, a culpable mental state is nonetheless required and is established if a person acts purposely or knowingly or recklessly, but criminal negligence is not sufficient. 
(c)  If the definition of an offense prescribes criminal negligence as the culpable mental state, it is also established if a person acts purposely or knowingly or recklessly. When recklessness suffices to establish a culpable mental state, it is also established if a person acts purposely or knowingly. When acting knowingly suffices to establish a culpable mental state, it is also established if a person acts purposely. 
(d)  Knowledge that conduct constitutes an offense, or knowledge of the existence, meaning or application of the statute defining an offense is not an element of an offense unless the ordinance clearly so provides. 
(Code 1964, § 7.555) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.021.  
Sec. 16-84. - Same—When not required. 
A culpable mental state is not required: 
(1)  If the offense is an infraction and no culpable mental state is prescribed by the ordinance defining the offense; or 
(2)  If the ordinance defining the offense clearly indicates a purpose to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state as to a specific element of the offense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.560) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.026.  
Sec. 16-85. - Ignorance and mistake. 
(a)  A person is not relieved of criminal liability for conduct because he engages in such conduct under a mistaken belief of fact or law unless such mistake negatives the existence of the mental state required by the offense. 
(b)  A person is not relieved of criminal liability for conduct because he believes his conduct does not constitute an offense unless his belief is reasonable and 
(1)  The offense is defined by an administrative regulation or order which is not known to him and has not been published or otherwise made reasonably available to him, and he could not have acquired such knowledge by the exercise of due diligence pursuant to facts known to him; or 
(2)  He acts in a reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous, contained in: 
a.  A statute or ordinance; 
b.  An opinion or order of an appellate court; 
c.  An official interpretation of the statute, regulation or order defining the offense made by a public official or agency legally authorized to interpret such statute, regulation or order. 
(c)  The burden of injecting the issue of reasonable belief that conduct does not constitute an offense under subparagraphs (b)(l) and (2) of this section is on the defendant. 
(Code 1964, § 7.565) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.031.  
Sec. 16-86. - Accountability for conduct. 
A person with the required culpable mental state is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his own conduct or by the conduct of another person for which he is criminally responsible, or both. 
(Code 1964, § 7.570) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.036.  
Sec. 16-87. - Responsibility for the conduct of another. 
(a)  A person is criminally responsible for the conduct of another when: 
(1)  The ordinance defining the offense makes him so responsible; or 
(2)  Either before or during the commission of an offense with the purpose of promoting the commission of an offense, he aids or agrees to aid or attempts to aid such other person in planning, committing or attempting to commit the offense. 
(b)  However, a person is not so responsible if: 
(1)  He is the victim of the offense committed or attempted; 
(2)  The offense is so defined that his conduct was necessarily incident to the commission or attempt to commit the offense. If his conduct constitutes a related but separate offense, he is criminally responsible for that offense but not for the conduct or offense committed or attempted by the other person; 
(3)  Before the commission of the offense he abandons his purpose and gives timely warning to law enforcement authorities or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense. 
(c)  The defense provided by subparagraph (b)(3) of this section is an affirmative defense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.575) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.041.  
Sec. 16-88. - Defense precluded. 
It is no defense to any prosecution for an offense in which the criminal responsibility of the defendant is based upon the conduct of another that: 
(1)  Such other person has been acquitted or has not been convicted or has been convicted of some other offense or degree of offense or lacked criminal capacity or was unaware of the defendant's criminal purpose or is immune from prosecution or is not amenable to justice; or 
(2)  The defendant does not belong to that class of persons who was legally capable of committing the offense in an individual capacity. 
(Code 1964, § 7.580) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.046.  
Sec. 16-89. - Conviction of different degrees of offenses. 
Except as otherwise provided, when two (2) or more persons are criminally responsible for an offense which is divided into degrees, each person is guilty of such degree as is compatible with his own culpable mental state and with his own accountability for an aggravating or mitigating fact or circumstance. 
(Code 1964 § 7.585) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.051.  
Sec. 16-90. - Liability of corporations and unincorporated associations. 
(a)  A corporation is guilty of an offense if: 
(1)  The conduct constituting the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on corporations by law; or 
(2)  The conduct constituting the offense is engaged in by an agent of the corporation while acting within the scope of his employment and in behalf of the corporation, and the offense is a misdemeanor or an infraction, or the offense is one defined by an ordinance that clearly indicates a legislative intent to impose such criminal liability on a corporation; or 
(3)  The conduct constituting the offense is engaged in, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated by the board of directors or by a high managerial agent acting within the scope of his employment and in behalf of the corporation. 
(b)  An unincorporated association is guilty of an offense if: 
(1)  The conduct constituting the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on the association by law; or 
(2)  The conduct constituting the offense is engaged in by an agent of the association while acting within the scope of his employment and in behalf of the association and the offense is one defined by an ordinance that clearly indicates a legislative intent to impose such criminal liability on the association. 
(Code 1964, § 7.590(1), (2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.056.  
Sec. 16-91. - Liability of individual for conduct of corporation or unincorporated association. 
A person is criminally liable for conduct constituting an offense which he performs or causes to be performed in the name of or in behalf of a corporation or unincorporated association to the same extent as if such conduct were performed in his own name or behalf. 
(Code 1964, § 7.600) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.061.  
Sec. 16-92. - Entrapment. 
(a)  The commission of acts which would otherwise constitute an offense is not criminal if the actor engaged in the prescribed conduct because he was entrapped by a law enforcement officer or a person acting in cooperation with such an officer. 
(b)  An entrapment is perpetrated if a law enforcement officer or a person acting in cooperation with such an officer, for the purpose of obtaining evidence of the commission of an offense, solicits, encourages or otherwise induces another person to engage in conduct when he was not ready and willing to engage in such conduct. 
(c)  The relief afforded by paragraph (a) of this section is not available as to any crime which involves causing physical injury to or placing in danger of physical injury a person other than the person perpetrating the entrapment. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of entrapment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.605) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.066.  
Sec. 16-93. - Duress. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the conduct charged to constitute an offense because he was coerced to do so, by the use of, or threatened imminent use of, unlawful physical force upon him or a third person, which force or threatened force a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist. 
(b)  The defense of duress, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, is not available as to any offense when the defendant recklessly places himself in a situation in which it is probable that he will be subjected to the force or threatened force described in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.610) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.071.  
Sec. 16-94. - Intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(a)  A person who is in an intoxicated or drugged condition whether from alcohol, drugs, or other substance, is criminally responsible for conduct unless such condition: 
(1)  Negatives the existence of the mental states of purpose or knowledge when such mental states are elements of the offense charged or of an included offense; or 
(2)  Is involuntarily produced and deprived him of the capacity to know or appreciate the nature, quality or wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(Code 1964, § 7.615) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.076.  
Sec. 16-95. - Infancy. 
(a)  No person shall be convicted of any offense unless he had attained his fourteenth birthday at the time the offense was committed. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of infancy. 
(Code 1964, § 7.620) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.081.  
Sec. 16-96. - Lack of responsibility because of mental disease or defect. 
(a)  A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he did not know or appreciate the nature, quality or wrongfulness of his conduct or was incapable of conforming his conduct to the requirements of law. 
(b)  The procedures for the defense of lack of responsibility because of mental disease or defect are governed by the applicable provisions of chapter 522 RSMo. 
(Code 1964, § 7.625) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 562.086.  
Secs. 16-97—16-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DEFENSE OF JUSTIFICATION 
 
Sec. 16-106. - Definitions. 
As used in sections 16-106.1 through 16-115, the following terms shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Deadly force. "Deadly force" means physical force which the actor uses with the purpose of causing or which he knows to create a substantial risk of causing death or serious physical injury. 
Dwelling. "Dwelling" means any building or inhabitable structure, though movable or temporary, or a portion thereof, which is for the time being the actor's home or place of lodging. 
Premises. "Premises" includes any building, inhabitable structure and any real property. 
Private person. "Private person" means any person other than a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1964, § 7.630)  
Sec. 16-106.1. - Civil remedies unaffected. 
The fact that conduct is justified under this division does not abolish or impair any remedy for such conduct which is available in any civil actions. 
(Code 1964, § 7.635) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.016.  
Sec. 16-107. - Execution of public duty. 
(a)  Unless inconsistent with the provisions of this division defining the justifiable use of physical force, or with some other provision of law, conduct which would otherwise constitute an offense is justifiable and not criminal when such conduct is required or authorized by a statutory provision or by a judicial decree. Among the kinds of such provisions and decrees are: 
(1)  Laws defining duties and functions of public servants; 
(2)  Laws defining duties of private persons to assist public servants in the performance of their functions; 
(3)  Laws governing the execution of legal process; 
(4)  Laws governing the military services and the conduct of war; 
(5)  Judgments and orders of courts. 
(b)  The defense of justification afforded by paragraph (a) of this section applies: 
(1)  When a person reasonably believes his conduct to be required or authorized by the judgment or directions of a competent court or tribunal or in the legal execution of legal process, notwithstanding lack of jurisdiction of the court or defect in the legal process; 
(2)  When a person reasonably believes his conduct to be required or authorized to assist a public servant in the performance of his duties, notwithstanding that the public servant exceeded his legal authority. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.640) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.021.  
Sec. 16-108. - Justification generally. 
(a)  Unless inconsistent with other provisions of this division defining justifiable use of physical force, or with some provision of law, conduct which would otherwise constitute any crime or murder is justifiable and not criminal when it is necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury which is about to occur by reason of a situation occasioned or developed through no fault of the actor, and which is of such gravity that, according to ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability of avoiding the injury outweighs the desirability of avoiding the injury sought to be prevented by the ordinance defining the crime charged. 
(b)  The necessity and justifiability of conduct under paragraph (a) of this section may not rest upon considerations pertaining only to the morality and advisability of the ordinance either in its general application or with respect to its application to a particular class of cases arising thereunder. Whenever evidence relating to the defense of justification under this section is offered, the court shall rule as a matter of law whether the claimed facts and circumstances would, if established, constitute a justification. 
(c)  The defense of justification under this section is an affirmative defense. 
(Code 1964, § 7.645) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.026.  
Sec. 16-109. - Use of force in defense of persons. 
(a)  A person may, subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, use physical force upon another person when and to the extent he reasonably believes such to be necessary to defend himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of unlawful force by such other person, unless: 
(1)  The actor was the initial aggressor; except that in such case his use of force is nevertheless justified provided: 
a.  He has withdrawn from the encounter and effectively communicated such withdrawal to such other person but the latter persists in continuing the incident by the use or threatened use of unlawful force; or 
b.  He is a law enforcement officer and as such is an aggressor pursuant to section 563.046, RSMo.; or 
c.  The aggression is justified under some other provision of this division or other provision of law. 
(2)  Under the circumstances as the actor reasonably believes them to be, the person whom he seeks to protect would not be justified in using such protective force. 
(b)  A person may not use deadly force upon another person under the circumstances specified in paragraph (a) of this section unless deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(c)  The justification afforded by this section extends to the use of physical restraint as protective force provided that the actor takes all reasonable measures to terminate the restraint as soon as it is reasonable to do so. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.650) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.031.  
Sec. 16-110. - Use of physical force in defense of premises. 
(a)  A person in possession or control of premises or a person who is licensed or privileged to be thereon, may, subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, use physical force upon another person when and to the extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to prevent or terminate what he reasonably believes to be the commission or attempted commission of the crime of trespass by the other person. 
(b)  A person may not use deadly force under circumstances described in paragraph (a) of this section unless the use of deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.655) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.036.  
Sec. 16-111. - Use of physical force in defense of property. 
(a)  A person may, subject to the limitations of paragraph (b) of this section, use physical force upon another person when and to the extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to prevent what he reasonably believes to be the commission or attempted commission by such person of stealing, property damage or tampering in any degree. 
(b)  A person may not use deadly force under circumstances described in paragraph (a) of this section unless the use of deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(c)  The justification afforded by this section extends to the use of physical restraint as protective force provided that the actor takes all reasonable measures to terminate the restraint as soon as it is reasonable to do so. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.660) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.041.  
Sec. 16-112. - Law enforcement officer's use of force in making an arrest. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer need not retreat or desist from efforts to effect the arrest, or from efforts to prevent the escape from custody, of a person he reasonably believes to have committed an offense because of resistance or threatened resistance of the arrestee. In addition to the use of physical force authorized under other sections of this chapter, he is, subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) and (c) of this section, justified in the use of such physical force as he reasonably believes is immediately necessary to effect the arrest or to prevent the escape from custody. 
(b)  The use of any physical force in making an arrest is not justified under this section unless the arrest is lawful or the law enforcement officer reasonably believes the arrest is lawful. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer in effecting an arrest or in preventing an escape from custody is not justified in using deadly force unless the use of deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.665) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.046.  
Sec. 16-113. - Private person's use of force in making an arrest. 
(a)  A private person who has been directed by a person he reasonably believes to be a law enforcement officer to assist such officer to effect an arrest or to prevent escape from custody may, subject to the limitations of paragraph (c) of this section, use physical force when and to the extent that he reasonably believes such to be necessary to carry out such officer's direction unless he knows or believes that the arrest or prospective arrest is not or was not authorized. 
(b)  A private person acting on his own account may, subject to the limitations of paragraph (c) of this section, use physical force to effect arrest or prevent escape only when and to the extent such is immediately necessary to effect the arrest, or to prevent escape from custody, of a person whom he reasonably believes to have committed a crime and who in fact has committed such crime. 
(c)  A private person in effecting an arrest or in preventing an escape from custody is not justified in using deadly force unless the use of deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.670) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.051.  
Sec. 16-114. - Use of force to prevent escape from confinement. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 16-113, a guard or other law enforcement officer may, subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, use physical force when he reasonably believes such to be immediately necessary to prevent escape from confinement or in transit thereto or therefrom. 
(b)  A guard or other law enforcement officer may not use deadly force under circumstances described in paragraph (a) of this section unless the use of deadly force is authorized under state or federal law. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.675) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.056.  
Sec. 16-115. - Use of force by persons with responsibility for care, discipline or safety of others. 
(a)  The use of physical force by an actor upon another person is justifiable when the actor is a parent, guardian or other person entrusted with the care and supervision of a minor or an incompetent person or when the actor is a teacher or other person entrusted with the care and supervision of a minor for a special purpose; and 
(1)  The actor reasonably believes that the force used is necessary to promote the welfare of a minor or incompetent person, or, if the actor's responsibility for the minor is for special purposes, to further that special purpose or to maintain reasonable discipline in a school, class or other group; and 
(2)  The force used is not designed to cause or believed to create a substantial risk of causing death, serious physical injury, disfigurement, extreme pain or extreme emotional distress. 
(b)  The use of physical force by an actor upon another person is justifiable when the actor is a person responsible for the operation of or the maintenance of order in a vehicle or other carrier of passengers and the actor reasonably believes that such force is necessary to prevent interference with its operation or to maintain order in the vehicle or other carrier, except that deadly force may not be used unless the use of deadly force is authorized by state and federal law. 
(c)  The use of physical force by an actor upon another person is justified when the actor is a physician or a person assisting at his direction; and 
(1)  The force is used for the purpose of administering a medically acceptable form of treatment which the actor reasonably believes to be adapted to promoting the physical or mental health of the patient; and 
(2)  The treatment is administered with the consent of the patient or, if the patient is a minor or an incompetent person, with the consent of the parent, guardian, or other person legally competent to consent on his behalf, or the treatment is administered in an emergency when the actor reasonably believes that no one competent to consent can be consulted and that a reasonable person, wishing to safeguard the welfare of the patient, would consent. 
(d)  The use of physical force by an actor upon another person is justifiable when the actor acts under the reasonable belief that: 
(1)  Such other person is about to commit suicide or to inflict serious physical injury upon himself; and 
(2)  The force used is necessary to thwart such result. 
(e)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.680) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 563.061.  
Secs. 16-116—16-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - INCHOATE OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 16-121. - Attempt. 
(a)  A person is guilty of attempt to commit an offense when, with the purpose of committing the offense, he does any act which is a substantial step towards the commission of the offense. A "substantial step" is conduct which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the offense attempted was, under the actual attendant circumstances, factually or legally impossible of commission, if such offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, an attempt to commit an offense is a class C misdemeanor if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor of any degree. 
(Code 1964, § 7.685) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 564.01.  
Sec. 16-122. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  A person is guilty of conspiracy with another person or persons to commit an offense if, with the purposes of promoting or facilitating its commission he agrees with such other person or persons that they or one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes such offense. 
(b)  If a person guilty of conspiracy knows that a person with whom he conspires to commit an offense has conspired with another person or persons to commit the same offense, he is guilty of conspiring with such other person or persons to commit such offense, whether or not he knows their identity. 
(c)  If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, he is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple offenses are the object of the same agreement. 
(d)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by him or by a person with whom he conspired. 
(e)  (l) No one shall be convicted of conspiracy if, after conspiring to commit the offense, he prevented the accomplishment of the objectives of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a renunciation of his criminal purpose. 
(2)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of renunciation of criminal purpose under subparagraph (e)(1) of this section. 
(f)  For the purpose of time limitations on prosecutions: 
(1)  Conspiracy is a continuing course of conduct which terminates when the offense or offenses which are its object are committed or the agreement that they be committed is abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he conspired. 
(2)  If an individual abandons the agreement, the conspiracy is terminated as to him only if he advises those with whom he has conspired of his abandonment or he informs the law enforcement authorities of the existence of the conspiracy and of his participation in it. 
(g)  A person may not be charged, convicted or sentenced on the basis of the same course of conduct of both the actual commission of an offense and a conspiracy to commit that offense. 
(h)  Unless otherwise provided, a conspiracy to commit an offense is a class C misdemeanor if the object of the conspiracy is a misdemeanor of any degree or an infraction. 
(Code 1964, § 7.690) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 564.016.  
Secs. 16-123—16-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Gambling devices prohibited in alcoholic beverage establishments, § 4-26. 
 
Sec. 16-132. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of indecent exposure if he knowingly exposes his genitals under circumstances in which he knows that his conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm. 
(b)  Indecent exposure is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.760) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 566.130.  
Sec. 16-133. - Unlawful entry into a shower or toilet facility. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful entry into a shower or toilet facility if he knowingly enters a shower, toilet or dressing facility reserved for persons of the opposite sex in any dormitory or rooming house, except: 
(1)  A person authorized to clean, repair or maintain the facilities may enter the facilities if he first knocks at the entrance to the facilities and announces his purpose and gives persons in the facility time to exit prior to entering the facility. 
(2)  A person of one sex may use the facilities reserved for the other sex if the facility consists of one toilet or one shower or both a toilet and a shower and the facility door is locked against entry by another person. 
(3)  A person of one sex may use the facilities reserved for the other sex if the management of the entity providing the facilities has directed the use and taken steps to prevent the use of the facility by persons of both sexes at the same time. 
(b)  Unlawful entry into a toilet facility is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13360, § 1, 7-6-92)  
Secs. 16-134—16-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 16-141. - Assault. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of assault if: 
(1)  He attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to another person; or 
(2)  With criminal negligence he causes physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; or 
(3)  He purposely places another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or 
(4)  He recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or 
(5)  He knowingly causes physical contact with another person knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative. 
(b)  Assault is a class A misdemeanor unless committed under subparagraphs (a)(3) or (5) of this section, in which case it is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.700) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 565.070.  
Sec. 16-142. - Consent as a defense. 
(a)  When conduct is charged to constitute an offense because it causes or threatens physical injury, consent to that conduct or to the infliction of the injury is a defense only if: 
(1)  The physical injury consented to or threatened by the conduct is not serious physical injury; or 
(2)  The conduct and the harm are reasonably foreseeable hazards of: 
a.  The victim's occupation or profession; or 
b.  Joint participation in a lawful athletic contest or competitive sport. 
(3)  The consent establishes a justification for the conduct under division 7 of this article. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of consent. 
(Code 1964, § 7.705) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 565.080.  
Sec. 16-143. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of harassment if, without good cause, that person engages in any act with the purpose to cause emotional distress to another person. 
(b)  Harassment is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.710; Ord. No. 23372 , § 1, 11-6-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 565.090.  
Sec. 16-144. - Interference with custody. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of interference with custody if, knowing that he has no legal right to do so, he takes or entices from lawful custody any person entrusted by order of a court to the custody of another person or institution. 
(b)  Interference with custody is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.715) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 565.150.  
Sec. 16-145. - Harassment of a bicyclist, pedestrian or person in a wheelchair. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of harassment of a bicyclist, pedestrian or person in a wheelchair if the person: 
(1)  Knowingly throws an object at or in the direction of any person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair for the purpose of frightening, disturbing or injuring that person; or 
(2)  Threatens any person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair for the purpose of frightening or disturbing that person; or 
(3)  Sounds a horn, shouts or otherwise directs sound toward any person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair for the purpose of frightening or disturbing that person; or 
(4)  Knowingly places a person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or 
(5)  Knowingly engages in conduct that creates a risk of death or serious physical injury to a person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair. 
(b)  Harassment of a bicyclist, pedestrian or person in a wheelchair is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 20306, § 1, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 20450, § 1, 10-19-09)  
Sec. 16-146. - Conversion therapy of minors prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this subsection: 
Conversion therapy or reparative therapy means any practice or treatment that seeks to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity, including efforts to change behaviors or gender expressions or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender. Conversion therapy shall not include counseling that provides support and assistance to a person undergoing gender transition, or counseling that provides acceptance, support and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and development, including sexual orientation-neutral treatment interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity. 
Gender identity or expression means the gender-related identity, appearance, expression, behavior or mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth. 
Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Provider means any licensed medical or mental health professional including, but not limited to, licensed professional counselors, licensed psychologists, licensed clinical social workers, provisional licensed professional counselors, provisional and temporary licensed psychologists, licensed and provisional licensed marital and family therapists, psychiatrists, certified substance abuse counselors, certified school counselors, behavior analysts and any professional licensed under RSMo Chs. 334 and 337. 
Sexual orientation means the preference or practice of homosexuality, heterosexuality, asexuality, and bisexuality, or some combination thereof, by consenting adults, or as perceived by others, but not including sexual preference or practice between an adult and a minor. 
(b)  Prohibited practice. It shall be unlawful for any provider to provide conversion therapy or reparative therapy to a minor, regardless of whether the provider receives compensation in exchange for such services. 
(Ord. No. 24045 , § 1, 10-7-19)  
Secs. 16-147—16-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Riding in stolen motor vehicles, § 14-9. 
 
Sec. 16-150. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in sections 16-151 through 16-169, shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Enter unlawfully or remain unlawfully. A person "enters unlawfully or remains unlawfully" in or upon premises when he is not licensed or privileged to do so. A person who, regardless of his purpose, enters or remains in or upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with license and privilege unless he defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated to him by the owner of such premises or by other authorized person. A license or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open to the public. 
Inhabitable structure. "Inhabitable structure" includes a ship, trailer, sleeping car, airplane, or other vehicle or structure: 
(1)  Where any person lives or carries on business or other calling; or 
(2)  Where people assemble for purposes of business, government, education, religion, entertainment or public transportation; or 
(3)  Which is used for overnight accommodation of persons. 
Any such vehicle or structure is "inhabitable" regardless of whether a person is actually present. 
Inhabitable structure of another. If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, any unit not occupied by the actor is an "inhabitable structure of another." 
Of another. Property is that "of another" if any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the actor, has possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that, for purposes of sections 16-161 through 16-163, property shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security arrangement. 
To tamper. "To tamper" means to interfere with something improperly, to meddle with it, displace it, make unwarranted alterations in its existing condition, or to deprive, temporarily, the owner or possessor of that thing. 
Utility. "Utility" means an enterprise which provides gas, electric, steam, water, sewage disposal, communication services or cable television service and any common carrier. It may be either publicly or privately owned or operated. 
(Code 1964, § 7.765)  
Sec. 16-151. - Reckless burning or exploding. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of reckless burning or exploding when he knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another. 
(b)  Reckless burning or exploding is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.770) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.060.  
Sec. 16-152. - Negligent burning or exploding. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of negligent burning or exploding when he with criminal negligence causes damage to property of another by fire or explosion. 
(b)  Negligent burning or exploding is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.775) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.065.  
Sec. 16-153. - Property damage in the first degree. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of property damage in the first degree if: 
(1)  He knowingly damages property of another to an extent exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); or 
(2)  He damages property to an extent exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the purpose of defrauding an insurer. 
(b)  Property damage in the first degree is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.780) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.110.  
Sec. 16-154. - Property damage in the second degree. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of property damage in the second degree if: 
(1)  He knowingly damages property of another; or 
(2)  He damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer. 
(b)  Property damage in the second degree is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.785) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.120.  
Sec. 16-155. - Claim of right. 
(a)  A person does not commit an offense of damaging, tampering with, operating, riding in or upon, or making connection with property of another if he does so under a claim of right and has reasonable grounds to believe he has such right. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of right; provided, however, that this defense shall not be available to a tenant in any prosecution involving property damage to a premises leased or rented by that tenant from another. 
(Code 1964, § 7.790) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.130.  
Sec. 16-156. - Trespass in the first degree. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of trespass in the first degree if he knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property. 
(b)  A person does not commit the crime of trespass in the first degree by entering or remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to which notice against trespass is given by: 
(1)  Actual communication to the actor; or 
(2)  Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. 
(c)  Trespass in the first degree is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.795) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.130.  
Sec. 16-157. - Trespass in the second degree. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if he enters unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of absolute liability. 
(b)  Trespass in the second degree is an infraction. 
(Code 1964, § 7.800) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.150.  
Sec. 16-158. - Tampering. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of tampering if he: 
(1)  Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; or 
(2)  Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile. airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle. 
(b)  Tampering is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.805) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.090.  
Sec. 16-159. - Tampering with a utility. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of tampering with a utility if he: 
(1)  Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or 
(2)  Knowingly shall accept or receive the use or benefit of gas, electric current, steam, water, sewage disposal, communication service or cable television service: 
a.  When such gas, electric current, steam, water, sewage disposal, communication service or cable television service should pass through a meter but has been directed therefrom; or 
b.  When such gas, electric current, steam, water, sewage disposal, communication service or cable television service shall have been obtained by diversion of same without authorization from the utility producing or providing such service. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the presence on a meter or other property of a utility of any wire, pipe or other device whatsoever which affects the diversion of gas, electric current, steam, water, sewage disposal, communication service or cable television service without the proper measurement or registration of such service, or which shall have been installed or attached without the authorization of the utility providing such service shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof on the part of the person who has custody or control of the building or portion of building to which the use or benefit of such service shall have been diverted and shall further be prima facie evidence of the intent of such person to accept or receive the use of such service. 
(c)  Tampering with a utility is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.810) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 569.090.  
Sec. 16-160. - Peeping toms. 
Whoever shall be found in the city trespassing upon the premises of another whereon is located a dwelling house during the hours between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise, such person being upon such premises and being then and there engaged in peeping or peering into such dwelling house, or being upon such premises with the intention of peeping or peering into such dwelling house, shall be deemed guilty of a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.815)  
Sec. 16-161. - Uninvited solicitation by peddlers, etc. 
(a)  The practice of being in and upon posted private residential property in the city, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, is declared unlawful, and is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  The posting in a conspicuous place of a notice stating "No Soliciting, " or similar language upon the premises of a private residence, shall be prima facie evidence that the solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise have not been requested or invited to be in and upon private residential property. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the solicitation of orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise for charitable purposes. 
(d)  Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance, as described in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1105)  
Sec. 16-162. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15929, § 1, adopted March 15, 1999 repealed § 16-162, which pertained to handbills and derived from Code 1964, § 7.1110.  
Sec. 16-163. - Posting bills, painting signs, etc., prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post or cause to be posted any bill, or paint, write or print, or cause to be painted, written or printed, any sign or device on any sidewalk, street, bridge, viaduct, pole, tree, post or on any wall, building or structure, or other property of another, unless in the case of private property, the prior consent of the owner thereof has been secured. For the purposes of this section, the presence of any bill, sign, device, painting, or printing in a location prohibited by this section which contains or includes the name of a business or corporation or the name by which a business or corporation is doing business, shall be prima facie evidence that both the business or corporation and its manager(s), officer(s) and director(s) had knowledge thereof and had posted, painted, written, or printed such bill, sign, device, painting or printing in such location or caused the same to be posted, painted, written or printed in such location. Further for the purposes of this section, the presence of any bill, sign, device, painting or printing in a location prohibited by this section which shall contain or include the name of any person shall be prima facie evidence that such person had knowledge thereof and had posted, painted, written or printed such bill, sign, device, printing or painting in such location or caused the same to be posted, painted, written or printed in such location. 
(b)  The director of community development is hereby authorized to issue permits allowing the placing of house numbers on curbs on public streets and other public rights-of-way and to promulgate rules and regulations governing the size, style, location and materials to be used in such numbering which will assure that such numbering is easily legible and uniform throughout the city. The director of community development is authorized to issue permits under such conditions and to such persons as the director deems competent and responsible to see that the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder are carried out. The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to the placing of street numbers on curbs which conform to the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and for which a permit has been issued. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7.1115, 7.1120; Ord. No. 21095, § 5, 9-19-11) 
Cross reference— Signs generally, Ch. 23.  
Sec. 16-164. - Serial numbers on articles. 
(a)  Removing, covering, altering or defacing. No person shall destroy, remove, cover, conceal, alter, deface or cause to be destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, the manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark, on any firearm, tape player, phonograph, radio or television receiver, combination thereof, radio device or accessory, outboard motor, piano, power tool or other article which bears a manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark, for any reason whatsoever. 
(b)  Sale of article after removal, etc. No person shall sell, offer for sale, pawn or use as security for a loan, any firearm, tape player, phonograph, radio or television receiver or combination thereof, radio device or accessory, outboard motor, piano, power tool or other article which bears a manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark, from which the manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark, has been removed, or which has been destroyed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced. 
(c)  Purchase or possession of article after removal, etc. No person shall buy, receive as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner receive or have in his possession any article mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, on which the manufacturer's original number, mark, serial number or other distinguishing number or mark has been destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, and possession of any such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation hereof. 
(d)  Articles in possession prior to enactment of section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, any person who has in their possession on May 16, 1977, an article described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall not be in violation of the provisions of this section and in addition such individuals may sell or offer for sale such articles in their possession, provided they registered the article with the chief of police by June 15, 1977. The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish procedures for the registration of such articles. 
(e)  Penalty. Any violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1175)  
Sec. 16-165. - Sale of merchandise; information on ownership required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any item, object or merchandise unless such person has available on request the name, address and telephone number of the owner of such item, object or merchandise. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to sales made without private profit for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, civic or religious purpose and when the person or organization conducting such sale holds a special permit for such sale issued by the city business license administrator under section 13-20 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1180)  
Sec. 16-166. - Notice for residential dwelling units; information on zoning district and occupancy limitations required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building with one (1) or more dwelling units to sell or lease such property without first providing to the buyer or lessee written notice of the zoning district in which the dwelling unit or units are located and the applicable occupancy limitations contained in chapter 29. The notice shall be contained in either the seller's disclosure, the real estate contract, the lease agreement, or on a zoning district and occupancy disclosure form provided by the director of community development. The definition of "dwelling unit" provided in section 22-183 of this Code shall apply to this section. 
(Ord. No. 21854, § 2, 10-21-13)  
Secs. 16-167—16-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11.5. - STEALING 
 
Sec. 16-170. - Definitions. 
As used in sections 16-171 through 16-173, the following terms shall have the meaning given in this section. 
Appropriate means to take, obtain, use, transfer, conceal or retain possession of. 
Coercion. Coercion means a threat, however communicated: 
(1)  To commit any crime; or 
(2)  To inflict physical injury in the future on the person threatened or another; or 
(3)  To accuse any person of any crime; or 
(4)  To expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or 
(5)  To harm the credit or business repute of any person; or 
(6)  To take or withhold action as a public servant, or to cause a public servant to take or withhold action; or 
(7)  To inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor. 
A threat of accusation, lawsuit or other invocation of official action is not coercion if the property sought to be obtained by virtue of such threat was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which the accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful service. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification as to any threat. 
Deceit. "Deceit" means purposely making a representation which is false and which the actor does not believe to be true and upon which the victim relies, as to a matter of fact, law, value, intention or other state of mind. The term "deceit" does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed. Deception as to the actor's intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise. 
Deprive. "Deprive" means: 
(1)  To withhold property from the owner permanently; or 
(2)  To restore property only upon payment of reward or other compensation; or 
(3)  To use or dispose of property in a manner that makes recovery of the property by the owner unlikely. 
Of another. Property is that "of another" if any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the actor, has possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that, for purposes of sections 16-161 through 16-163, property shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security arrangement. 
Property. "Property" means anything of value whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, in possession or in action, and shall include, but not be limited to, the evidence of a debt actually executed but not delivered or issued as a valid instrument. 
Receiving. "Receiving" means acquiring possession, control of title or lending on the security of the property. 
Services. "Services" includes transportation, telephone, electricity, gas, water or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, admission to exhibitions and use of vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 7.820)  
Sec. 16-171. - Stealing. 
A person commits the crime of stealing if he appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him thereof, either without his consent or by means of deceit or coercion. Stealing is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.825) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 570.030.  
Sec. 16-172. - Lost property. 
(a)  A person who appropriates lost property shall not be deemed to have stolen that property within the meaning of section 16-171 unless such property is found under circumstances which gave the finder knowledge of or means of inquiry as to the true owner. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of lost property. 
(Code 1964, § 7.830) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 570.060.  
Sec. 16-173. - Claim of right. 
(a)  A person does not commit an offense under section 16-171 if, at the time of the appropriation, he: 
(1)  Acted in the honest belief that he had the right to do so; or 
(2)  Acted in the honest belief that the owner, if present, would have consented to the appropriation. 
(b)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of right. 
(Code 1964, § 7.835) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 570.070.  
Secs. 16-174, 16-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly persons at fires, § 9-2; false fire alarms, § 9-3. 
 
Sec. 16-176. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this division shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Intimidate. "Intimidate" means to knowingly act or speak in such a manner as to cause a reasonable person to fear for his immediate personal safety. 
Panhandling. "Panhandling" means any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person. "Panhandling" also means any solicitation for the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. Panhandling does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. 
Private property. "Private property" means any place which at the time is not open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
Property of another. "Property of another" means any property in which the actor does not have a possessory interest. 
Public place. "Public place" means any place which at the time is open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
Separate premises. If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such units are "separate premises." 
(Code 1964, § 7.850; Ord. No. 14565, § 1, 7-17-95; Ord. No. 17923, § 2, 12-1-03)  
Sec. 16-176.1. - Peace disturbance—Generally. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of peace disturbance if: 
(1)  That person unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person or persons by: 
a.  Loud noise; or 
b.  Offensive and indecent language which is likely to produce an immediate violent response from a reasonable recipient; or 
c.  Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person under circumstances which is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or 
d.  Creating a noxious and offensive odor. 
(2)  That person is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing: 
a.  Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or 
b.  The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place. 
(3)  With the purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, that person engages in fighting or in violent or tumultuous behavior. 
(b)  Peace disturbance is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.840; Ord. No. 10324, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 23372 , 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-177. - Private peace disturbance. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of private peace disturbance if he is on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to another person or persons on the same premises by: 
(1)  Threatening to commit a crime against any person; or 
(2)  Fighting. 
(b)  Private peace disturbance is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.845) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 574.020.  
Sec. 16-178. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of unlawful assembly if he knowingly assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this city, this state or of the United States with force or violence. 
(b)  Unlawful assembly is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.855) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 574.040.  
Sec. 16-179. - Rioting. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of rioting if he knowingly assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this city, this state or of the United States with force or violence, and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of such laws with force or violence. 
(b)  Rioting is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.860) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 574.050.  
Sec. 16-180. - Refusal to disperse. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of refusal to disperse if, being present at the scene of an unlawful assembly, or at the scene of a riot, he knowingly fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot. 
(b)  Refusal to disperse is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.865) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 574.060.  
Sec. 16-181. - Keeping disorderly premises. 
A person commits the crime of keeping a disorderly premises if he shall permit, allow or encourage any peace disturbance, as defined in sections 16-176.1 and 16-177, to occur or continue on premises owned or controlled by him. Keeping disorderly premises is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.870l; Ord. No. 21068, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 16-182. - Impeding the use of streets, sidewalks or alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to impede, obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, sidewalk, alley or public way by another: 
(1)  By coasting, roller skating, ice skating, skateboarding, flying kites, playing baseball, football, soccer or any other game or sport on or in any street, sidewalk, alley or public way; or 
(2)  By sitting, standing, lying, or any other conduct with the intent to impede, obstruct or interfere with such free use of any street, sidewalk, alley or public way. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1100)  
Sec. 16-183. - Disorderly intoxication; consumption of liquor in certain public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any schoolhouse or church house within the city in which there is an assemblage of people, met for a lawful purpose, or any courthouse within the city, in a drunken or intoxicated and disorderly condition, or to drink or offer to drink any intoxicating liquors in the presence of such assembly of people, or in any courthouse within the city and any person or persons so doing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1145) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Authority, RSMo. § 67.310.  
Sec. 16-184. - Nuisance in places open to public view. 
Any person who commits a nuisance upon any place open to public view within the corporate limits of the city by emptying, discharging or evacuating ordure or urine thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1150)  
Sec. 16-185. - Possession of open container of alcoholic beverage or consumption of alcoholic beverage in certain public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage on any street, sidewalk or city parking facility unless such alcoholic beverage is in the original container and the seal is unbroken. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on any street, sidewalk or city parking facility. 
(c)  The definition of "alcoholic beverages" contained in Chapter 4 shall apply to this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverage by a passenger in a licensed motor vehicle or pedal trolley. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages served by an establishment licensed under section 4-48 of this Code provided that the restrictions of that section are observed. 
(f)  The city council may temporarily exclude any street from the provisions of this section in connection with the temporary closing of the street for a special event. 
(g)  A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
(h)  In prosecutions under this section, there is a rebuttable presumption that a container marked or labeled as containing an alcoholic beverage actually contains the described alcoholic beverage. This rebuttable presumption applies only in cases where a sample of the contents of the container has been preserved and is available to the defendant for testing. 
(Ord. No. 14048, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 17600, § 2, 2-17-03; Ord. No. 18460, § 2, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 23698 , § 3, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 16-186. - Unlawful panhandling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to panhandle on any day after sunset or before sunrise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to panhandle on residential or private property after having been asked to leave or refrain from panhandling by the owner or other person lawfully in charge of the property or lawfully in possession of the property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to panhandle when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within twenty (20) feet of a public toilet; 
(2)  Within twenty (20) feet of an automated teller machine; 
(3)  On any city bus or within twenty (20) feet of any bus station or bus stop; 
(4)  Within ten (10) feet of an entrance to a building; 
(5)  Within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to a bank, savings and loan or other financial institution; or 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a pay telephone. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to panhandle when the person solicited is waiting in any line, is seated at an outdoor dining facility or is in a motor vehicle. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to panhandle in an aggressive manner, including taking any of the following actions: 
(1)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to the solicitation; 
(2)  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; 
(3)  Blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
(4)  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
(5)  Closely following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited; 
(6)  Using profane or abusive language which is likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction from the person being solicited; 
(7)  Panhandling in a group of two (2) or more persons; or 
(8)  Panhandling with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or other thing of value. 
(f)  Panhandling in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14565 § 1, 7-17-95; Ord. No. 17923, § 2, 12-1-03)  
Secs. 16-187—16-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17923, § 2, adopted Dec. 1, 2003, repealed former § 16-187 of the Code, which pertained to aggressive peddling and derived from Ord. No. 14565, § 1, adopted July 17, 1995.  
DIVISION 13. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly persons at fires, § 9-2. 
 
Sec. 16-191. - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in sections 16-191.1 through 16-214, shall have the meaning given in this section. 
Affidavit means any written statement which is authorized or required by law to be made under oath, and which is sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths. 
Government. "Government" means any branch or agency of the government of this state or of any political subdivision thereof. 
Judicial proceeding. "Judicial proceeding" means any official proceeding in court, or any proceeding authorized by or held under the supervision of a court. 
Juror. "Juror" means a grand or petit juror, including a person who has been drawn or summoned to attend as a prospective juror. 
Jury. "Jury" means a grand or petit jury, including any panel which has been drawn or summoned to attend as prospective jurors. 
Official proceeding means any cause, matter, or proceeding where the laws of this state require that evidence considered therein be under oath or affirmation. 
Public record. "Public record" means any document which a public servant is required by law to keep. 
Testimony. "Testimony" means any oral statement under oath or affirmation. 
(Code 1964, § 7.875)  
Sec. 16-191.1. - Hindering prosecution. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of hindering prosecution if for the purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, convicting or punishment of another for conduct constituting a crime he: 
(1)  Harbors or conceals such person; or 
(2)  Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort to bring another into compliance with the law; or 
(3)  Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise or other means to aid him in avoiding discovery or apprehension; or 
(4)  Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation, anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or apprehension of such person. 
(b)  Hindering prosecution is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.880) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.030.  
Sec. 16-192. - False affidavit. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of making a false affidavit if, with purpose to mislead any person, he, in any affidavit, swears falsely to a fact which is material to the purpose for which such affidavit is made. 
(b)  For the purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  A fact is material, regardless of its admissibility under rules of evidence, if it could substantially affect, or did substantially affect, the course or outcome of the cause, matter or proceeding. 
(2)  Knowledge of the materiality of the statement is not an element of this crime, and it is no defense that: 
a.  The defendant mistakenly believed the fact to be immaterial; or 
b.  The defendant was not competent, for reasons other than mental disability or immaturity, to make the statement. 
(c)  It is a defense to a prosecution under paragraph (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement by affidavit or testimony but this defense shall not apply if the retraction was made after: 
(1)  The falsity of the statement was exposed; or 
(2)  Any person took substantial action in reliance on the statement. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(e)  Making a false affidavit is a class A misdemeanor if done for the purpose of misleading a public servant in the performance of his duty; otherwise making a false affidavit is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.885) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.050.  
Sec. 16-193. - False declarations. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of making a false declaration if, with the purpose to mislead a public servant in the performance of his duty, he: 
(1)  Submits any written false statement, which he does not believe to be true: 
a.  In an application for any pecuniary benefit or other consideration; or 
b.  On a form bearing notice, authorized by law, that false statements made therein are punishable; or 
(2)  Submits or invites reliance on: 
a.  Any writing which he knows to be forged, altered or otherwise lacking in authenticity; or 
b.  Any sample, specimen, map, boundary mark, or other object which he knows to be false. 
(b)  The falsity of the statement or the item under paragraph (a) of this section must be as to a fact which is material to the purposes for which the statement is made or the item submitted; and the provisions of paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of section 16-192 shall apply to prosecutions under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  It is a defense to a prosecution under paragraph (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or item but this defense shall not apply if the retraction was made after: 
(1)  The falsity of the statement or item was exposed; or 
(2)  The public servant took substantial action in reliance on the statement or item. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(e)  Making a false declaration is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.890) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.060.  
Sec. 16-194. - Proof of falsity of statements. 
No person shall be convicted of a violation of sections 16-191, 16-192 or 16-193 based upon the making of a false statement except upon proof of the falsity of the statement by: 
(a)  The direct evidence of two (2) witnesses; or 
(b)  The direct evidence of one witness together with strongly corroborating circumstances; or 
(c)  Demonstrative evidence which conclusively proves the falsity of the statement; or 
(d)  A directly contradictory statement by the defendant under oath together with 
(1)  The direct evidence of one witness; or 
(2)  Strongly corroborating circumstances; or 
(e)  A judicial admission by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false. An admission, which is not a judicial admission, by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false may constitute strongly corroborating circumstances. 
(Code 1964, § 7.895) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.070.  
Sec. 16-195. - False reports. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of making a false report if he knowingly: 
(1)  Gives false information to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of implicating another person in a crime; or 
(2)  Makes a false report to a law enforcement officer that a crime has occurred or is about to occur; or 
(3)  Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a law enforcement officer, security officer, fire department or other organization, official or volunteer, which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident calling for an emergency response has occurred. 
(b)  It is a defense to a prosecution under paragraph (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or report before the law enforcement officer or any other person took substantial action in reliance thereon. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  Making a false report is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.900) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.080.  
Sec. 16-196. - False bomb report. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of making a false bomb report if he knowingly makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to any person that a bomb or other explosive has been placed in any public or private place or vehicle. 
(b)  Making a false bomb report is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.905) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.090.  
Sec. 16-197. - Tampering with physical evidence. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of tampering with physical evidence if he: 
(1)  Alters, destroys, suppresses or conceals any record, document or thing with purpose to impair its verity, legibility or availability in any official proceeding or investigation; or 
(2)  Makes, presents or uses any record, document or thing knowing it to be false with purpose to mislead a public servant who is or may be engaged in any official proceeding or investigation. 
(b)  Tampering with physical evidence is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.910) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.100.  
Sec. 16-198. - Tampering with a public record. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of tampering with a public record if with the purpose to impair the verity, legibility or availability of a public record: 
(1)  He knowingly makes a false entry in or falsely alters any public record; or 
(2)  Knowing he lacks authority to do so, he destroys, suppresses or conceals any public record. 
(b)  Tampering with a public record is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.915) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.110.  
Sec. 16-199. - False impersonation. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of false impersonation if he: 
(1)  Falsely represents himself to be a public servant with purpose to induce another to submit to his pretended official authority or to rely upon his pretended official acts, and 
a.  Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or 
b.  Causes another to act in reliance upon his pretended official authority; or 
(2)  Falsely represents himself to be a person licensed to practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required by the laws of this state with purpose to induce another to rely upon such representation, and 
a.  Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or 
b.  Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation. 
(b)  False impersonation is a class B misdemeanor unless the person represents himself to be a law enforcement officer, in which case false impersonation is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.920) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.120.  
Sec. 16-200. - Impersonating officers. 
Any person who shall wear in public any badge, star or uniform imitating a police officer; or any person who shall use the word "police" on any uniform, badge, identification patch, identification card, vehicle, or as a part of any name under which such person is doing business shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.921)  
Sec. 16-201. - Simulating legal process. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of simulating legal process if, with purpose to mislead the recipient and cause him to take action in reliance thereon, he delivers or causes to be delivered: 
(1)  A request for the payment of money on behalf of any creditor that in form and substance simulates any legal process issued by any court of this state; or 
(2)  Any purported summons, subpoena or other legal process knowing that the process was not issued or authorized by any court. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a subpoena properly issued by a notary public. 
(c)  Simulating legal process is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.925) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.130.  
Sec. 16-202. - Resisting or interfering with arrest. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of resisting or interfering with arrest if, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest, or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person: 
(1)  Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from such officer; or 
(2)  Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical interference. 
(b)  This section applies to arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants and to arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or ordinance violation. 
(c)  It is no defense to a prosecution under paragraph (a) of this section that the law enforcement officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest. However nothing in this section shall be construed to bar civil suits for unlawful arrest. 
(d)  Resisting or interfering with arrest is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.930; Ord. No. 17104, § 1, 11-19-01) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.150.  
Sec. 16-202.1. - Interference with police dog or police horse. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of interference with a police dog or police horse if: 
(1)  Knowing the dog or horse is under the control of a police officer, the person obstructs, interferes with or prevents by any means or method the dog or horse from carrying out the commands of the police officer; or 
(2)  Knowing a police officer is in charge of a police dog or police horse, the person obstructs, interferes with or prevents by any means or method the police officer from maintaining control of the dog or horse. 
(b)  Interference with a police dog or police horse is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14512, § 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 19072, § 1, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 16-202.2. - Abuse of a police dog or police horse. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of abuse of a police dog or police horse if the person knowingly kills, assaults, beats, strikes, kicks, mutilates, injures, disables, arouses, angers or excites any police dog or police horse. 
(b)  Abuse of a police dog or police horse is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14512, § 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 19072, § 1, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 16-203. - Interference with legal process. 
(a)  Process includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court. 
(b)  A person commits the crime of interference with legal process if, knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any process, he interferes with or obstructs such person. 
(c)  Interference with legal process is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.935) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.160.  
Sec. 16-204. - Refusing to make an employee available for service of process. 
(a)  Any employer, or any agent who is in charge of a business establishment, commits the crime of refusing to make an employee available for service of process if he knowingly refuses to assist any officer authorized by law to serve process who calls at such business establishment during the working hours of an employee for the purpose of serving process on such employee, by failing or refusing to make such employee available for service of process. 
(b)  Refusing to make an employee available for service of process is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.940) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.170.  
Sec. 16-205. - Failure to execute an arrest warrant. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer commits the crime of failure to execute an arrest warrant if, with the purpose of allowing any person charged with or convicted of a crime to escape, he fails to execute any arrest warrant, capias, or other lawful process ordering apprehension or confinement of such person, which he is authorized and required by law to execute. 
(b)  Failure to execute an arrest warrant is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.945) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.180.  
Sec. 16-206. - Refusal to identify as a witness. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing he has witnessed any portion of a crime, or of any other incident resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, upon demand by a law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his official duties, he refuses to report or gives a false report of his name and present address to such officer. 
(b)  Refusal to identify as a witness is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.950) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.190.  
Sec. 16-207. - Escape from custody. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of escape from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any crime, he escapes from custody. 
(b)  Escape from custody is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.955) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.200.  
Sec. 16-208. - Interfering with a prisoner or aiding escape of a prisoner. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of interfering with a prisoner or aiding escape of a prisoner if he: 
(1)  Introduces into any place of confinement any deadly weapon or dangerous instrument, or other thing adapted or designed for use in making an escape, with the purpose of facilitating the escape of any prisoner confined therein, or of facilitating the commission of any other crime; or 
(2)  Assists or attempts to assist any prisoner who is being held in custody or confinement for the purpose of effecting the prisoner's escape from custody or confinement; or 
(3)  Gives away or sells, or attempts to give away or sell, to any person confined in any city jail or in custody of any peace officer in the city anything whatsoever without the consent of the person in charge of such jail or person having such custody. 
(b)  Interfering with a prisoner or aiding escape of a prisoner is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.960) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.230.  
Sec. 16-209. - Disturbing a judicial proceeding. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness, and thereby to influence a judicial proceeding, he disrupts or disturbs a judicial proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting, or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed matter, concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding, or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding. 
(b)  Disturbing a judicial proceeding is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.965) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.250.  
Sec. 16-210. - Tampering with a witness. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of tampering with a witness if, with purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness in an official proceeding to disobey a subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself or avoid subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information or documents, or to testify falsely, he: 
(1)  Threatens or causes harm to any person or property; or 
(2)  Uses force, threats or deception; or 
(3)  Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect, upon such witness. 
(b)  Tampering with a witness is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.970) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.270.  
Sec. 16-211. - Improper communication. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of improper communication if he communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee, or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person. 
(b)  Improper communication is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.975) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.290.  
Sec. 16-212. - Misconduct by a juror. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of misconduct by a juror if, being a juror, he knowingly: 
(1)  Promises or agrees, prior to the submission of a cause to the jury for deliberation, to vote for or agree to a verdict for or against any party in a judicial proceeding; or 
(2)  Receives any paper, evidence or information from anyone in relation to any judicial proceeding for the trial of which he has been or may be sworn, without the authority, if the court or officer before whom such proceeding is pending, and does not immediately disclose the same to such court or officer. 
(b)  Misconduct by a juror is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.980) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.300.  
Sec. 16-213. - Misconduct in selection or summoning a juror. 
(a)  A public servant authorized by law to select or summon any juror commits the crime of misconduct in selecting or summoning a juror if he knowingly acts unfairly, improperly or not impartially in selecting or summoning any person or persons to be a member or members of a jury. 
(b)  Misconduct in selecting or summoning a juror is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.985) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.310.  
Sec. 16-214. - Misconduct in administration of justice. 
(a)  A public servant, in his public capacity or under color of his office or employment, commits the crime of misconduct in administration of justice if: 
(1)  He is charged with the custody of any person accused or convicted of any crime or municipal ordinance violation and he coerces, threatens, abuses or strikes such person for the purpose of securing a confession from him; 
(2)  He knowingly seizes or levies upon any property or dispossesses anyone of any lands or tenements without due and legal process, or other lawful authority; 
(3)  He is a judge and knowingly accepts a plea of guilty from any person charged with a violation of a statute or ordinance at any place other than at the place provided by law for holding court by such judge; 
(4)  He is a jailer or keeper of a county jail and knowingly refuses to receive, in the jail under his charge, any person lawfully committed to such jail on any criminal charge or criminal conviction by any court of this state, or on any warrant and commitment or capias on any criminal charge issued by any court of this state; 
(5)  He is a law enforcement officer and violates the provisions of Section 544.170 RSMo., by knowingly: 
a.  Refusing to release any person in custody who is entitled to such release; or 
b.  Refusing to permit a person in custody to see and consult with counsel or other persons; or 
c.  Transferring any person in custody to the custody or control of another, or to another place, for the purposes of avoiding the provisions of that section; or 
d.  Preferring against any person in custody a false charge for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of that section. 
(b)  Misconduct in the administration of justice is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.320.  
Sec. 16-215. - Failure to comply with a subpoena. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of failure to comply with a subpoena if, after being duly served with a subpoena issued by the municipal court, he fails to appear at the time and in the manner directed in the subpoena or to do any other act required by the subpoena. 
(b)  Failure to comply with a subpoena is a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 11556, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 16-216. - Failure to appear in municipal court. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of failure to appear in municipal court if: 
(1)  He has been issued a summons for a violation of any ordinance of the City of Columbia and fails to appear before the judge of the municipal court at the time and on the date on which he was summoned, or at the time and on the date to which the case was continued. 
(2)  He has been released upon recognizance of bond and fails to appear before the judge of the municipal court at the time and on the date on which he was summoned or at the time and on the date to which the case was continued. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the exercise by the municipal court of its power to punish for contempt. 
(e)  Failure to appear in municipal court is a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 11556, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Secs. 16-217—16-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly persons at fires, § 9-2; false fire alarms, § 9-3. 
 
Sec. 16-221. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of obstructing government operations if he purposely. obstructs, impairs, hinders or perverts the performance of a governmental function by the use or threat of violence, force or other physical interference or obstacle. 
(b)  Obstructing governmental operations is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 576.030.  
Sec. 16-222. - Official misconduct. 
(a)  A public servant, in his public capacity or under color of his office or employment, commits the crime of official misconduct if: 
(1)  He knowingly discriminates against any employee or any applicant for employment on account of race, creed, color, sex or national origin, provided such employee or applicant possesses adequate training and educational qualifications; 
(2)  He knowingly demands or receives any fee or reward for the execution of any official act or the performance of a duty imposed by law or by the terms of his employment, that is not due, or that is more than is due, or before it is due; 
(3)  He knowingly collects taxes when none are due, or exacts or demands more than is due; 
(4)  He is the city or county treasurer, city or county clerk, or other municipal or county officer, or judge of a municipal or county court, and knowingly orders the payment of any money or draws any warrant, or pays over any money for any purpose other than the specific purpose for which the same was assessed, levied and collected, unless it is or shall have become impossible to use such money for that specific purpose; 
(5)  He is an officer or employee of any court and knowingly charges, collects or receives less fee for his services than is provided by law; 
(6)  He is an officer or employee of any court and knowingly, directly or indirectly, buys, purchases or trades for any fee taxed or to be taxed as costs in any court of this state, or any county warrant, at less than par value which may be by law due or to become due to any person by or through any such court; 
(7)  He is a county officer, deputy or employee and knowingly traffics for or purchases at less than the par value or speculates in any court warrant issued by order of the county court of his county, or in any claim or demand held against such county. 
(b)  Official misconduct is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 576.040.  
Sec. 16-223. - Misuse of official information. 
(a)  A public servant commits the crime of misuse of official information if, in contemplation of official action by himself or by a governmental unit with which he is associated, or in reliance on information to which he has access in his official capacity and which has not been made public, he knowingly: 
(1)  Acquires a pecuniary interest in any property, transaction, or enterprise which may be affected by such information or official action; or 
(2)  Speculates or wagers on the basis of such information or official action; or 
(3)  Aids, advises or encourages another to do any of the foregoing with purpose of conferring a pecuniary benefit on any person. 
(b)  Misuse of official information is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 575.050.  
Sec. 16-224. - Deceiving a law enforcement officer. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of deceiving a law enforcement officer if he shall knowingly deceive a law enforcement officer for the following purposes: 
(1)  To prevent discovery of any offense or crime which has been or is being committed by any person; or 
(2)  To prevent or hinder investigation, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of any person for conduct constituting an offense under the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. 
(b)  It is a defense to a prosecution under this section that the actor retracted the false information or removed the deception but this defense shall not apply if the retraction or removal was made after: 
(1)  The falsity of the information or the deception was exposed; or 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer took substantial action in reliance on the false information or deception. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction or removal under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  Deceiving a law enforcement officer is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1010)  
Sec. 16-225. - False identification. 
Any person who possesses: 
(a)  A reproduced, modified or altered motor vehicle driver's license from any state, jurisdiction or licensing authority; 
(b)  A reproduced, modified, or altered, non-driver's identification card or any other modified or altered identification card originally issued by any governmental or educational institution or authority; 
(c)  Any identification document of another person which indicates that person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older when the possessor is under twenty-one (21) years of age; or 
(d)  Any identification card or document which appears on its face to be issued by a legitimate governmental or educational issuing authority which indicates the possessor is twenty-one (21) years of age or older when the possessor is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
is guilty of a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 17605, § 1, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 17985, § 1, 2-2-04)  
Secs. 16-226—16-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly persons at fires, § 9-2; false fire alarms, § 9-3. 
 
Sec. 16-231. - Littering. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of littering if he throws or places, or causes to be thrown or placed, any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks, hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish of any kind, nature or description; any solid or liquid chemical waste or residue, any flammable or explosive liquid; any water or wastes having toxic, poisonous, caustic or corrosive properties; or any waters, wastes or materials or substances which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating public nuisance or hazard to humans or wildlife; on the right-of-way of any public road or state highway or on or in any of the waters in this state or on the banks of any stream or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the city, or any board, department, agency, or commission thereof or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the federal government or on any private real property owned by another without his consent. 
(b)  Littering is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1015; Ord. No. 14915, § 1, 8-5-96) 
Cross reference— Refuse collection, § 22-156 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 577.070.  
Sec. 16-232. - Abandoning motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of abandoning a motor vehicle if he abandons any motor vehicle on the right-of-way of any public road or state highway or on or in any of the waters in this state or on the banks of any stream, or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the state, any board, department, agency or commission thereof, or any political subdivision thereof or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the federal government or on any private real property owned by another without his consent. 
(b)  Abandoning a motor vehicle is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1020) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 577.080.  
Sec. 16-233. - Abandonment of airtight or semi-airtight containers. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of abandonment of airtight icebox if he abandons, discards, or knowingly permits to remain on his premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  Abandonment of an airtight icebox is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1025) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 577.100.  
Sec. 16-234. - Fireworks and firearms. 
(a)  Discharging. Every person who shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, revolver or any other firearm or air rifle, or shall possess, use, burn, explode or set off any firecracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, Roman candles or any other firecracker or fireworks other than a sparkler within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exceptions to provisions of paragraph (a): 
(1)  Gun clubs, sheet shoots, target ranges. The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to the firing of firearms within the bounds of gun clubs, skeet shoots or target ranges in the manner specified, and as authorized by the board of adjustment, after public hearing and in accordance with provisions of chapter 29 of this Code. 
(2)  Permits for special shooting events and fireworks displays. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue permits for special one day shooting events or fireworks displays to be held at such places as, in the opinion of the city manager, shall provide maximum safety for all persons concerned, and under direct supervision and control of such persons as the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to such authorized events for which such permits have been issued. 
(3)  Hunting . The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section pertaining to the discharge of firearms shall not apply to any person discharging a shotgun, primitive firearm or BB gun while lawfully hunting on a privately owned tract of land twenty (20) acres or larger that was annexed into the city after February 21, 2005, subject to the following prohibitions: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in such a manner that the projectile travels along or across any street, building or playground. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm at or in the direction of any visible person, domestic animal, vehicle, building or playground within reasonable range of the firearm at an angle that might allow the projectile to strike near any of these objects or areas. 
c.  It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within three hundred (300) feet of any building or playground off the premises where the person is shooting. 
(c)  Sale of fireworks prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (d), every person who shall sell or expose for sale any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pinwheels, fire balloons, Roman candles, toy cannons or any other fireworks of a like kind within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale of fireworks in wholesale lots by any person holding a wholesale license to do business within the city for use or sale outside the limits of the city, or for use within the city limits by competent persons under a permit issued by the city manager. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any property annexed into the city which was lawfully used for the commercial sale of fireworks at any time during the year immediately preceding annexation may be used for the commercial sale of fireworks for up to seven (7) years after annexation. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7.1125—7.1135; Ord. No. 15211, § 2, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 18429, § 1, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 21468, § 2, 10-1-12) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 16-235. - Barbed wire fences. 
No person shall construct, or cause or permit to be constructed, any fence composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, along the line of any street, alley or sidewalk within the city; and whoever shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1160)  
Sec. 16-236. - Fences charged with electricity prohibited. 
No person shall construct, or cause or permit to be constructed, any fence charged with electricity at any place within the limits of the city, and whoever shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1165)  
Sec. 16-237. - Smoking or use of vapor products prohibited in city buses; penalty for violation of section. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use vapor products on any motor bus owned or leased by the city. Violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1964, § 7.1190; Ord. No. 22312, § 4, 12-15-14 )  
Sec. 16-238. - Use of protective helmets. 
(a)  No person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall wear, ride or use any roller skates, inline skates, roller blades, skateboards, or scooter, as these things are commonly defined, within the city limits without properly wearing an approved skate or bicycle helmet securely fastened by chin or neck strap. 
(b)  An approved skate or bicycle helmet is headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standard for protective helmets set by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission federal safety standards. 
(c)  No parent, custodian, or legal guardian of a person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall allow that person to wear, ride or use any roller skates, in-line skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooter or tricycle within the city limits as set out in this ordinance without wearing an approved skate or bicycle helmet. This is an offense of absolute liability. 
(d)  Violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 17642, § 2, 4-7-03)  
Sec. 16-239. - Notice of intent to excavate; One Call System. 
(a)  The following definitions apply to this section: 
Emergency means either: 
(1)  A sudden, unexpected occurrence, presenting a clear and imminent danger demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property, or essential public services. "Unexpected occurrence" includes, but is not limited to, thunderstorms, high winds, ice or snow storms, fires, floods, earthquakes, or other soil or geologic movements, riots, accidents, water or wastewater pipe breaks, vandalism, or sabotage; or 
(2)  Any interruption in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or any damage to property or facilities that causes or could cause such an interruption. 
Excavation means any operation in which earth, rock or other material in or on the ground is moved, removed or otherwise displaced by means of any tools, equipment or explosives and includes, without limitation, backfilling, grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling, well-drilling, augering, boring, tunneling, scraping, cable or pipe plowing, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, driving, and demolition of structures, except that, the use of mechanized tools and equipment to break and remove pavement and masonry down only to the depth of such pavement or masonry, the use of pressurized air to disintegrate and suction to remove earth, rock and other materials, the tilling of soil for agricultural or seeding purposes, and the installation of marking flags and stakes for the location of underground facilities that are not driven shall not be deemed excavation. Backfilling or moving earth on the ground in connection with other excavation operations at the same site shall not be deemed separate instances of excavation. 
Notification center means Missouri One Call System, Inc. or any other statewide organization formed as a notification center under the Underground Facility Safety and Damage Prevention Act, RSMo §§ 319.010—319.050. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday or a legally declared local, state or federal holiday. 
(b)  Except in the event of an emergency, no person shall engage in any excavation activity unless the person has served notice of intent to excavate to the notification center by toll-free telephone number, by facsimile or by completing notice via the Internet at least two (2) working days, but not more than ten (10) working days before beginning excavation. The notice required under this section shall comply with the requirements of Missouri law. 
(c)  A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 21153, § 1, 11-21-11)  
Secs. 16-240—16-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - WEAPONS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 16-246. - Brandishing a weapon. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of brandishing a weapon when the person exhibits any deadly or dangerous weapon in a rude, angry or threatening manner to any person in the city or goes into any courthouse, church, school or any other public meeting carrying a deadly or dangerous weapon. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "deadly or dangerous weapon" means any weapon other than a firearm, from which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury, may be discharged, or a knife, dagger, billy, blackjack or metal knuckles. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to police officers and other officers or persons whose duty it is to execute process or warrants or to make arrests. 
(d)  The crime of brandishing a weapon is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1170; Ord. No. 18042, § 1, 4-19-04)  
Sec. 16-247. - Firearms in city buildings. 
(a)  No person who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement by the Missouri Director of Revenue under Section 571.094 RSMo or who has been issued a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms, issued by another state or political subdivision of another state, shall, by authority of that endorsement or permit, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm readily capable of lethal use in any building or portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted at each entrance of a building entirely owned, leased or controlled by the city stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited. Where the city owns, leases or controls only a portion of a building, signs shall be posted at each entrance to those portions of the building owned, leased or controlled by the city stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to buildings used for public housing by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, or private dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
(d)  Any person violating this section may be denied entrance to the building or ordered to leave the building. Any city employee violating this section may be disciplined under the provisions of Chapter 19. No other penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(e)  No person who has been issued a certificate of qualification which allows the person to carry a concealed firearm before the director of revenue begins issuing concealed carry endorsements in July, 2004, shall, by authority of that certificate, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm readily capable of lethal use in any building or portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 18042, § 1, 4-19-04)  
Sec. 16-248. - Reserved.  
DIVISIONS 17—22. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 16-249—16-252. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 23. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 16-253. - Possession of thirty-five grams or less of marijuana, or five grams or less of hashish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess thirty-five (35) grams or less of marijuana or cannibis in any species or form thereof, including but not limited to cannibis sativa L., or five (5) grams or less of hashish. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10637, § 1(7.1141), 7-1-85) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 10637, adopted July 1, 1985, amended the 1964 Code by the addition of § 7.1141, which has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-253.  
Sec. 16-254. - Drugs, nostrums and medicines. 
(a)  Any person who shall distribute any drugs, nostrums, medicines or samples containing any such things, anywhere in the city, whether licensed or not, except by actual delivery thereof to some person over the age of sixteen (16) years, or any person who shall distribute or deposit any such things in or near any school or other place where children might obtain them, shall upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings designated: 
(1)  Drugs and medicines shall mean substances or preparations prescribed by duly licensed physicians intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. 
(2)  Nostrums shall mean substances or preparations usually of secret composition and recommended by the preparer for use as a drug or medicine, but without scientific proof of their effectiveness. 
(Ord. No. 10651, § 1(7.1140), 7-15-85) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 10651, adopted July 15, 1985, reenacted § 7.1140 of the 1964 Code, which provisions have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-254.  
Sec. 16-255. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class A misdemeanor. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "drug paraphernalia" means any object which has been used for or is intended for use in inhaling, injecting, ingesting or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined by the statutes of the State of Missouri. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court should consider, in addition to other logically relevant factors, the proximity of the object to a controlled substance and the existence of any residue of a controlled substance found on or in the object. 
(Ord. No. 14658, § 1, 10-2-95)  
Sec. 16-255.1. - Medical marijuana. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to ensure that patients, for whom marijuana has been recommended by a physician, suffer no punishment or penalty for obtaining, possessing, and/or using medicinal marijuana and/or paraphernalia used to consume medicinal marijuana. 
(b)  Seriously ill adults who obtain and use marijuana and/or marijuana paraphernalia for medicinal purposes pursuant to the recommendation of a physician shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, punishment or sanction. Physicians who recommend marijuana for their patients shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, punishment or sanction. If an adult obtains a physician's recommendation for marijuana use after an arrest, such charges shall be dismissed. If this provision is held invalid, then a maximum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) may be imposed. There shall be a strong presumption that the appropriate disposition is to defer prosecution or to suspend imposition of sentence. All such matters shall only be referred to the municipal prosecuting attorney, and no other prosecuting attorney, and the municipal prosecuting attorney shall not refer the matter to any other prosecutor, agency, or office, unless the adult is also charged with a felony offense arising from the same set of facts and circumstances. The term "seriously ill adults" shall include patients who suffer from side-effects of the treatment of cancer, HIV/AIDS or symptoms of multiple sclerosis, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine headaches, chronic severe pain, or any other serious condition for which marijuana provides relief and for which a duly-licensed physician has recommended such use. 
(c)  The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section is declared invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
(d)  Any city ordinance or regulation that is inconsistent with this section shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 18187, § 1, 8-2-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18187, passed by city council on Aug. 2, 2004, called for election; said ordinance was passed by the voters on Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 16-255.2. - Policies for enforcing marijuana offenses. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to ensure that adults as defined by state criminal statutes, other than those excluded herein, are not arrested and suffer only a fine and/or community service or counseling and no other punishment or penalty, for the possession of a misdemeanor amount of marijuana and/or marijuana paraphernalia. This section shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
(b)  When any law enforcement officer suspects any adult as defined by state criminal statutes, other than those excluded herein, of possession of a misdemeanor amount of marijuana and/or possession of marijuana paraphernalia, that person shall not be required to post bond, suffer arrest, be taken into custody for any purpose nor detained for any reason other than the issuance of a summons, suffer incarceration, suffer loss of driver's license, or any other punishment or penalty other than the issuance of a summons and, if found guilty, a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). There shall be a strong presumption that the proper disposition of any such case is to suspend the imposition of sentence and/or require community service work and/or drug counseling and education. All such matters shall only be referred to the municipal prosecuting attorney, and no other prosecuting attorney, and the municipal prosecuting attorney shall not refer the matter to any other prosecutor, agency, or office, unless provisions of subsection (c) are applicable. 
(c)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to persons: 
(1)  Who have been found guilty of a felony within the preceding ten (10) years; or 
(2)  Who have been found guilty in a state court of a Class A misdemeanor, other than misdemeanor marijuana possession or misdemeanor possession of marijuana paraphernalia, within the preceding five (5) years; or 
(3)  Who have been found guilty in a state or municipal court of misdemeanor marijuana possession on two or more prior occasions within the preceding five (5) years; or 
(4)  Who are arrested on suspicion of any felony or misdemeanor offense chargeable only under state law, arising from the same set of facts and circumstances as the alleged marijuana offense. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section is declared invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
(e)  Any city ordinance or regulation that is inconsistent with this section shall be null and void and is hereby repealed effective immediately. 
(f)  The message of this section is that people should not use marijuana, but should also not lose opportunities for education and employment because of such use. The limited resources of law enforcement should be directed primarily toward crimes of violence or property loss. The enforcement of laws against marijuana shall be among the lower priorities of law enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 18188, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 18916, § 1, 2-20-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18188, passed by city council on Aug. 2, 2004, called for election; said ordinance was passed by the voters on Nov. 2, 2004.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Barking, annoying dogs prohibited, § 5-56. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-256. - Loud noises prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. This subsection shall not apply to sounds from any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument or any similar device for producing or amplifying sound. This subsection shall not apply to shouting, singing, whistling or verbal utterances. 
(b)  The acts described in this division, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 1964, § 7.265; Ord. No. 20630, § 1, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-257. - Horns and signaling devices. 
The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.270) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14.  
Sec. 16-258. - Radios, phonographs, etc. outside the downtown area. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to play or permit to be played any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument or any similar device for producing or amplifying sound in a manner that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. 
(b)  Playing or permitting to be played any device described in subsection (a) between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so that it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or outdoor area in which the device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(c)  Playing or permitting to be played any device described in subsection (a) between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. so that it is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the building, structure or outdoor area in which the device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Except as allowed in division 2 of this article, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to play or permit to be played any sound producing or sound amplifying device in or on the vehicle so that it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the vehicle. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the downtown area as defined in section 16-258.1. 
(Code 1964, § 7.275; Ord. No. 12912 § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 16182, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 20630, § 1, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-258.1. - Radios, phonographs, etc. in the downtown area. 
(a)  As used in this section, "Downtown area" means the area included within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Providence Road and Ash Street; thence east along the centerline of Ash Street to the centerline of Tenth Street; thence north along the centerline of Tenth Street to the centerline of Park Avenue; thence east along the centerline of Park Avenue to the southwest corner of Lot 3 of Harbison's Addition and COLT Railroad Administrative Plat; thence clockwise around the boundary of Lot 3 of Harbison's Addition and COLT Railroad Administrative Plat to a point opposite the centerline of Orr Street; thence south along the centerline of Orr Street to the centerline of Ash Street; thence east along the centerline of Ash Street to the centerline of College Avenue; thence south along the centerline of College Avenue to the centerline of Locust Street; thence west along the centerline of Locust Street to the centerline of Hitt Street; thence south along the centerline of Hitt Street to the centerline of Elm Street; thence west along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Watson Place; thence south along the centerline of Watson Place to an east-west alley; thence west along the centerline of the alley to the centerline of Ninth Street; thence north along the centerline of Ninth Street to the centerline of Elm Street; thence west along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Providence Road; thence north along the centerline of Providence Road to the point of beginning. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to play or permit to be played, in the downtown area, any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument or any similar device for producing or amplifying sound in a manner that either: 
(1)  Unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of any person in or outside the downtown area, or 
(2)  Is plainly audible at the following distances from the building, structure or outdoor area where the device is located at the following times: 
300 feet Sunday through Wednesday from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
150 feet Sunday through Wednesday from 10:00 p.m. to 1:30 a.m. 
300 feet Thursday through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
150 feet Thursday through Saturday from 11:00 p.m. to 1:30 a.m. 
50 feet every day from 1:30 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  Sounds escaping from the opening of exterior doors for entry and exit shall not constitute a violation of this section. This subsection shall not apply to sounds escaping from a door that has been propped open. 
(d)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to any sounds generated in connection with an event or activity for which the city council has authorized a street closure. 
(e)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to any sounds generated in compliance with a noise permit issued by the city manager. The city manager is authorized to issue noise permits for special occasions such as University of Missouri home football games and outdoor festivals. 
(f)  Except as allowed in division 2 of this article, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to play or permit to be played any sound producing or sound amplifying device in or on the vehicle so that it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the vehicle from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and five (5) feet from the vehicle from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to play or permit to be played, outdoors in the downtown area, any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument or any similar device for producing or amplifying sound, before 7:00 a.m. on any day or after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday or after 11:00 p.m. Thursday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 20630, § 1, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-259. - Shouting, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to shout, sing, whistle or make any verbal utterance or noise at a volume that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. 
(b)  Shouting, singing, whistling or making other verbal utterances or noises between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or outdoor area in which the person is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 7.280; Ord. No. 18941, § 1, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 16-260. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.285) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 16-261. - Blowing whistles. 
The blowing of any locomotive whistle or whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.290)  
Sec. 16-262. - Mufflers required. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.295) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14.  
Sec. 16-263. - Motors out of repair; loads. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.300)  
Sec. 16-264. - Loading and unloading. 
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.305)  
Sec. 16-265. - Construction, repair and demolition of buildings, streets and utilities. 
(a)  Buildings. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb the peace and quiet of neighboring inhabitants by demolishing, constructing, altering or repairing any building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(b)  Streets. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb the peace and quiet of neighboring inhabitants by excavating, grading, paving, constructing, altering or repairing any public or private street, drive or parking lot other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Nothing in this article shall prevent work on any public street, including utility installation, removal or repair, when the director of public works has determined that the work is necessary in order to minimize traffic disruption. 
(c)  Utilities. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb the peace and quiet of neighboring inhabitants by installing, removing or repairing any utility other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Nothing in this article shall prevent work on any utility in order to maintain or restore utility service. 
(d)  Site preparation. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb the peace and quiet of neighboring inhabitants by operating any earthmoving, excavating, paving or tree cutting equipment other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(e)  Permits. Upon application, the director of public works may grant a permit to any person extending the hours of work set forth in subparagraphs (a) through (d) for an identified project. The permit shall state the nature, location and extended hours of the work to be done. The permit may be granted for a period of time not to exceed three (3) days and may be renewed for periods not to exceed three (3) days on an emergency basis only as determined by the director of public works. A permit authorized by this subsection shall be granted only if the director of public works first determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the permitted work and that significant loss or inconvenience would result to any party if the permit were not granted. 
(Ord. No. 12622, § 1, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 13202, § 1, 12-16-91) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 12622, adopted June 4, 1990, repealed former § 16-265 and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions pertained to erection, repair and demolition of buildings and derived from Code 1964, § 7.310. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 16-266. - In vicinity of schools, hospitals, churches, etc. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court, while the same is in use; or, adjacent to any hospital; which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.315)  
Sec. 16-267. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.320) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 16-268. - Noise at sales. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.325)  
Sec. 16-269. - Transportation of iron, steel, etc. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.330)  
Sec. 16-270. - Motorbuses. 
The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a motorbus or coach is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.335)  
Sec. 16-271. - Pile drivers, derricks, etc. 
The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.340)  
Sec. 16-271.1. - Quarries, blasting, etc. 
(a)  The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any equipment which is used in the mining or quarrying of any rock, mineral or ore, or any equipment to prepare, finish, or wash any rock, mineral, or ore is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is unlawful. 
(b)  Blasting in conjunction with any quarrying or mining operation between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is unlawful. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punished as a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10690, § 1(7.343), 9-3-85) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 10690, adopted Sept. 3, 1985, amended the Code 1964 by the addition of § 7.343, which at the discretion of the editor has been included herein as § 16-271.1.  
Sec. 16-272. - Blowers, power fans, etc. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Code 1964, § 7.345)  
Sec. 16-273. - Engine brakes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to use an engine brake. 
(b)  An "engine brake" is a device that retards the forward motion of a motor vehicle by the use of the compression of the engine of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to public safety vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 19721, § 1, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 16-274. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not exceeding three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.350; Ord. No. 12912 § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 17052, § 1, 10-1-01)  
Sec. 16-275. - University of Missouri homecoming.[10] 
The provisions of Division 1 of this article shall not apply to any construction noise emanating from the area bounded by Providence Road, Kentucky Boulevard, Maryland Avenue and Turner Avenue between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on the Wednesday, Thursday or Friday before the annual University of Missouri homecoming weekend. 
(Ord. No. 13486, §§ 1-2, 10-19-92) 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13486 § 1, adopted October 19, 1992, repealed former § 16-275, relative to the Boone County Fair and enacted in lieu thereof a new § 16-275 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former § 16-275 derived from Ord. No. 13044 § 1, enacted on July 15, 1991. 
 
Sec. 16-276. - School marching bands, 
The provisions of division 1 of this article shall not apply to any junior or senior high school marching band practicing on school grounds between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. during the academic school year. 
(Ord. No. 14975, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 20495, § 1, 12-7-09)  
Sec. 16-277—16-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT AND TRUCKS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 16-281. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this section: 
Sound amplifying equipment: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound amplifying equipment, including a megaphone, amplifier, "walkie-talkie, " amplifiers on fronts of business buildings or other sound device. "Sound amplifying equipment, " shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic purposes. 
Sound truck or other conveyances: Any vehicle, whether motorized or not, and any airplane, balloon, dirigible or any other type of aircraft, having mounted therein, thereon or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.355) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-282. - Commercial advertising prohibited. 
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any sound amplifying equipment or sound truck or other conveyance for commercial sound advertising purposes on any street or on any public or private alley in the city or in the air over the city, with sound amplifying equipment in operation; and no person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any sound amplifying equipment on any public square, public street or public playground for commercial advertising purposes in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.360) 
Cross reference— License, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 16-283. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22038, § 1, adopted April 21, 2014 , repealed § 16-283, which pertained to noncommercial use—registration statement required and derived from § 7.365 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 16-284. - Noncommerical use—Form and contents of registration statement. 
The registration statement required by section 16-283 shall be in writing, shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following information: 
(a)  Name and home address of the applicant. 
(b)  Address and place of business of applicant. 
(c)  Type, license number and motor number of the sound truck or other conveyance to be used by applicant. 
(d)  Name and address of person who owns the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(e)  Name and address of person having direct charge of the sound truck and sound amplifying equipment. 
(f)  Name and address of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(g)  The purpose for which the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(h)  A general statement as to the section of the city, in or over which the sound truck or other conveyance will be used or the public parks or public playgrounds at which the sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(i)  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(j)  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(k)  A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(l)  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound amplifying equipment, or otherwise, stating the following: 
(1)  The wattage to be used. 
(2)  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced. 
(3)  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.370)  
Sec. 16-285. - Same—Amendments to registration statement. 
All persons using, or causing to be used, sound trucks or sound amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to section 16-283 of this chapter within forty-eight (48) hours after any change in the information furnished in such statement. 
(Code 1964, § 7.375)  
Sec. 16-286. - Signed copy of registration statement; identification. 
The chief of police or other authorized member of the police department shall return to each applicant under section 16-283 of this chapter one copy of such registration statement duly signed by the chief of police or other authorized member of the police department and such copy shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment at all times while the sound equipment is in operation. Such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Code 1964, § 7.380)  
Sec. 16-287. - Regulations for use—On streets. 
The noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment or sound trucks on any of the permitted streets in the city, with sound amplifying equipment in operation, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech. 
(2)  Operations shall be permitted between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. each day. 
(3)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least five (5) miles per hour, except when such truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools or churches. 
(5)  No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be operated on any street or on any public or private alley within the fire limits of the city. 
(6)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
(7)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of two hundred (200) feet from the sound truck, and so that such volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility; provided, however, that, the limitation of audibility to a distance not in excess of two hundred (200) feet shall not apply to sound issued from aircraft. 
(8)  No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated having in excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(Code 1964, § 7.385)  
Sec. 16-288. - Same—In public parks and playgrounds. 
The regulations provided in section 16-287 of this chapter insofar as applicable, shall apply to any noncommercial use of any sound amplifying equipment in any public park or public playground within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that operations shall be authorized on all days including Sundays and legal holidays; except that no such sound amplifying equipment shall be used on any public playground in connection with any public school building on days on which such public building is being used for school purposes; and provided, further, that, the volume of sound from such sound amplification equipment when used on public parks and public playgrounds shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of three hundred (300) feet from the sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1964, § 7.390)  
Secs. 16-289—16-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES  
DIVISION 1. - NUISANCE PARTIES 
 
Sec. 16-301. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this division: 
Nuisance party is a social gathering of ten (10) or more people on residential property that results in any of the following occurring at the site of the gathering, on neighboring property or on an adjacent public street: 
(1)  Unlawful sale, furnishing, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Violation of any of the provisions of article III of this chapter (noise); 
(3)  Fighting; 
(4)  Property damage; 
(5)  Littering; 
(6)  Outdoor urination or defecation in a place open to public view; 
(7)  The standing or parking of vehicles in a manner that obstructs the free flow of traffic; 
(8)  Conduct that threatens injury to persons or damage to property; 
(9)  Unlawful use or possession of marijuana or any drug or controlled substance; 
(10)  Trespassing; 
(11)  Indecent exposure; 
(12)  Setting off fireworks; or 
(13)  Discharging firearms. 
"Permit" means to give permission to; or to allow by silent consent, by not prohibiting, or by failing to exercise control. 
(Ord. No. 19287, § 1, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 20496, § 1, 12-7-09)  
Sec. 16-302. - Nuisance parties prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having the right to possession of any residential premises, whether individually or jointly with others, to cause or permit a social gathering on the premises to become a nuisance party. 
(Ord. No. 19287, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-303. - Police order to disperse. 
Columbia police officers are authorized to order those attending a nuisance party to disperse. It shall be unlawful for any person not domiciled at the site of the nuisance party to fail or refuse to leave the premises immediately after being told to leave by a Columbia police officer. 
(Ord. No. 19287, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-304. - Nuisance parties—Residential rental properties; certificate of compliance sanctions. 
(a)  Intent of section. This section shall set forth administrative procedures and standards for revoking a residential landlord's certificate of compliance under the Rental Unit Conservation Law (section 22-181 et seq. of this Code) when multiple nuisance parties have occurred on residential rental property. The city seeks the cooperation of residential landlords in eliminating nuisance parties held by their tenants. The sanction of revoking a certificate of compliance is intended as a last resort after other attempts to eliminate the problem have failed. This section also establishes the offense of failure to prevent a nuisance party. 
(b)  Initial nuisance party. Within ten (10) days after the initial nuisance party that serves as a basis for a certificate of compliance sanction, the police department shall send the property owner and tenants of the unit hosting the gathering, by certified mail, a notice of nuisance party ordinance violation. The notice shall set forth the date, place and nature of the violation and urge the property owner and tenants to take action to prevent future nuisance parties on the property. If notice cannot be given to a party by certified mail, notice shall be given by first class mail and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the dwelling. 
(c)  Subsequent nuisance party; compliance meeting. If a subsequent nuisance party occurs at the same unit within a twelve-month period, the police department shall send the property owner and tenants, by certified mail, another notice of nuisance party violation within ten (10) days of the party. If notice cannot be given to a party by certified mail, notice shall be given by first class mail and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the dwelling. The notice shall set forth the date, place and nature of the violation and shall schedule a nuisance party ordinance compliance meeting. The compliance meeting shall be attended by a police department representative, by the property owner or the owner's agent and by the tenants responsible for the nuisance party. The purpose of the compliance meeting is to reach agreement on corrective action necessary to avoid future nuisance parties on the property. Possible corrective actions include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  An agreement by tenants to impose limits on social gatherings such as restrictions on the number of guests, time, music, consumption of alcoholic beverages, etc. 
(2)  An agreement by the property owner not to renew the lease or to initiate an eviction action if further nuisance parties are held on the property. 
If agreement is reached, a police department representative shall reduce the corrective action to writing and shall provide a copy to the property owner and tenants. 
(d)  Owner's failure to prevent a third nuisance party. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any residential rental property to fail to prevent a nuisance party within twelve (12) months of a nuisance party that triggered a compliance meeting under subsection (c). An owner of residential rental property shall not be prosecuted for a violation of this subsection unless: 
(1)  At least one person was charged with a violation of section 16-302 or section 16-303 or an offense that caused a social gathering to become a nuisance party in connection with a nuisance party at the residential unit which triggered a notice under section 16-304(b); and 
(2)  At least one person was charged with a violation of section 16-302 or section 16-303 or an offense that caused a social gathering to become a nuisance party in connection with a nuisance party at the residential unit which triggered a compliance meeting under section 16-304(c). 
(e)  Revocation of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance may be revoked if the notices of nuisance party ordinance violations under subsections (b) and (c) have been sent and: 
(1)  The property owner refused or failed to attend a compliance meeting; 
(2)  The property owner refused or failed to comply with any corrective action agreed to at the compliance meeting; 
(3)  Another nuisance party occurred at the same unit within twelve (12) months of the nuisance party that triggered the compliance meeting and the owner of the property failed to appear in response to a summons issued for a violation of subsection (d); or 
(4)  Two nuisance parties, each resulting in at least one person being charged with a violation of section 16-302 or section 16-303 or an offense that caused the social gathering to become a nuisance party, occurred at the same unit within eighteen (18) months of the nuisance party that triggered the compliance meeting. 
When the police have sufficient evidence to support the revocation of a certificate of compliance, the police chief shall submit the matter to the city manager. 
(f)  Initiation of revocation proceedings. If the city manager determines that a revocation of the certificate of compliance for a building or unit may be justified, the city manager may institute a contested case for that purpose in accordance with RSMo ch. 536. The property owner and affected tenants shall be necessary parties to the case. The city manager or the manager's designee shall serve as hearing officer at the hearing held on the proposed revocation of the certificate of compliance. 
(g)  Findings required for revocation; other considerations. The hearing officer may revoke the certificate of compliance for the unit in violation of this division if the officer finds that: 
(1)  The initial and subsequent nuisance parties occurred at the unit; 
(2)  The proper notices of nuisance party ordinance violations were sent; and 
(3)  a.  The property owner failed or refused to attend a compliance meeting; 
b.  The property owner failed or refused to comply with any corrective action agreed to at the compliance meeting; or 
c.  Another nuisance party occurred at the same unit within twelve (12) months of the nuisance party that triggered the compliance meeting and the owner of the property failed to appear in response to a summons issued for a violation of subsection (d); or 
d.  Two (2) nuisance parties, each resulting in at least one person being charged with a violation of section 16-302 or section 16-303 or an offense that caused the social gathering to become a nuisance party, occurred at the same unit within eighteen (18) months of the nuisance party that triggered the compliance meeting. 
In determining whether the certificate of compliance should be revoked, the hearing officer shall consider: 
(1)  The level of cooperation of the parties in attempting to avoid nuisance parties; 
(2)  The level of disturbance associated with the nuisance parties; 
(3)  The impact of the nuisance parties on neighbors and other victims; 
(4)  The degree to which the landlord and tenants have taken reasonable steps to avoid future nuisance parties; and 
(5)  The history of nuisance party ordinance violations on owner's property. 
(h)  Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating subsection (d) and to a certificate of compliance revocation proceeding that the property owner has evicted or is diligently attempting to evict all tenants and occupants of the property who were responsible for the nuisance parties. 
(i)  Time sanctions in effect. The order revoking a certificate of compliance shall state the period of time that must elapse between the effective date of the revocation and the time when a new certificate may be issued for the property. This period shall not exceed one year. 
(j)  Appeal. The property owner or any affected tenant may appeal an adverse decision of the hearing officer to the Circuit Court of Boone County in accordance with RSMo ch. 536. 
(k)  Effect of property conveyance. If title to property subject to an order revoking the certificate of compliance is conveyed in an arms-length transaction, as determined by the city manager or the manager's designee, the new owner may apply for a certificate of compliance after the new owner has met with a representative of the police department and agreed to take corrective action satisfactory to the chief of police to avoid future nuisance parties. 
In determining whether the conveyance was an arms-length transaction, the city manager or the manager's designee shall consider: 
(1)  Whether the property was conveyed for less than fair market value; 
(2)  Whether the property was conveyed to an entity controlled by a person conveying the property; and 
(3)  Whether the property was conveyed to a relative of a person conveying the property. 
(Ord. No. 19287, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-305. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates section 16-302, section 16-303, or section 16-304(d) shall, upon conviction, be punished for a first offense by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 19287, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Secs. 16-306—16-315. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 16-316. - Legislative findings. 
The city council makes the following legislative findings: 
(1)  Chronic unlawful activity on property adversely affects the peace and safety of neighboring residents and diminishes the quality of life in the neighborhood. 
(2)  Prosecution of unlawful activity on property is not always an effective way to preserve a desirable quality of life in the neighborhood. 
(3)  It is in the public interest for property owners to be vigilant in preventing unlawful activity from occurring on their property. 
(4)  It is in the public interest to make property owners responsible for the use of their property by tenants, occupants and visitors. 
(5)  The purpose of this article is to maintain a desirable quality of life in Columbia by holding property owners responsible for the use of their property. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-317. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division: 
Chief of police and chief include any designee of the chief of police. 
Chronic nuisance property means residential property on which or within two hundred (200) feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three (3) or more nuisance activities during any four-month period. 
Nuisance activity means any of the following unlawful conduct: 
(1)  Harassment under RSMo § 565.090 or section 16-143 of this Code; 
(2)  Assault under RSMo § 565.050 through RSMo § 565.070 or section 16-141 of this Code; 
(3)  Any sexual offense under RSMo ch. 566; 
(4)  Any prostitution related offense under RSMo ch. 567; 
(5)  Any violation of the liquor control law, RSMo ch. 311 or the alcoholic beverages ordinance, chapter 4 of this Code; 
(6)  Trespass under RSMo § 569.140 or section 16-156 of this Code; 
(7)  Any stealing or related offense under RSMo ch. 570 or section 16-171 of this Code; 
(8)  Any arson or related offense under RSMo §§ 569.040 through 569.065 or section 16-151 or 16-152 of this Code; 
(9)  Any violation of the "Comprehensive Drug Control Act of 1989" in RSMo ch. 195 or sections 16-253 through 16-255 of this Code; 
(10)  Gambling under RSMo ch. 572; 
(11)  Discharge of a firearm under section 16-234 of this Code; 
(12)  Possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage under section 16-185 of this Code; 
(13)  Indecent exposure under section 16-132 of this Code; 
(14)  Peace disturbance by fighting under section 16-176.1 of this Code; 
(15)  Unlawful use of weapons and armed criminal action under RSMo ch. 571 and brandishing a weapon under section 16-246 of this Code; 
(16)  Any noise violation under section 16-258 or section 16-259 of this Code; 
Person associated with the property means any person who is lawfully present on the property including any owner, tenant, occupant, guest or invitee. 
Property means any lot or other unit of real property. 
Property owner means a person having a fee interest in real property. 
Property owner's agent means a person authorized by the property owner to manage the property. 
Residential property means any property containing a single-family structure, a duplex, an apartment building, a manufactured or mobile home, a boarding house, a group home, a fraternity or sorority house, or a mixed use structure that includes a residential living unit. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-318. - Police chief determination of chronic nuisance property. 
(a)  Before any property is determined to be a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police must notify the property owner in writing that at least two (2) nuisance activities have occurred on or within two hundred (200) feet of the property and that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall identify the property and describe the alleged nuisance activities in detail including the dates on which the alleged nuisance activities occurred. The notice shall instruct the property owner to respond to the notice by either disputing the allegations of nuisance activities or proposing a plan to abate the nuisance activities. The notice shall be served on the property owner by first class and certified mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. 
(b)  The chief of police shall meet with any property owner who requests a meeting to dispute an allegation of nuisance activity or to discuss a plan to abate the nuisance activities. The property owner shall be notified of the position of the chief of police on all disputed allegations of nuisance activity within thirty (30) days after the meeting. 
(c)  If, after a property owner has received notice under subsection (a), the chief of police determines that an additional nuisance activity has occurred on or within two hundred (200) feet of the property causing the property to become a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall give the property owner written notice of the determination. The notice shall identify the property and describe in detail the alleged nuisance activities that cause a property to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall be served on the property owner by first class and certified mail or by personal service in the same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri statute or court rule. A notice mailed by first class mail shall be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed. The property owner shall have ten (10) days after receipt of the notice to arrange a meeting with the chief of police to dispute the determination of chronic nuisance property or persuade the chief of police to defer submitting the matter to the city manager for abatement or to the city prosecutor for prosecution. 
(d)  The chief of police shall meet with any property owner who requests a meeting to dispute or discuss the determination of chronic nuisance property. 
(e)  If, after the property owner has been given the opportunity to meet with the chief of police, the chief still believes that the property is a chronic nuisance property, the chief may submit a report on the matter to the city manager for abatement under section 16-319 or to the city prosecutor for prosecution under section 16-321. The chief of police may defer referring a chronic nuisance property to the city manager or the prosecutor if the property owner has presented an abatement plan satisfactory to the chief of police and has made good faith efforts to implement the plan. 
(f)  Copies of the notices required under subsections (a) and (c) shall be sent to any active neighborhood association and any active neighborhood watch group for the neighborhood or watch area in which the property is located. 
(g)  The provisions of this section pertaining to property owners apply equally to property owners' agents. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-319. - Administrative process for abating chronic nuisance property. 
(a)  If, after reviewing the police chief's chronic nuisance property report, the city manager determines that the proper procedures have been followed and that there is reason to believe that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, the city manager may authorize the city counselor to initiate an administrative action to abate the nuisance. The administrative action shall follow the contested case provisions of RSMo ch. 536. The owners of the property and any tenants shall be necessary parties to the action. The city manager or the manager's designee shall serve as hearing officer. 
(b)  If, after considering all evidence, the hearing officer determines that the property is a chronic nuisance property and that the procedures of section 16-318 were followed, the hearing officer may order appropriate abatement. Abatement may include closure of the property for up to one year, physically securing the property, suspension of utility services during the period of closure and revocation of a certificate of compliance for rental property. If there is more than one residential unit on the property, the hearing officer shall close only the unit or units whose occupants, guests or invitees have engaged in the nuisance activities. The hearing officer shall consider the following factors in determining whether to close a chronic nuisance property: 
(1)  The level of cooperation of the property owner and occupants in attempting to prevent nuisance activities; 
(2)  The nature and extent of the nuisance activities; 
(3)  The impact of the nuisance activities on neighbors and others; and 
(4)  Any actions taken to avoid further nuisance activities connected with the property. 
(c)  If an abatement order is not complied with, the hearing officer may authorize the abatement of the chronic nuisance property by city employees or by persons under contract with the city. No person shall enter private property to enforce an abatement order unless the person in possession of the property has consented to the entry or unless the municipal judge has issued a warrant for the entry. The chief of police shall certify the cost of abatement under this subsection to the city clerk. The cost shall include administrative costs as well as the actual cost of abating the nuisance. The city clerk shall cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared in the amount of the abatement cost. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. No clerical error or informality in the tax bill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the tax bill shall be a defense in an action to collect the tax bill. Tax bills issued under this section, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of nine (9) percent per year. The cost of abatement shall also constitute a personal obligation of any person who failed to comply with the order of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-320. - Effect of property conveyance. 
(a)  When title to property is conveyed, any nuisance activity that occurred before the conveyance may not be used to establish the property as a chronic nuisance property unless the reason for the conveyance was to avoid a determination that the property was a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  There is a rebuttable presumption that a reason for the conveyance of property was to avoid a determination that the property was a chronic nuisance property if: 
(1)  The property was conveyed for less than fair market value; 
(2)  The property was conveyed to an entity controlled by a person conveying the property; 
(3)  The property was conveyed to a relative of a person conveying the property. 
(Ord. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-321. - Chronic nuisance property prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a property owner or a property owner's agent to cause, permit or allow the property to become a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  The procedures set forth in section 16-318 must be followed before any property owner or property owner's agent is prosecuted for a violation of this section. No person shall be both prosecuted under this section and made a party to an administrative action under section 16-319 based on the same facts. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-322. - Other unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Fail to obey an abatement order issued under this division; 
(2)  Interfere with any police officer, agent or employee of the city who is enforcing an abatement order issued under this division; or 
(3)  Occupy or use or allow another to occupy or use property that has been closed by an abatement order issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-323. - Defenses. 
(a)  In any prosecution or abatement action under this division, it shall be an affirmative defense that the property owner has evicted or is diligently attempting to evict all tenants and occupants of the property that committed each alleged nuisance activity that caused the property to become a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  In any prosecution or abatement action under this division, it shall be an affirmative defense that the property owner has diligently pursued reasonable means to avoid a recurrence of violations similar to the alleged nuisance activities that caused the property to become a chronic nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 16-324. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates section 16-321 shall, upon conviction, be punished for a first offense by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Any person who violates section 16-322 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 19288, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Chapter 17 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; animals and fowl, Ch. 5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; public works and improvements, Ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; Unified Development Code, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire parks, RSMo. § 90.010. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Recreation budget. 
For the acquisition, maintenance and development of adequate recreational facilities, and for the proper promotion of a recreational program, the city manager shall include in his budget an amount estimated by him to be sufficient for such purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1020) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 112.  
Sec. 17-2. - Permanent park fund. 
There shall be a permanent park fund which shall consist of gifts, bequests and devises specified for this purpose, rents, issues and profits derived from any property which may have been purchased or held in trust by or for the City of Columbia for recreational purposes; and the proceeds of the sale of any such property, real, personal or mixed, so purchased or held in trust. Monies in this permanent park fund shall be appropriated, expended or encumbered only for parks and other recreational property or facilities. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1030) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 113.  
Sec. 17-3. - Special assessments for parks and recreational facilities. 
(a)  Authorized. Public parks and recreational facilities may be acquired, constructed, maintained and repaired as any other public improvement with the cost of such acquisition, maintenance, repair and construction being specially assessed under these provisions and the provisions of chapter 22. 
(b)  Establishment of special benefit district. When the city council shall determine at the public hearing required for the acquisition or construction of a public improvement that the park or recreational facility so considered will constitute a special benefit to property in any area, it may establish a special benefit district including such property. Such benefit district shall be established by ordinance with the legal boundaries thereof specifically defined and may thereafter by ordinance be amended to reduce or enlarge such district or to alter the boundaries thereof. Such park or recreational facilities may then be acquired, constructed, repaired or maintained with the costs being levied against the property owners in the district in the manner herein provided. 
(c)  How levied. The costs of acquiring, constructing, repairing or maintaining a park or recreational facility, when established by the council as a benefit to property within the district, shall be levied and assessed in the name of the owner(s) of that property and charged against the lots, tracts and parcels of land in the proportion such lots, tracts or parcels bear to the total area of the district exclusive of public highways. 
(Code 1964, §§ 2.1040—2.1060)  
Secs. 17-4—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment of commissions, § 22. 
Cross reference— City commission generally, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Composition; compensation; removal; vacancies. 
The council shall appoint a parks and recreation commission of seven (7) members, who shall be registered qualified voters of the city; who shall not be paid officers or employees of the city; and who shall serve without compensation. Each ward of the city shall be represented on the commission by a resident of that ward and appointments shall be made in a manner so as to preserve that representation. The council may remove any member of the commission for misconduct or neglect of duty. Vacancies on the commission occasioned by removal, resignation or for any other cause shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1964, § 2.880(1))  
Sec. 17-17. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The commission shall meet regularly at such times and places as the commission shall determine. A quorum for the transaction of business at such meetings shall be a majority of the appointed and acting members of such commission. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the commission to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 2.880(2); Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-17.1. - Officers. 
(a)  The commission shall elect annually, at the first meeting in June, a chair, vice-chair, and secretary. The secretary may be an employee of the city. 
(b)  Where there is a vacancy in any elected office, the commission shall elect a new officer to serve until the next regular annual election. The new officer shall have been appointed a member of the commission, with the exception of the secretary, who may be an employee of the city. Should the chair and vice-chair both be absent, the members present shall select a member previously appointed to the commission by the council to serve as chair for that meeting. 
(Ord. No. 10868, § 1, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-18. - Powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation commission shall have the power and be required to: 
(1)  Act in advisory capacity in all matters pertaining to public recreation. 
(2)  Consider the annual budget of the parks and recreation department and make recommendations with respect thereto to the city manager. 
(3)  Assist in the planning of a recreation program, promote and stimulate public interest therein; and to that end solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of school authorities and other public and private agencies. 
(Code 1964, § 2.890)  
Sec. 17-19. - Ordinances pertaining to parks and recreational activities. 
No ordinance pertaining to the park department or the recreational activities of the city shall be considered by the council without first referring the same to the parks and recreation commission and receiving its recommendation with reference thereto; provided, however, that if no recommendation is received from the commission within a period of thirty (30) days after the matter is referred to the commission, then the council may take action without such recommendation. 
(Code 1964, § 2.900)  
Secs. 17-20—17-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Revenues for recreational facilities and programs, § 112; permanent park fund, § 113. 
Cross reference— City departments generally, § 2-176 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-26. - Director—Appointment; qualifications. 
The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the city manager, and shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the city manager. He shall be selected by the city manager on the basis of his training and experience for his duties. 
(Code 1964, § 2.860)  
Sec. 17-27. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible to the city manager for an adequate and progressive recreational program. To that end, the director shall have the power and be required to: 
(1)  Manage and control all recreation programs in all places and buildings owned or controlled by, or available to the city. 
(2)  Manage and control the recreational use of all parks, parkways, playgrounds, golf courses, recreational centers, camps, swimming pools and such other city-owned lands, buildings, facilities and equipment, as may be authorized for recreational purposes. 
(3)  Plan a park and recreational program, with advice of the parks and recreation commission, so that the city will have adequate and ample park and recreational facilities. 
(4)  Submit a plan, with the advice of the parks and recreation commission, for financing the park and recreation program. 
(5)  Formulate, with the advice of the parks and recreation commission, proposed rules and regulations for submission to the council by the city manager for the proper use and protection of all property under the jurisdiction of the department. 
(6)  Manage the physical construction and improvement of all parks, playgrounds, golf courses, recreational centers, camps, swimming pools and all other city-owned land and buildings to be used for recreational purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 2.870; Ord. No. 22578, § 3, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 17-28—17-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONDUCT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-41. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
Director. A person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible. 
Park. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Unmanned aircraft system. A small unmanned aircraft weighing less than fifty-five (55) pounds operated in accordance with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1964, § 2.920; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-42. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Officials. The director, park rangers, and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Ejectment. The director, park rangers, and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article. 
(c)  Seizure of property. The director, park rangers and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device unlawfully in the park, or used unlawfully, in violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1000; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-43. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 2.1010)  
Sec. 17-44. - Use of mobility aids. 
(a)  Use of mobility aids. Individuals with mobility disabilities are permitted to use wheelchairs and manually powered mobility aids, such as walkers, crutches, canes, braces, or other similar devices, designed for use by individuals with mobility disabilities in any area open to pedestrian use. Individuals with mobility disabilities are permitted to use power-driven mobility devices in any area open to pedestrian use in a park unless the director adopts a regulation pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Regulations on use of power-driven mobility aids. The director is authorized to establish regulations related to the use of a power-driven mobility device if the director determines that a particular power-driven mobility device cannot be operated in accordance with legitimate safety requirements. In determining whether to adopt a regulation related to the use of a power-driven mobility device in a specific park, the director shall consider: 
(1)  The type, size, weight, dimensions, and speed of the device; 
(2)  The park's volume of pedestrian traffic (which may vary at different times of the day, week, month, or year); 
(3)  The facility's design and operational characteristics (e.g., whether its service, program, or activity is conducted indoors, its square footage, the density and placement of stationary devices, and the availability of storage for the device, if requested by the user); 
(4)  Whether legitimate safety requirements can be established to permit the safe operation of the power-driven mobility device in the specific facility; and 
(5)  Whether the use of the power-driven mobility device creates a substantial risk of serious harm to the immediate environment or natural or cultural resources, or poses a conflict with federal land management laws and regulations. 
A regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be posted in the applicable park, the director's office and on the city's website. 
(c)  Compliance with regulations required. It shall be unlawful to use a power-driven mobility device in violation of a regulation adopted by the director. 
( Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Secs. 17-45—17-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO PARK PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 17-51. - General disfiguration and removal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any building; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes; posts; or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Code 1964, § 2.930(1)(a))  
Sec. 17-52. - Injury, removal of natural features. 
(a)  Trees, shrubbery, lawns. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of, any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(b)  Removal, excavation of natural resources. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency, except by specified written permit issued hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 2.930(1)(c), (2)(a))  
Sec. 17-53. - Climbing trees, monuments, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. It shall be unlawful to tie or tether any object, including but not limited to hammocks and slacklines, to a tree, monument, vases, fountains, railings, fences, goal posts or any other park fixture or natural feature. This section shall not prohibit the attachments of hammocks and slacklines to installed posts upon which signage indicates that the posts are for the placement of hammocks and slacklines. 
(Code 1964, § 2.930(2); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-54. - Erection of structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across park lands, except or special written permit issued hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 2.930(1)(d))  
Sec. 17-55. - Restrooms and washrooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fail to cooperate in maintaining park restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1964, § 2.930(1)(b); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-56. - Deer hunting program. 
Nothing in this division shall prohibit any person participating in a city deer hunting program from using a tree stand in accordance with the applicable ordinance, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18197, § 1, 8-16-04)  
Secs. 17-57—17-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SANITATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation generally, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 17-66. - Discarding refuse and trash. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to bring or have brought in or to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash on park property. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1964, § 2.940(2)) 
Cross reference— Refuse collection, § 22-156 et seq.  
Sec. 17-67. - Water pollution, contamination. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution, discoloration or contamination of said waters. 
(Code 1964, § 2.940(1)) 
Cross reference— Water service, § 27-57 et seq.  
Secs. 17-68—17-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRAFFIC[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 17-76. - Compliance with state motor vehicle laws. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this Code and other ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(1))  
Sec. 17-77. - Enforcement of traffic regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fail to obey any traffic officer, park ranger, or park employee, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplemental regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(2); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-78. - Vehicle operation confined to roads. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may, on occasion, be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director. This section shall not apply to vehicles used by the city for park maintenance or to power-driven mobility devices used by an individual with a mobility disability when operated in accordance with this chapter and any regulations adopted by the director pursuant to section 17-44. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(5); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-79. - Traffic signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(3))  
Sec. 17-80. - Speed of vehicles. 
No person shall drive a vehicle in a park at a greater speed than is reasonable and approved under conditions then and there existing. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding that posted. Where no speed limit is posted, it shall be unlawful for a person, where no special hazard exists, to drive a vehicle in a park at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(4); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-81. - Parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions there at and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. This shall not apply to vehicles used by the city for park maintenance and to power-driven mobility devices used by an individual with a mobility disability. 
(Code 1964, § 2.950(6); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Secs. 17-82—17-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 17-91. - Swimming and bathing. 
(a)  Designated areas. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a park when such activity is prohibited by the director upon finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
(b)  Certain hours. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to swim, bathe or wade in any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the director for such purposes for each individual area. 
(c)  Bath houses. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(d)  Costume. It shall be unlawful for any person in park to allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit or other clothing so as to indecently expose his or her person in a manner that is likely to cause affront or alarm. 
(e)  The director is authorized to establish rules for areas designated for swimming and bathing. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with posted rules at a designated swimming or bathing area. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(1); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-92. - Boating. 
(a)  Designated areas. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to bring into or operate any boat, raft or other water craft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating by the director. It shall be unlawful to operate or use a boat in a designated swim area, except for official boating as is necessary due to an emergency or to keep the areas properly protected and policed. Boating activities shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be adopted. In areas designated by the director, only sailboats, hand-propelled crafts and boats with electronic trolling motors are permitted. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in a park any boat, raft or other watercraft with a length greater than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(b)  Public docks. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to use the public docks for dockage or other purposes without first making arrangements for such accommodation with the director, who shall assign space and collect reasonable rental charges in conformity with established regulations and rates. 
(c)  Operation of boats. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to navigate, direct or handle any boat in such manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger any person. 
(d)  Safety vest required. It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a boat, raft or other watercraft in a city park without wearing a coastguard approved safety vest properly fastened. 
(e)  Operation of boats after sundown and before sunrise. Any person who operates or uses a boat in a city park at any time after sundown and before sunrise shall display red and green sidelights visible from a distance of at least one (1) mile away on a dark, clear night and an all-round white light or both a masthead light and a stern light which are visible from a distance of at least two (2) miles away on a dark, clear night. The all-round white light (or the masthead light and stern light) shall be visible from all directions in a 360-degree circle. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(2); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-93. - Fishing. 
(a)  Commerce prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to engage in commercial fishing, or the buying or selling of fish caught in any waters. 
(b)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fish in any waters whether by the use of hook and line, net, trap or other device, except in waters designated by the director for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be prescribed by the director. 
(c)  Off-shore. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fish off-shore from the beaches except from such portions thereof as may be staked off and posted therefor, or to at any time fish in any area where bathing or swimming is permitted or in designated off leash dog parks. 
(d)  Prohibition during closed hours. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to launch, dock, or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain on or in, any boat during the closed hours of the park. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(3); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-94. - Picnic areas. 
(a)  Use generally. The director shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(b)  Availability. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first-come, first-served," except in those cases where prior reservations have been made with the director. 
(c)  Nonexclusivity. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to use any portion of the picnic areas or any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, or to use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, except in those cases where prior reservations have been made with the director. 
(d)  Duty of picnicker. It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(5); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-95. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to camp in other than designated areas for organized camping, provided by the director and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision. Except in areas designated for organized camping or pursuant to a permit issued by the director, no person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park, after closing hours, any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like. Except in areas designated for organized camping, it shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on the seats, or benches, or other areas in a park. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(6); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-96. - Games. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or to operate unmanned aircraft systems or model airplanes from a location in a park, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation or in areas designated by special permit issued by the director. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball, softball, lacrosse and rugby is prohibited except in the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such pastime. Riding motor propelled scooters is prohibited in any city park or trail. This section shall not prohibit the operation of unmanned aircraft systems by a remote pilot in command who is physically located outside of a park when the operation is done in compliance with federal laws, rules and regulations, or a certificate of authority issued by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(7); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 23713 , § 3, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 17-97. - Horseback riding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to ride a horse, except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub. It shall be unlawful to allow a horse to defecate upon any city trail or in any city park. It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the person charged immediately removed the deposit and properly disposed of it. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-98. - Hunting; carrying and use of weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring-guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot into park areas from beyond the park boundaries. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit any person in a park from carrying a concealed firearm if the person is lawfully carrying the concealed firearm pursuant to the laws of the state of Missouri or has a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms, issued by another state or political subdivision of another state. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit any person from participating in any parks and recreation department archery program or event. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit any person from participating in any deer hunting program established by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.960(4); Ord. No. 18042, § 2, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 18197, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-99. - Electrically-assisted pedal powered cycle on designated trails. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
"Cycle" shall mean any device upon which a person may ride; propelled by human power, having two (2) or more wheels, excluding wheelchairs. 
"Electrically-assisted pedal powered cycle" is defined as a device weighing less than one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds, having two (2) or more wheels that are a minimum of sixteen (16) inches in diameter with fully operable pedals upon which a person may pedal the cycle, propelled by human power with the assistance of an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750) watts or one horsepower (1 h.p.), whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor, is less than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
"Pedal trolley" shall mean a wheeled device designed to be propelled solely by a passenger or passengers via pedaling with brakes and steering operated by a non-pedaling driver. A pedal trolley may include an assist motor. 
(b)  Electrically-assisted pedal powered cycles shall only be operated on the following trails and hard surface city trail connectors: 
(1)  MKT Trail; 
(2)  Hinkson Creek Trail; 
(3)  Hominy Creek Trail; 
(4)  Scott's Branch Trail; 
(5)  Grindstone Trail; 
(6)  County House Trail; 
(7)  Bear Creek Trail; and 
(8)  South Providence Trail. 
(c)  Rules applicable to electrically-assisted pedal powered vehicles are: 
(1)  No person shall operate an electrically-assisted pedal powered cycle on a city trail or in a city park at speeds greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to operate an electrically-assisted pedal powered cycle on a city trail in a careless and imprudent manner. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate a pedal trolley in a city park or on a city trail. 
( Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 23698 , § 4, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Secs. 17-100—17-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BEHAVIOR 
 
Sec. 17-106. - Interference with permittees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority of a permit. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(10))  
Sec. 17-107. - Exhibition of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(9))  
Sec. 17-108. - Peace disturbance in a park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Unreasonably and knowingly disturb or alarm another person or persons by: 
a.  Loud noise; or 
b.  Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are likely to produce an immediate violent response from a reasonable recipient; or 
c.  Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or 
d.  Fighting; or 
e.  Creating a noxious and offensive odor. 
(2)  Purposely cause inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing: 
a.  Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or 
b.  The free ingress or egress to or from the park. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(8); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-109. - Restricted areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public"; nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(5))  
Sec. 17-110. - Skating, walking, etc., on ice. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to go onto the ice on any of the waters, except such areas as are designated as skating fields, and provided a safety signal or sign is displayed. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(7); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-111. - Restrictions on sexual conduct in a park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Expose his or her genitals under circumstances in which he or she knows that his or her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; 
(2)  Have sexual contact in the presence of a third person or persons under circumstances in which he or she knows that such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or 
(3)  Have sexual intercourse in a public place in the park. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(3); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-112. - Fireworks and explosives. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to bring, or have in his possession, or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any park area from land or a highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints, except under the sponsorship of organized groups and with the permission of the director and/or the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(2)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 17-113. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to build or attempt to build a fire except in such area and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(4))  
Sec. 17-114. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain parks. 
(a)  Except as allowed in subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any of the following city parks: 
(1)  Paquin Park; and 
(2)  Flat Branch Park. 
(b)  The definition of "alcoholic beverage" contained in chapter 4 shall apply to this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any person possessing or consuming an alcoholic beverage at an event in a park where alcoholic beverages are allowed under a permit issued by the director under section 17-134. 
(Code 1964, § 2.970(1); Ord. No. 20901, § 1, 3-7-11; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-115. - Bonnie View Nature Sanctuary; limitations on dogs and cycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or responsible for a dog to allow the dog to be in any portion of Bonnie View Nature Sanctuary south of Rollins Road and west of the Scott's Branch Trail. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a cycle, as defined in section 17-140, in Bonnie View Nature Sanctuary other than on a hard surfaced area. 
(Ord. No. 20967, § 1, 5-16-11)  
Sec. 17-116. - Scott's Branch Trail; limitation on dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or responsible for a dog to allow the dog to be on portions of the Scott's Branch Trail between Dublin Park and the Bonnie View Nature Sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 21174, § 1, 12-5-11)  
Secs. 17-117—17-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 17-121. - Advertising generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. An exception shall be granted to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director, or pursuant to and in compliance with a special event permit. 
(Code 1964, § 2.980(2); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-122. - Vending and peddling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or to station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. An exception is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director or pursuant to and in compliance with a special event permit. 
(Code 1964, § 2.980; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-123. - Posting signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, or to erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Code 1964, § 2.980)  
Secs. 17-124—17-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - OPERATING POLICIES 
 
Sec. 17-131. - Hours of operation. 
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. If there is no sign posted, the hours of operation are 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful to enter or remain in a park when the park is closed. 
(Code 1964, § 2.990(1); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-132. - Closed areas. 
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. It shall be unlawful to enter or remain in a section or part of a park declared closed to the public. 
(Code 1964, § 2.990(2); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-133. - Metal detectors and geocaching. 
It shall be unlawful to use metal detectors in a park without a permit. It shall be unlawful to place and leave caches or other containers for the purpose of geocaching or treasure hunting in a park without a permit. 
(Code 1964, § 2.990(3); Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 17-134. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. A permit shall be obtained from the director before participating in any special use or activity in a park. A list of such uses and activities shall be kept on file in the office of the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the appropriate director. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any. 
(3)  The day and hours for which the permit is desired. 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired. 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance. 
(6)  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(c)  Standards for issuance. The director shall issue a permit hereunder when the director finds: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park. 
(2)  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by city. 
(5)  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(6)  That, if public liability insurance is required, the applicant has provided the director with a certificate of general liability insurance covering the proposed use or activity. General liability insurance shall be required as follows: 
a.  No insurance shall be required for events that use a park or park facilities for activities for which the park or park facilities were designed and that do not bring temporary portable facilities, structures or devices into the park. The director may allow for the innovative use of facilities for new activities with the use of temporary portable facilities or devices under reasonable regulations. Anyone wishing to make application for such activity shall provide the director with information as required by the director, which may include rules of conduct and a list of equipment that is used or required for the activities. The director may evaluate the activity on the impact to facilities, the safety and experience of the public and participants, and any other reasonable criteria related to the standards for issuance. The director may require insurance at a level to protect the city and the public after consultation with the city's risk manager, or allow for the activity under required rules and regulations, or reject/revoke a permit for the activity. 
b.  General liability insurance in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one person in a single accident or occurrence, naming the city as an additional insured, shall be required for events that involve moderate risk, such as: 
i.  Festivals, concerts, contests, athletic camps and events, exhibitions and celebrations that are open to the general public and that are expected to have an attendance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) or less and that do not include the use of any high risk device or the participation in any high risk activity. (See examples in item c. below.) 
ii.  The landing or take-off of individual hot air balloons (excluding commercial rides). 
iii.  Any other event or activity that, in the judgment of the director, involves a moderate risk of injury. 
c.  General liability insurance in the amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for all claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one person in a single accident or occurrence, naming the city as an additional insured, shall be required for events that involve a high risk, such as: 
i.  Festivals, concerts, contests, athletic camps and events, exhibitions and celebrations that are open to the general public and that are expected to have an attendance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) or more or that involve a high risk of injury. 
ii.  Hot air balloon festivals or competitions. 
iii.  Events involving animals for show, display or rides. 
iv.  Events involving devices that entail risk of injury including, but not limited to, inflatables (such as bounce houses, but excluding inflatables that are predetermined by the director to be for a sport or recreation activity), dunking booths, amusement or carnival rides, mock weapons, or battery or gas powered devices/toys. 
v.  Any other event or activity that, in the judgment of the director, involves a high risk of injury. 
d.  The following involve excessive risk and shall not be allowed in city parks: 
i.  Tethered hot air balloon rides. 
ii.  Climbing walls. 
iii.  Fireworks, pyrotechnic displays and torpedo/rockets. 
iv.  Helicopters, airplanes, powered parachutes, hang gliders and other aerial or aviation devices other than hot air balloons and unmanned aircraft systems as defined in section 17-41. 
v.  Motorized vehicle races or contests and precision driving contests and stunts. 
vi.  Remote control airplanes. 
(d)  Appeal. Within five (5) days after receipt of an application, the director shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of his reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal, in writing, within five (5) days to the city manager, who shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection (c) hereof, and sustain or overrule the director's decision within five (5) days. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(e)  Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations, the terms of the permit, and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said permits. 
(f)  Liability of permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(g)  Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1964, § 2.990(4); Ord. No. 19926, § 1, 6-2-08; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 17-135. - Activity fees. 
All fees for parks and recreation activities or facility use charges shall be established by ordinance.  
Secs. 17-136—17-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CITY TRAILS 
 
Sec. 17-140. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division: 
City trail means any trail maintained by the parks and recreation department for use by pedestrians or cyclists. 
Cycle means any device, other than a wheelchair, which is propelled by human power and has one or more wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
Motor propelled scooter means any scooter, e-scooter and other small wheeled vehicle which does not rely solely on human propulsion and is equipped with an electric motor that is capable of propelling the device to a maximum speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
Pedestrian includes any person riding in a wheelchair. 
Wheelchair means a chair mounted on wheels for use by disabled individuals. 
(Ord. No. 14460 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 23713 , § 3, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 17-141. - Trail use by cyclists; motor propelled scooters prohibited. 
(a)  Every person operating a cycle upon a city trail shall ride as near to the right side of the trail as practicable, exercising due care when passing a pedestrian or another cyclist. 
(b)  Persons operating cycles upon a city trail shall ride single file when passing a pedestrian or another cyclist. 
(c)  No person shall operate a cycle upon a city trail at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under conditions then existing. 
(d)  Every person operating a cycle upon a city trail shall give an audible signal before passing a pedestrian or another cyclist. 
(e)  Every person operating a cycle upon a city trail shall at all times exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with another trail user. 
(f)  No person may operate a motor propelled scooter on any city trail or in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 14460 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 23713 , § 3, 11-19-18)  
Sec. 17-142. - Trail use by pedestrians. 
Pedestrians on a city trail shall remain as near to the right side of the trail as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 14460 § 1, 4-17-95)  
Sec. 17-143. - Trail and park use by dogs. 
(a)  No person responsible for a dog shall permit the dog to be on any city trail or in any city park, unless the dog is held on a leash. The dog shall be reined in to within four (4) feet of the responsible person whenever it approaches or is approached by another trail or park user. This section does not apply in areas designated as a dog park. 
(b)  No person responsible for a dog shall permit the dog to defecate upon any city trail or in any city park. It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the person charged immediately removed the deposit and properly disposed of it. 
(Ord. No. 14460 § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 23029 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Secs. 17-144, 17-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR OPEN SPACE AND PARK LAND ACQUISITION 
 
Sec. 17-146. - Special assessments for land acquisition authorized. 
All or part of the cost of purchasing land for open space or park purposes may be assessed against land specially benefitted by the open space or park in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13929 § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-147. - Initiation of procedure; public hearing. 
Before authorizing the purchase of any land for open space or park purposes which is to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the matter. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days before the hearing. The notice shall describe generally the land to be purchased and the boundaries of the proposed benefit district. The notice shall also set forth the proposed formula for imposing special assessments which may be based on the square footage or the assessed value of the property charged or any other reasonable method of calculation. If, after the public hearing, the city council desires to proceed with the purchase of the land, it shall, by ordinance, authorize the city manager to acquire the property. 
(Ord. No. 13929 § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-148. - Assessments levied after land acquired; public hearing. 
After the land for open space or park land has been acquired, the council shall, by ordinance, after a public hearing, levy special assessments and authorize the issuance of tax bills against the lots, parcels and tracts of land specially benefitted by purchase of the land for open space or park land. The amount of any special assessment shall not exceed the amount of the benefit conferred on the property assessed. The ordinance shall contain a description of each lot, tract or parcel of land chargeable with a portion of the cost of the land acquisition and the amount with which it is chargeable. The city clerk shall issue the tax bills and deliver them to the director of finance for collection. Tax bills shall be signed by the clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the city. When an ordinance levying a special assessment is passed, a copy of the tax bill authorized thereby shall be delivered to the then record owner of the property charged therewith. The special assessment and tax bill shall be a first lien upon the property. The lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13929 § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-149. - Invalid assessments may be reassessed. 
If any tax bill or special assessment shall be invalid in whole or in part as determined by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction, or the amount assessed is not sufficient to pay the cost of the land acquired, the council may, after a new public hearing, cause such assessment to be reassessed and authorize the enforcement of its collection. 
(Ord. No. 13929 § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-150. - Tax bills; form and content. 
Each tax bill shall contain a brief general statement of the facts authorizing its issue, the amount for which it is issued, the name of the record owner and the description of the property against which it is issued, the rate of interest which it bears, when it begins to bear interest, and shall state that it is a lien against the land therein described, and give the time that the lien continues. Tax bills shall bear no interest for sixty (60) days after the date of issue, at which time such tax bills shall be due and payable in full. After the expiration of sixty (60) days, tax bills shall bear interest, on the unpaid balance, at a rate of nine (9) percent, which rate shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing the issuance thereof. Every tax bill shall be a lien against the lot, tract or parcel of land described therein for a period of ten (10) years after date of issue, unless sooner paid. The lien, for tax bills payable in installments, shall expire one (1) year after the date of maturity of the last installment, except when it becomes necessary to bring suit to enforce the lien, in which case the lien shall continue until the expiration of the litigation. If the property owner cannot be served by legal process, a suit may be brought by attachment or by any other legal remedy. Tax bills shall be prima facie evidence of what they contain, of their own validity and of the facts authorizing their issue. No mere informality or clerical mistake in any of the proceedings shall be a defense thereto. Any error made in issuing any tax bill may be corrected by the city clerk, either by interlineation or by issuing a new tax bill in lieu of the erroneous one. When a tax bill is corrected by interlineation, the date of making same shall be certified by the clerk on the margin or back of the bill. In any action brought on any tax bill, the court shall have the authority to correct any error in the tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 13929 § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-151. - Installment payments. 
The owner of any tract of land, against which a tax bill has been issued, may, not later than sixty (60) days after the issuance of the tax bill, enter into an agreement with the city to pay the tax bill in ten (10) annual installments. Each payment shall be in an amount equal to one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the unpaid balance of the tax bill, together with all accrued interest. If any installment is not paid when due, the balance shall be then due and payable in full, together with all accrued interest. Prepayments may be made without penalty. 
(Ord. No. 13929, § 1, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 17-152. - Record and payment. 
The director of finance shall keep a record of all tax bills issued by the city, which shall show the date and amount of each tax bill, the rate of interest it bears, the name of the record owner and the description of the property against which it was issued, and a general description of the facts authorizing its issue. The director of finance shall accept partial or total payment of any tax bill and shall keep a record of all payments. When any tax bill is paid in full, he shall note the date of satisfaction on the record. The tax bill shall then be canceled and returned to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 13929, § 1, 1-18-94)  
Secs. 17-153—17-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARKS AND RECREATION FEES 
 
Sec. 17-161. - Fees. 
The following parks and recreation fees are hereby established: 
(a)  Activities/classes. Any activity (unless specified elsewhere in this section) that has as its main objective to instruct a participant for the purpose of increasing the participant's skill level, will carry a fee of: 
Children (17 and under) ..... $3.00—$100.00 
Adults ..... 3.00—175.00 
The fee for each individual class is based upon the recovery of direct costs associated with the program. 
Day camp (per person, per one week session) 
Includes $7.50 user fee ..... $125.00 
"School's Out" Camp at the ARC, includes $4.05 user fee ..... 45.00 
"School's Out" Camp at the ARC, includes $4.05 user fee ..... 45.00 
(b)  Team activities. 
Kickball leagues, per game ..... $27.30 
Volleyball leagues, per game ..... 29.00 
Softball leagues, per game ..... 34.00 
Basketball leagues, per game ..... 34.00 
Flag football leagues, per game ..... 30.00 
Cross country, individual ..... 5.00—100.00 
Cross country, per team ..... 100.00—300.00 
Tennis leagues 
Singles, per person ..... 18.00 
Doubles, per person ..... 12.00 
Tennis tournaments 
Singles children (15 and under) ..... 7.50 
Singles adult (16 and over) ..... 12.00 
Doubles (all ages) ..... 15.00 
Youth sports participation fee (individual fee per scheduled games) 
Activity fee, per game ..... 1.80 
User fee, per game ..... 0.45 
Adult sports (individual fee per scheduled games) 
Activity fee, per game ..... 1.80 
User fee, per game ..... 0.60 
No advance forfeit fee will be charged; however, any team forfeiting a game must pay a $15.00 re-entry fee before being allowed to continue playing in the activity league. 
(c)  Golf courses. For use of the greens at the L.A. Nickell and Lake of the Woods Golf Courses, the following fees are hereby established: 
Greens fees for 18-holes—Adult (18—59) and Senior (60 & older) 
Monday—Friday Rate; excludes holidays 
Adult 18-hole Weekday Play ..... $19.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Senior 18-hole Weekday Play until 2:00 p.m. ..... 15.75 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Saturday, Sunday and holiday rate 
Weekend and holiday play ..... 25.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Twilight rate for 18-holes—4:00 p.m. to close (March 1—October 31) 
Twilight 18-hole weekday play ..... 15.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Twilight 18-hole weekend and holiday play ..... 21.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Super twilight rate—6:30 p.m. to close (March 1—October 31) 
Super twilight 18-hole weekday play ..... 11.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Super twilight 18-hole weekend and holiday play ..... 11.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Greens fees—Junior (17 and under) 
Monday—Friday rate 
Weekday play ..... 8.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Saturday, Sunday and holiday rate 
Weekend and holiday play ..... 11.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Green Fees for 9-holes—Adult (18—59) and Senior (60 and older) 
Monday—Friday rate; excludes holidays 
Adult 9-hole weekday play ..... 11.25 
Recreation facility use charge per green fee ..... 0.75 
Capital improvement fee per green fee* ..... 2.00 
Senior 9-hole weekday play ..... 9.25 
Recreation facility use charge per green fee ..... 0.75 
Capital improvement fee per green fee* ..... 2.00 
Twilight Rate for 9-holes—4:00 p.m. to close (March 1—October 31) 
Twilight 9-hole weekday play ..... 9.25 
Recreation facility use charge per green fee ..... 0.75 
Capital improvement fee per green fee* ..... 2.00 
Twilight 9-hole weekend and holiday play ..... 12.25 
Recreation facility use charge per green fee ..... 0.75 
Capital improvement fee per green fee* ..... 2.00 
Winter Green Fees: November 1—February 28 
Monday—Friday rate 
Winter weekday play ..... 15.25 
User fee ..... 0.75 
Cap fee ..... 2.00 
Saturday, Sunday and holiday rate 
Winter weekend and holiday play ..... 21.25 
Recreation facility use charge per greens fee paid ..... 0.75 
Capital Improvement fee per greens fee paid ..... 2.00 
Season passes—Annual pass: Valid one year from date of purchase 
Adult plus one season pass for both courses 
Any day play ..... 1,356.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 52.50 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 87.50 
For the purposes of this subsection "adult plus one" means any two related persons residing at the same address. Additional related persons living at the same address may be added to the pass if they are under the age of 22. Proof of residence and age may be required. 
Adult (30—59) season pass, both courses 
Any day play ..... 810.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 26.25 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 48.00 
Young Adult (18—29) season pass, for both courses 
Any day play ..... 634.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 26.25 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 43.75 
Junior season pass (17 and under), for both courses 
Any day play ..... 400.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 15.00 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 25.00 
Limited play (May 1—August 31) ..... 200.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 7.50 
Capital improvement fee per pass ..... 12.50 
Senior season pass (60 and over), for both courses 
Any day play ..... 634.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 26.25 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 43.75 
Senior couple season pass for both courses 
Any day play ..... 1,057.00 
Recreation facility use charge per pass ..... 52.50 
Capital improvement fee per pass* ..... 87.50 
Applicable for two adults 60 years of age and over for related persons residing at the same address. No additional family members may be added to this pass. Proof of residence and age may be required. 
Educational instruction 
Team member fee** ..... 50% of applicable green fee 
Equipment rental fees 
Driving range ball rental ..... 3.00—15.00 
Pull carts ..... 5.00 
Club rentals ..... 20.00 
Riding golf cart fees 
18-hole charge, per person ..... 15.40 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 0.60 
9-hole charge, per person ..... 7.70 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 0.30 
Individual season cart fee (annual pass holders only) ..... 696.80 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 31.20 
Adult plus one season cart (annual pass holders only) 
(must reside in same household) ..... 1,175.60 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 62.40 
Private carts 
Season trail activity fee ..... 587.80 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 31.20 
Daily trail activity fee ..... 15.40 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 0.60 
Private cart storage activity fee ..... 336.80 
Capital improvement fee, per cart* ..... 31.20 
Private tournament fees—Per established guidelines approved by the parks and recreation director 
*All revenues derived from the golf course capital improvement fee shall become a part of the capital improvements project fund for improvements to the golf course only. 
**This fee is available on weekdays only to members of an official team of any educational institution in Boone County (except the Columbia Public School System which shall be exempt from the fee) when playing with the official team of the institution and accompanied by the coach or other authorized representative of the educational institution. 
(d)  Outdoor aquatics. 
Admission fees to municipal outdoor swimming facilities 
Albert-Oakland Family Aquatic Center 
Children (1 and under) ..... Free 
Children (2—15) ..... $3.00 
Children (2—15) group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 2.25 each 
Adults (16 and over) ..... 4.25 
Adults (16 and over) group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 3.25 each 
Child pass book ..... 45.00 
Adult pass book ..... 63.75 
Lake of the Woods; Little Mates Cove 
Children (1 and under) ..... Free 
Children (2—15) ..... 2.00 
Children (2—15) group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 1.50 each 
Adults (16 and over) ..... 3.25 
Adults (16 and over) group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 2.45 each 
Child pass book ..... 30.00 
Adult pass book ..... 48.75 
Outdoor pool season pass (valid only for the summer season). Includes admission to Albert-Oakland Family Aquatic Center (AOFAC), Douglass Pool, Lake of the Woods Pool (LOW) and Pirates Landing. Season pass holders can participate in outdoor water fitness classes offered at OFAC and LOW at no charge. 
Youth individual ..... 70.00 
Adult individual ..... 115.00 
Family pass* ..... 220.00 
Family—Each person after five members ..... 10.00 
*For the purposes of this subsection "family" is defined as a maximum of two adults and up to three children or dependents residing at one residence. "Dependent" has the same meaning as "dependent" under federal income tax law. A person shall not be considered a dependent under this subsection unless the person was claimed as a dependent on Federal Income Tax Form 1040 for the most recent income tax reporting period. Additional related persons, residing at the same address, may be added to the pass if they are under the age of 18, are a full-time student (12 credit hours or more) under the age of 25, or qualify as a dependent. Each additional person over five will be an additional $10.00 per season. Children under the age of two will be admitted for free and will not be counted toward the number of persons in the family. 
Douglas Family Aquatic Center 
Children (1 and under) ..... Free 
Children (2—15) ..... 1.50 
Adults (16 and over) ..... 1.50 
Swim lessons (infant, toddler, parent-assisted preschool) ..... 45.20 
User fee ..... 1.80 
Swim lessons (Levels 1—7) ..... 49.30 
User fee ..... 2.70 
Private swim lessons ..... 94.65 
User fee ..... 1.35 
Semi-private swim lessons ..... 122.30 
User fee ..... 2.70 
Lifeguard certification class ..... 130.00 
Pool rental—Rates vary per facility 
2-hour rental rate; $1.00 per person over 50 ..... 92.00—300.00 
Locker rental ..... 0.25 
Aquatic exercise 
(Drop-in rate) ..... 5.00—10.00 
(10-pass rate) ..... 35.00—60.00 
Birthday party packages—Varies by package chosen ..... 5.00—100.00 
(e)  OAK Tours/Senior Plus Programs. Any senior adult participating in OAK Tours will be required to pay an annual fee. 
Hillcrest Community Center (HCC) annual activity fee 
HCC single activity fee ..... $25.00 
(f)  Rental fees. 
Amphitheater ..... $10.00—$200.00 
Early bird (6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) shelter reservation hourly fee ..... 15.00 
Single Booking Park Shelter Reservations (per rental) ..... 28.00—80.00 
Medium shelter ..... 45.00 
Large shelter ..... 55.00 
Double Booking Park Shelter Reservations (per rental) 
Full day medium shelter rental ..... 60.00 
Partial day medium shelter rental ..... 45.00 
Full day large shelter rental ..... 70.00 
Partial day large shelter rental ..... 55.00 
Island shelter special use fee ..... 45.00 
Special park permit use fee ..... 45.00 
Wedding permit use fee ..... 45.00 
Indoor shelter reservations—Reichmann Pavilion 
Weekday (Monday—Thursday)—½-day rental ..... 300.00 
Weekday (Monday—Thursday)—8:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m. 
Business Rental; November 1—February 28 ..... 240.00 
Weekday (Monday—Thursday)—Full-day rental ..... 400.00 
Friday—7:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m. (June 1—August 15) ..... 230.00 
Friday and Sunday—Full day rental ..... 585.00 
Saturday/holiday—Full day rental ..... 650.00 
Weekend wedding special (November 1—March 31) ..... 1,470.00 
Weekend (Friday—Sunday) wedding special (April 1—May 31 and August 16—September 30) ..... 1,590.00 
Weekend (Friday—Sunday) wedding special (June 1—August 15; access from 7:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m. only on Friday night) ..... 1,325.00 
Indoor shelter reservation—Philips Pavilion 
Weekday—½ day rental ..... 840.00 
Weekday—8:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m. (business rental) ..... 1,080.00 
Friday and Sunday—full day rental ..... 1,460.00 
Saturday/holiday—full day rental ..... 1,620.00 
Weekend wedding special (November 1—March 31) ..... 3,670.00 
Weekend wedding special (April 1—October 31) ..... 3,960.00 
Outdoor Pavilion—Clary-Shy Park 
Weekday—½ day rental ..... 185.00 
Weekday—Full day rental ..... 280.00 
Friday and Sunday—½ day rental ..... 210.00 
Friday and Sunday—Full day rental ..... 370.00 
Saturday—½ day rental; 4:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m. only ..... 230.00 
Portable dance floor 
Weekday—½ day rental ..... 50.00 
Weekday—Full day rental ..... 75.00 
Weekend/holiday full day rental ..... 75.00 
Hillcrest Community Center Reservations (per hour) ..... 22.00—32.00 
Maplewood Barn Reservations (per hour) ..... 27.00—50.00 
Moss Building Reservations (per hour) ..... 27.00—50.00 
Rock Quarry House Reservations (per hour) ..... 22.00—32.00 
Waters House (per hour) ..... 22.00—32.00 
Garden plots (per year) ..... 36.00 
Festival displays (per day) ..... 17.50—60.00 
Parklet ..... 0—200.00 
Picnic table (per table) ..... 0—25.00 
Picnic table delivery (1 to 8 tables) ..... 100.00 
Coin-operated pitching and other game machines ..... 0.25—2.00 
Vendor fees—Based on the market value of the event, a reservation fee of $0.00—$100.00 will be charged to reserve vendor space. The reservation fee shall be the minimum amount required to acquire vendor space. The balance of fees owed (over the reservation fee) based on actual sales shall be due no more than ten (10) days after the event. 
Food vendor fee for parks and recreation 
Sponsored event ..... 15% of gross sales 
Non-food vendor fee—Based on market value of event, a reservation fee of $0.00—$200.00 will be charged to reserve vendor space. 
Non-food booth (12' × 12') fee ..... 0.00—200.00 
(g)  Armory Sports Center. 
Armory Gymnasium 
Hourly Rate 
Activity fee ..... $27.00 
User fee ..... 3.00 
Full-day rate 
Activity fee ..... 162.00 
User fee ..... 18.00 
Conference rooms—Hourly rate (two-hour minimum) ..... 20.00 
Classrooms—Hourly rate (two-hour minimum) ..... 10.00 
(h)  Athletic Field Rentals. In addition to the recreation facility use charge under section (q)(2). 
Baseball/Softball 
(1)  Without lights, per hour ..... $16.00 
(2)  With lights, per hour ..... 22.00 
(3)  Per game (marked fields) ..... 68.00 
(4)  Daily rate (marked fields) ..... 153.00 
(5)  Daily rate (marked, w/temporary fence) ..... 200.00 
(6)  Rainbow Baseball/Softball Sunday rate (marked) ..... 130.00 
Soccer/Football/Lacrosse/Rugby fields—Per field 
(1)  Fields without lights 
Rate, per practice ..... 16.00 
(2)  Fields with lights 
Rate, per practice ..... 22.00 
(3)  Fields with or without lights and irrigated 
Rate, per game ..... 54.00 
Rate, per day ..... 122.00 
(4)  Fields with or without lights and not irrigated 
Rate, per game ..... 40.00 
Rate, per day ..... 92.00 
Athletic fields—Special field preparation (in addition to normal rental rates) 
(1)  Special field preparation fee—Baseball fields ..... 100.00 
(2)  Special field preparation fee—Football/lacrosse/soccer fields ..... 250.00 
Tennis courts and outdoor basketball courts—Per court 
(1)  Per court, per hour ..... 14.00 
(2)  Per court, per day ..... 54.00 
(3)  Per four (4) courts, per day ..... 90.00 
In-line hockey 
(1)  Per game ..... 30.00 
(2)  Per day ..... 144.00 
(i)  Transportation charges. 
Transportation (bus or vans) provided by parks and recreation department for any activity outside service area of Boone County, except for those activities deemed by the director of parks and recreation to be representational ..... $20.00 
(j)  Promotional Pricing. In order to promote additional attendance, the Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to reduce fees at certain times and to offer reduced fee coupons. 
(k)  Special events/special use fees. 
(1)  Fees for general special event/special use unless otherwise indicated are based upon direct costs ..... $25.00— 
$250.00 
(2)  Concession fees—The fee per event is based upon the concession privileges granted by the parks and recreation director in accordance with the park special use permit. 
1—3 booths (food and items for resale) ..... 60.00 
4—6 booths (food and items for resale) ..... 108.00 
Additional fee for each booth over 6 ..... 15.00 
(3)  Park facilities—The schedule of fees for use of park facilities (disc golf course, MKT Trail, mountain bike course, radio control areas, roller hockey, skateboard park, etc.) will apply when the facilities are used semi-exclusively or exclusively by the renter and the renter charges participation fees: 
Adult participation fee, per game/event per day: 
Activity fee ..... 1.80 
User fee ..... 0.60 
Youth participation fee, per game/event per day: 
Activity fee ..... 1.80 
User fee ..... 0.45 
A $75.00 per day reservation fee is due at the time of the reservation. The balance of the fees (over $75.00) based upon actual usage is due 10 days after the event. 
(4)  Ticketed special event fees—Those events where the event sponsor requests exclusive use of parkland and event attendance is limited to those purchasing tickets. The park use fee is due at time of reservation. Per ticket revenue, based on actual sales, shall be due no more than ten (10) days after the event. 
Price per reserved parkland, per acre plus per ticket fee ..... 100.00 
$1.00—$20.00 ticket sold, per ticket ..... 1.00 
$21.00—$50.00 ticket sold, per ticket ..... 2.00 
$51.00 and higher ticket sold, per ticket ..... 3.00 
(l)  Activity and recreation center (ARC). Annual and multiple (20) pass membership fees include certain basic aquatic/land exercise classes as determined by parks and recreation director. 
Admission fees: 
Youth (1 and under) ..... Free 
Youth rates (Ages 2—17): 
Youth daily admission ..... $3.60 
Youth daily recreation center improvement fee (RCIF) ..... 0.15 
Youth multiple (20) pass admission ..... 55.00 
Youth multiple RCIF ..... 1.25 
Youth group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 2.65 each 
Youth group rate RCIF ..... 0.15 
Youth annual pass—Paid monthly ..... 19.25/month 
Youth annual paid monthly RCIF ..... 0.25/month 
Youth annual pass ..... 198.00 
Youth annual RCIF ..... 5.00 
Youth 30-day pass ..... 25.25 
Youth 30-day RCIF ..... 0.25 
Youth after school (3:00—6:00 p.m.) fee ..... 2.60 
Youth after school RCIF ..... 0.15 
Adult rates (Ages 18—59): 
Adult daily admission ..... 5.85 
Adult daily recreation center improvement fee (RCIF) ..... 0.15 
Adult multiple (20) pass admission ..... 88.75 
Adult multiple RCIF ..... 1.25 
Adult group rate (groups of 10 or larger) ..... 4.30 each 
Adult group rate RCIF ..... 0.15 
Adult annual pass—Paid monthly ..... 34.25/month 
Adult annual paid monthly RCIF ..... 0.25/month 
Adult annual pass ..... 354.00 
Adult annual RCIF ..... 5.00 
Adult 30-day pass ..... 40.25 
Adult 30-day RCIF ..... 0.25 
Adult plus one annual pass—Paid monthly ..... 44.50 
Adult plus one annual pass—Paid monthly RCIF ..... 0.25 
Adult plus one annual pass ..... 462.00 
Adult plus one annual pass RCIF ..... 5.00 
Adult plus one 30-day pass ..... 54.25 
Adult plus one 30-day pass RCIF ..... 0.25 
Senior rates (Ages 60 and over): 
Senior daily admission ..... 3.60 
Senior daily recreation center improvement fee (RCIF) ..... 0.15 
Senior multiple (20) pass admission ..... 55.00 
Senior multiple RCIF ..... 1.25 
Senior annual pass—Paid monthly ..... 22.25/month 
Senior annual paid monthly RCIF ..... 0.25/month 
Senior annual pass ..... 220.00 
Senior annual RCIF ..... 5.00 
Senior 30-day pass ..... 28.25 
Senior 30-day RCIF ..... 0.25 
Senior couple—Annual ..... 287.50 
Senior couple annual RCIF ..... 5.00 
Senior couple annual paid monthly ..... 28.85 
Senior couple annual paid monthly RCIF ..... 0.40 
Senior couple 30-day pass ..... 34.85 
Senior couple 30-day RCIF ..... 0.40 
Family groups: 
(For the purposes of this subsection "family" is defined as a maximum of two adults and up to three children or dependents residing at one residence. "Dependent" has the same meaning as "dependent" under federal income tax law. A person shall not be considered a dependent under this subsection unless the person was claimed as a dependent on Federal Income Tax Form 1040 for the most recent income tax reporting period. Additional related persons, residing at the same address, may be added to the pass if they are under the age of 18, are a full-time student (12 credit hours or more) under the age of 25, or qualify as a dependent. Each additional person over five will be an additional $27.50 per year or $2.50 per month. Children under the age of two will be admitted for free and will not be counted toward the number of persons in the family.) 
Family rates: 
Family daily admission (up to five persons) ..... 14.85 
Family—Each person after five ..... 2.00 
Family daily recreation center improvement fee (RCIF) ..... 0.40 
Family annual pass—Paid monthly ..... 51.50/month 
Family annual pass paid monthly—Each person after five ..... 2.75 
Family annual paid monthly RCIF ..... 1.25/month 
Family annual pass ..... 566.50 
Family—Each person after five ..... 28.75 
Family annual RCIF ..... 7.50 
Family 30-day pass ..... 57.50 
Family 30-day pass RCIF ..... 1.25 
All revenues derived from the recreation center improvement fund (RCIF) shall become a part of the capital improvements project fund for improvements to the community recreation center only. 
Rental rates—Hourly: 
Aerobics room ..... 26.25 
Aerobics room RCIF ..... 1.25 
Meeting rooms 
1/3 meeting room ..... 23.75 
1/3 meeting room RCIF ..... 1.25 
2/3 meeting room ..... 47.50 
2/3 meeting room RCIF ..... 2.50 
Full meeting room ..... 71.25 
Full meeting room RCIF ..... 3.75 
Gymnasium: 
½ court gym ..... 31.50 
½ court RCIF ..... 1.50 
Full court gym ..... 63.00 
Full court gym RCIF ..... 3.00 
Full gym ..... 115.50 
Full gym RCIF ..... 5.50 
Indoor pool (2-hour minimum): 
1—100 people ..... 133.00 
RCIF ..... 7.00 
101—150 people ..... 175.50 
RCIF ..... 9.50 
151—200 people ..... 223.00 
RCIF ..... 12.00 
201—250 people ..... 327.50 
RCIF ..... 17.50 
Birthday party packages (varies by package chosen) ..... 125.00—300.00 
Facility "Lock-In" rates (8 hours, 10 p.m.—6 a.m.): 
1—100 ..... 950.00 
RCIF ..... 50.00 
101—500 (plus an additional, per person fee) ..... 1,068.75 
(Additional, per person fee for each person over 100) ..... 5.00 
RCIF ..... 56.25 
Babysitting (per visit, two hour maximum): 
Pass holder, per visit ..... 2.25 
Pass holder, per 20 visits ..... 40.00 
Pass holder, monthly fee for first child ..... 20.00 
Pass holder, monthly fee for each additional child ..... 10.00 
Non-pass holder per visit ..... 3.00 
Non-pass holder per 20 visits ..... n/a 
(m)  Adapted sports/special olympics admission fees. 
Adapted dance admissions ..... $5.00 
Adapted recreation night ..... 5.00 
Sport participation ..... 17.50 
Transportation ..... 20.00 
(n)  Columbia Sports Fieldhouse at A. Perry Philips Park. For use of the courts and meeting rooms, the following fees are hereby established. 
Full court 
Hourly rental rates: 
Four (4) full courts (entire gym floor) ..... 170.00 
Two (2) full courts ..... 90.00 
One (1) full court ..... 50.00 
Partial day rental rates (up to eight (8) hours): 
Four (4) full courts (entire gym floor) ..... 1,150.00 
Two (2) full courts ..... 650.00 
One (1) full court ..... 360.00 
Full day rental rates (up to sixteen (16) hours): 
Four (4) full courts (entire gym floor) ..... 1,900.00 
Two (2) full courts ..... 1,300.00 
One (1) full court ..... 720.00 
Cross Court 
Hourly rental rates: 
Eight (8) cross courts (entire gym floor) ..... 200.00 
Four (4) cross courts ..... 110.00 
One (1) cross court ..... 30.00 
Partial day rental rates (up to eight (8) hours): 
Eight (8) cross courts (entire gym floor) ..... 1,360.00 
Four (4) cross courts ..... 790.00 
One (1) cross court ..... 220.00 
Full day rental rates (up to sixteen (16) hours): 
Eight (8) cross courts (entire gym floor) ..... 2,240.00 
Four (4) cross courts ..... 1,580.00 
One (1) cross court ..... 440.00 
Meeting Rooms 
Meeting Room A or B, per hour ..... 30.00 
Meeting Room A and B, per hour ..... 60.00 
Fieldhouse Event Fees 
Vendor fee - per day ..... 50.00 
Gate fee - minimum* ..... 100.00 
Non-refundable reservation deposit** ..... 300.00 
*$100.00 minimum or $1.00 per ticket sold; whichever is greater. 
**Applied to the final rental fee. 
(o)  Gans Creek Recreation Area. For use of the running course, parking lot(s), finish line and athlete and indoor pavilions, the following fees are hereby established: 
Course Fees: 
Dedicated course fee/athlete pavilion ..... $1,300.00 
Dedicated course fee/athlete pavilion and indoor pavilion ..... 1,500.00 
Fees, per participant: 
0—100 participants ..... $2.40 
101—200 participants ..... 2.04 
201—300 participants ..... 1.80 
301—400 participants ..... 1.56 
401—500 participants ..... 1.20 
Over 500 participants ..... 1.00 
Portable toilet, per unit fee* 
Standard ..... $60.00 
Wheelchair accessible ..... 70.00 
Event Fees 
Non-refundable race deposit** ..... $300.00 
Gate fee - minimum*** ..... 100.00 
Non-food vendor fee, per day ..... 50.00 
*Rental of portable toilets will be required for races with more than two hundred (200) participants. The number of participants determine the number of portable toilets required to be rented. 
**Applied to final rental fee if tournament is held. 
***One hundred dollar ($100.00) minimum or one dollar ($1.00) per ticket sold, whichever is greater. 
(p)  All revenues derived from the fees set forth in subsections (a) through (m) shall become a part of the recreation services fund of the city unless otherwise specified. 
(q)  Recreation facility use charge. 
(1)  The following recreational facility use charges are established for participation in city or private club sponsored activities which schedule the use of facilities owned, maintained or scheduled by the city: 
$0.45 per hour, per person (17 and under). 
$0.60 per hour, per person (18 and over). 
$7.50 per month maximum charge for any individual for any one activity. 
(2)  A ten (10) per cent recreation facility use charge shall be added to all park and recreation facility rental fees established by this section. 
(3)  All recreation facility use charge revenues shall become a part of the capital improvements project fund for parks and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 18286, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 18687, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19209, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19676, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20045, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20411, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21072, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21427, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 21802, § 1, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13; Ord. No. 22212, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22924 , § 1, 9-19-16, eff. 10-1-16; Ord. No. 23302 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23636 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 23744 , § 1, 1-7-19; Ord. No. 24010 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Chapter 18 - PENSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18160, § 1, adopted July 6, 2004, substantially amended Ch. 18 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Past fund. 
Nothing in this article affects any benefits accrued under the police and firemen's retirement fund which was replaced in 1981 by the police retirement plan created in section 18-39 and the firefighters' retirement plan created in section 18-64. The provisions of the police and firemen's retirement fund shall govern all appeals and requests with respect to the police and firemen's retirement fund. Appeals relating to former police shall be determined by the police retirement board; appeals relating to former firefighters shall be determined by the firefighters' retirement board. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1630; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 18-17 was deleted by Ord. No. 12868, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 1991; such deleted provisions pertaining to exempt governmental plans and deriving from Code 1964, § 9.1640.  
Sec. 18-18. - Financial integrity of funds. 
The city council shall provide the necessary funds to make the police retirement plan and the firefighters' retirement plan actuarially and financially sound for as long as the plans are maintained. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1650; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-19. - Right of council to amend article. 
The city council shall have the same right to amend this article in every particular as it has to amend any ordinance that it may adopt. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1660; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-20. - Interpretation and administration. 
This article shall be interpreted and administered: 
(1)  Conservatively, to reduce the obligations of the fund, to prevent the overpayment or mispayment of any sum and to maintain the actuarial and financial soundness of the fund. In the event of doubt as to any provision, it shall be interpreted against the payment of any benefit. 
(2)  In light of and in conformity with the provisions of the federal and state constitutions, federal and state statutes, and the home rule charter and ordinances of the city. 
(3)  In such a manner as to confirm and continue the status of the police retirement plan and the firefighters' retirement plan as exempt governmental plans. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1670; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-21. - Right to benefits; when fixed. 
(a)  Age or length of service . The rights of a retiree to retirement benefits based on age or length of service under the police retirement plan or the firefighters' retirement plan are defined by the plan provisions in effect at the time the retiree left city employment. 
(b)  Disability . The rights of a retiree to retirement benefits based on disability under the police retirement plan or the firefighters' retirement plan are defined by the plan provisions in effect at the time the retiree was determined to be disabled and left city employment. 
(c)  Death . The rights of surviving spouses, surviving children and other persons entitled to death benefits upon the death of a covered employee under the police retirement plan or the firefighters' retirement plan are determined by the plan provisions in effect at the time of the death of the covered employee. The rights of surviving spouses, surviving children and other persons entitled to death benefits upon the death of a retiree under the police retirement plan or the firefighters retirement plan are determined by the plan provisions in effect at the time the retiree left city employment. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1680; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-22. - Assets of plans; investment; administration. 
(a)  The director of finance shall serve as administrator for the police retirement fund and firefighters' retirement fund and of all assets, payments and deposits made or received from prior plans. The director of finance shall keep the books and records of the plans and cause them to be audited annually by an independent auditor as part of the city's annual audit. The director of finance shall annually prepare and have available as public information for each plan, a comprehensive annual financial report showing the financial condition of the plan as of the end of the plan's fiscal year in accordance with section 105.661 RSMo. 
The director of finance shall have all powers necessary to discharge the duties of plan administrator, including, but not by way of limitation, authority to make the initial determination of the right of any person to any interest in or eligibility for any benefit under the plans. The director of finance may adopt rules to implement the police retirement plan and the firefighters' retirement plan. All rules and decisions of the director of finance shall be uniformly and consistently applied to all covered employees in similar circumstances. When making a determination or calculation, the director of finance shall be entitled to rely upon information furnished by a covered employee or beneficiary, the city, the legal counsel of the city, or the actuary. The director of finance shall issue directions concerning all benefits which are to be paid from the trust fund pursuant to the provisions of the plans. The director of finance may require a covered employee to complete and file with the director of finance an application for pension and all other forms approved by the director of finance, and to furnish all pertinent information requested by the director of finance. 
(b)  The director of finance shall account for, separately: 
(1)  Those assets necessary to maintain the actuarial and financial soundness of the police retirement fund; 
(2)  Those assets necessary to maintain the actuarial and financial soundness of the firefighters' retirement fund. 
These funds shall at all times be invested in a manner consistent with the laws of the United States and the State of Missouri and the ordinances and charter of the city. 
(c)  Nothing in this article requires segregation of assets nor permits or authorizes the partition of fund assets by the boards of the respective funds. 
(d)  All assets of the funds created by this article, and all assets necessary to maintain the obligations of past funds, may be jointly invested with profits, losses, income and charges with respect thereto being received, borne, or shared by the funds in proportion to the amount of the assets invested by the fund or past fund. 
(e)  Whenever, in the director of finance's opinion, a person entitled to receive any payment of a fund benefit is under a legal disability or is incapacitated in any way so as to be unable to manage personal financial affairs, the director of finance may make payments to such person or to the person's legal representative or relative. Any payment of a benefit or installment thereof in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be a complete discharge of any liability for the making of such payment under the provisions of the plans. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1690; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-23. - Assets of funds. 
The assets of the funds shall consist of: 
(1)  Funds transferred from the police and firemen's retirement fund; 
(2)  Any and all funds given or donated to the funds from any source, including private gifts, bequests, devises or grants; provided, that all such funds are subject to the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  The net earnings on all investments and the interest earned thereon; 
(4)  The contributions of the respective covered employees; and 
(5)  An amount appropriated in the annual city budget sufficient to raise the amount in the respective retirement fund to that level which, according to actuarial evaluation, is necessary to make the retirement fund financially sound. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1700; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-24. - Investment committee. 
(a)  Investments shall be made by the director of finance or the director's designee under the direction and review of the investment committee. The investment committee shall establish a general policy for investments, and the fund shall be invested by the director of finance in accordance with that policy. The investment committee shall review the investments from time to time as it shall deem appropriate. The director of finance shall make a quarterly report of investments and disbursements. 
(b)  The investment committee shall consist of: 
(1)  All voting members of the firefighters' retirement board; and 
(2)  All voting members of the police retirement board; and 
(3)  The director of finance. 
(c)  The director of finance shall be a nonvoting member of the investment committee. Five (5) voting members of the investment committee shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. The affirmative vote of a majority of voting members present at the meeting shall be necessary to take any action. 
(d)  The policies of the committee shall be advisory and subject to the review of the city council which may affirm or reject such policies and direct the director of finance's investments accordingly. The finance director or the director's designee shall provide an annual report to the city council on the investment portfolio. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1710; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 23980 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 18-25. - Diversion of funds. 
Neither the administrator, the investment board nor the respective boards of either retirement fund shall attempt to cause or permit the diversion or use of any of the assets of the retirement funds other than for the specific purposes and uses herein set forth. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1720; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-26. - Administrator to make disbursements. 
The payment of any benefit, whether of a continuing or single nature, shall be made by the administrator in accordance with standard city procedures and the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1730; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18160, § 1, adopted July 6, 2004, repealed § 18-27, which pertained to benefits from prior plans. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 18-28. - Employment of professional services. 
The administrator, the police retirement board or the firefighters' retirement board may, under the procedures established by city ordinance, employ the services of an investment counselor, attorney, actuary or other professional to assist in their duties. If services are rendered to more than one (1) fund, payment for such services shall be debited against the funds in proportion to their fund balances. 
Unless such services are so acquired, the administrator shall provide financial services and the city counselor shall provide legal services. 
Such services, when provided by city staff persons, shall be charged against the funds in the same manner and at the same rate as charged the enterprise funds of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1750; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-29. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall knowingly or wilfully make any false statement in regard to applying for or securing a pension or disability benefit under the retirement plans herein established, or who shall falsify, cause or permit to be falsified any record or records of such retirement plan in any attempt to defraud such retirement plan as a result of such act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or shall be subject to both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all rights, interest and privileges of such person under such retirement plan shall be revoked and canceled. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2080; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-30. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The city may terminate the plans at any time. Upon the termination of the plans the city shall direct and require liquidation of the trust after payment of expenses by the payment or provision for the payment of benefits. Any distribution after termination of the plans may be made, in whole or in part, to the extent that no discrimination in value results, in cash, in securities or other assets in kind (based on their fair market value as of the date of distribution), or in nontransferable annuity contracts providing for pensions commencing at the covered employees' eligible retirement dates, as the city, in its discretion, shall determine. 
In no event shall the city receive any amounts from the trust upon termination of the plans except that, and notwithstanding any other provision of the plans, (i) the city shall receive such amounts, if any, as may remain after the satisfaction of all liabilities of the plans and arising out of any variations between actual requirements and expected actuarial requirements, and (ii) the city may receive the amount of any contribution to the extent such contribution was made under mistake of fact. 
If the city partially or completely terminates either of the plans or discontinues contributions to either plan, members of the affected plan shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in the plan benefits to the extent such benefits are funded. 
(b)  The laws of the state and the ordinances of the city shall govern, control and determine all questions arising with respect to the plans and the interpretation and validity of their provisions. The interpretation of the provisions shall be made in such a manner as to confirm and continue its status as qualified plans and trust under the code. 
(c)  No pension payable under the plans shall exceed the limitations under Internal Revenue Code Section 415 and such limitations are expressly incorporated into the plans by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Secs. 18-31—18-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 18-35. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division: 
Active service. The regular service of a covered police employee and sick leave and vacation accrued and actually taken as a result of that employment, as well as military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended. It shall exclude periods spent by an otherwise active employee while on any inactive pay status such as lost time, leave of absence or other leave for military service. Such voluntary or involuntary absences of a covered police employee shall not be counted as time spent in active service and covered employment. 
Administrator. The director of finance of the city. 
Child. The natural or legally adopted child of a covered police employee or retiree, who is unmarried and under the age of eighteen (18), shall be deemed a child for all purposes under this division. A stepchild who is unmarried, under the age of eighteen (18), and domiciled with and under the control and supervision of a covered police employee, shall be deemed a child under this division for purposes of disability benefits. A stepchild who is unmarried, under the age of eighteen (18), and domiciled with and under the control and supervision of a covered police employee or retiree, shall be deemed a child for purposes of death benefits. 
Code. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Covered employment. The active service of a covered police employee and service covered by another plan established by this article. 
Covered police employee. A person employed by the Columbia Police Department as a full-time, regular police officer. This term shall exclude clerical employees, watchmen, school traffic guards, turnkeys, volunteers and any other employee or associate, regardless of whether they are commissioned as a police officer, when they are not a salaried full-time, regular police officer of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person hired by the Columbia Police Department on or after October 1, 2012 as a police officer, shall participate in the police retirement fund in accordance with the terms and provisions set forth in division 5 of article II of this chapter set forth herein. 
Duty-related disability or death. A disability or death which results from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by a covered employee while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place. Duty-related disability or death shall include a disability or death which results from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by an off-duty covered employee acting under color of the employee's commission. A disability or death resulting from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by an off-duty covered employee while in paid employment of another entity shall only be considered a duty-related disability or death if the covered employee was acting under color of the employee's commission within the limits of the City of Columbia at the time the disability was sustained. 
Highest average salary. The average of the thirty-six (36) months of covered employment, whether or not consecutive, in which such covered police employee's salary was the highest, or, if the employee has less than thirty-six (36) months of service, then the average salary over the employee's entire period of service. For the purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) months of highest average, no period shorter than twelve (12) months shall be used. "Salary," as used in this definition, includes only compensation included in computing the employee's contributions to the police retirement fund. 
Nonduty-related disability or death. A disability or death other than a duty-related disability or death. 
Pick up. This term has the same meaning in this division as it has in Code Section 414(h). 
Plan year. The twelve-month period commencing on each October 1 and ending on the following September 30. 
Retiree. A former covered police employee entitled to receive benefits from the police retirement fund. 
Social Security and Workers' Compensation entitlements. The amount of Social Security or Workers' Compensation benefits to which a claimant would be entitled as a result of the claimant's covered employment, regardless of whether a claimant has actually made application for such benefits. Failure of a claimant to apply for such a benefit shall result in the calculation of the claimant's benefits under the police retirement fund as if such benefits are actually being received. Only an adverse determination by the appropriate Social Security or Workers' Compensation authority shall be deemed a bar to such reductions and such a determination shall be conclusive upon the police retirement board consideration of the amount of such an entitlement. Determination of entitlement shall be fixed as of the date of application for benefits from the police retirement fund. 
Surviving spouse. The spouse of a covered police employee or retiree to whom the employee was married at the date of the covered police employee's or retiree's death. Effective September 16, 2013, "spouse" means a person, as of the earlier of an employee's or retiree's annuity starting date or death, who is alive and to whom an employee or retiree is legally married under the laws of the state where the marriage occurred (regardless of the laws of the state where the employee, retiree or spouse are domiciled); provided such marriage is evidenced by a valid marriage certificate or other proof acceptable to the administrator. For the avoidance of doubt, any references to "spousal" or "married" in this plan shall be determined in accordance with this section. 
Trustee. The City of Columbia. 
Trust fund. The assets held by the trustee at the time of the adoption of this division and such assets as thereafter increased or decreased by contribution, investment, reinvestment, expenses (including any taxes), and distributions. 
Year(s) of service. A plan year in which a covered police employee has at least two hundred sixty (260) days of service. A covered police employee who has fewer than two hundred sixty (260) days of service in a plan year which includes the date the employee's employment or reemployment commenced shall in each case receive a partial year of service equal to the number of the employee's days of service in such plan year divided by two hundred sixty (260). 
(Code 1964, § 9.1780; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 10953, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 11745, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 13698, § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 15072, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 15276, § 1, 7-7-97; Ord. No. 15300, § 1, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 16406, § 1, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 17444, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17521, § 1, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 20234, § 1, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 22235, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 23982 , § 1, 9-3-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-36. - Police retirement board—Memberships; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The police retirement board is hereby established. The board shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) of whom shall be members of the police department, two (2) of whom shall be registered voters and residents of the city. The chief of police shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the board. 
(b)  The police members of the board shall be elected by a majority vote of the covered police employees for terms of two (2) years. 
(c)  The citizen members shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. The citizen members shall be chosen from applicants who are not employees of the city. 
(d)  No board member shall receive any compensation for service, although reasonable expenses of members shall be reimbursed in the same manner as provided for reimbursement of council expenses. 
(e)  Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(f)  The board shall elect a chair from its voting members. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1890; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-37. - Same—Meetings; quorum; attendance; vacancies. 
The board shall hold one (1) regular meeting each quarter at a time and place to be determined by the board, and may hold such additional meetings as may be required for the transaction of business. A quorum for the transaction of business at such meetings shall be a majority of the duly appointed and acting members of the board. The chief of police shall not be counted toward determining a quorum. The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from two (2) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the board to promptly notify the appointing authority of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1900; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-38. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board shall oversee and establish policies for the police retirement trust, advise the city council and the director of finance upon the administration of the fund, shall hear appeals from the decisions of the director of finance in accordance with the provisions of this article and such additional rules as it shall adopt. 
(b)  Records of hearings before the board and its minutes shall be kept. These records of the proceedings of the board shall be open to the public during all regular business hours; however, the records of medical examinations of any retiree or applicant for retirement shall be closed records. 
(c)  The board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to receive, hear and rule upon all appeals from decisions of the administrator for benefits from the fund under the contested case provisions of chapter 536 RSMo. 
(d)  The board may prescribe rules and regulations, not inconsistent with state laws or this article, to govern and control the hearing, consideration and disposition of all appeals, and other administrative matters and proceedings before the board. 
(e)  The board shall advise the council in order that a high degree of care is exercised to keep the police retirement fund safely invested in such securities as will afford the greatest return consistent with safety of principal, but such investments shall be limited to such securities as are, or may be eligible by the laws of the State of Missouri. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1910; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-39. - Creation of police retirement plan and fund. 
There is hereby created, pursuant to the constitution and laws of Missouri, the police retirement plan for the retirement of covered police employees. The plan of retirement includes benefits paid on account of age, service, disability, and death. In order to maintain such benefits, a police retirement fund is hereby created and shall be maintained as the council deems appropriate from public funds appropriated by the council, from the contributions of covered employees and from such other funds and sources as have been previously set forth. 
This fund shall be a trust, within the meaning of section 401(a) of the Code, created for the exclusive benefit of covered police employees, retirees, their spouses and minor children. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to covered police employees, retirees and their beneficiaries under the trusts, shall any part of the corpus or income be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of covered police employees, retirees or their beneficiaries. 
Except as otherwise provided in this plan, the trust fund shall be retained for the exclusive benefit of covered employees and their beneficiaries, shall be used to pay benefits to such persons, to pay administrative expenses to the extent not paid by the city, and shall not revert to or inure to the benefit of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1760; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-40. - Contributions to the police retirement fund. 
(a)  Covered police employees shall be assessed and required to pay into the fund three and five-tenths (3.5) percent of their compensation. "Compensation," as used in this subsection, includes salary, wages, overtime pay, amounts contributed to a cafeteria plan under Code section 125, amounts contributed to a deferred compensation plan under Code section 457, amounts contributed to this plan on behalf of a covered employee and picked up by the city under Code section 414(h), sick leave buy back payments, automobile allowance payments, and cash in lieu of vacation paid under section 19-129(b). Compensation does not include payment for unused vacation days or unused floating holidays, workers compensation payments, safety awards, or any other payment or benefit not listed in this subsection. 
(b)  The contributions of covered police employees shall be deducted from their biweekly compensation and placed in the police retirement fund. Deduction of contributions shall be a term and condition of employment; acceptance and continuance in employment shall be deemed to be the assent of an employee to deductions. 
(c)  The city shall pick up employee contributions required of covered police employees. The contributions so picked-up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the Code. The city shall pick up these contributions from funds established and available, which funds would otherwise have been designated as employee contributions and paid to the retirement fund. 
Pursuant to section 414(h) of the Code, these employee contributions so picked up shall not be included in gross income for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed by refund or benefit payment. 
(d)  The city shall pay into the police retirement fund all amounts that are needed, in addition to the contributions of covered police employees, to make the fund actuarially and financially sound. 
(e)  The administrator, shall return to the appropriate city fund any city contribution made by mistake. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1770; Ord. No. 9961, § 1, 10-3-83; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 13698 § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 14982, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15072, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 17444, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-41. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-42. - Retirement by reason of age or service. 
(a)  A covered police employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) or upon having completed twenty (20) years of active service without regard to age. For purposes of this section and eligibility to retire after having completed twenty (20) years of active service without regard to age, active service shall include military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended (USERRA), only to the extent any contributions required under section 18-40 of this Code are made to the police retirement fund either during the period of qualified military service under USERRA or within five (5) years from the date of reemployment. 
(b)  A former covered police employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65). 
(c)  The administrator shall pay to a retiree, retired on account of age or service, retirement benefits determined by subsections (1) or (2) below. The plan benefits of subsection (1) below apply to employees hired after October 1, 1991 and employees employed on October 1, 1991 who elected the benefits of subsection (1). The plan benefits of subsection (2) below apply to employees employed on October 1, 1991 who elected the benefits of subsection (2). 
(1)  A retiree retired due to age or service shall receive three (3) percent of highest average salary per year of covered employment up to twenty (20) years. For each year of service in covered employment over twenty (20), the retiree shall receive an additional two (2) percent of highest average salary per year, up to a maximum of seventy (70) percent for twenty-five (25) years of service. This benefit shall continue for life. In the first month of each plan year, the retirement benefit shall be increased by six tenths (0.6) percent (i.e. annual compound COLA). 
(2)  A retiree covered under this option of the plan shall receive, up to age sixty-two (62), three (3) percent of highest average salary per year of covered employment up to twenty (20) years. For each year of service in covered employment over twenty (20), the retiree shall receive an additional two (2) percent of highest average salary per year, up to a maximum of seventy (70) percent for twenty-five (25) years of service. In addition, a covered police employee retiring prior to age sixty-two (62) according to the eligibility requirements of this plan shall receive an increase in the first month of each plan year after retirement of two (2) percent of the retirement benefits per year up to age sixty-two (62). After age sixty-two (62), all employees retired under this option shall receive two and twenty hundredths (2.20) percent of the highest average salary times the number of years of continuous service up to twenty (20) years. For each year over twenty (20), one and seventy hundredths (1.70) percent of highest average salary is added. The maximum benefit is fifty-two and five tenths (52.5) percent of highest average salary with twenty-five (25) years of continuous service. The benefit calculated at age sixty-two (62) is then increased by two (2) percent for each year from retirement to age sixty-one (61). The benefits calculated at age sixty-two (62) shall be increased each future year of retirement by two (2) percent. The benefit calculated at age sixty-two (62) is then payable from age sixty-two (62) and increased in each future year by two (2) percent of the preceding year's benefit amount. 
(d)  Upon approval of any application for benefits by the administrator, the applicant shall be entitled to receive monthly benefit payments beginning on the last day of the month immediately following the month in which employment ends. 
(e)  If, when a covered police employee's employment is terminated, the reserve value of the employee's retirement benefits is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the administrator shall pay the employee the amount of the reserve value in a single lump sum payment. "Reserve value" is the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefits the covered police employee would otherwise be eligible to receive under the police retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be made as soon as possible after employment is terminated and shall be in lieu of all other retirement benefits otherwise due the employee under the police retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be a complete discharge of all liabilities of the police retirement fund to the employee. This subsection shall not apply to covered police employees who retire on disability. 
(f)  In accordance with the requirements of subsection 401(a)(9) of the Code, distribution of retirement benefits under this section shall begin no later than April 1 of the year in which the retiree either attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or retires, whichever is later. Any distribution options in the police retirement plan inconsistent with the provisions of section 401(a)(9) of the Code are overridden by the provisions of the Code. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1790; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 9917, § 1, 8-15-83; Ord. No. 9961, § 1, 10-3-83; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-43. - Disability benefits. 
(a)  A covered police employee who sustains a duty-related disability or a covered police employee having completed one (1) continuous year or more of covered employment who sustains a nonduty-related disability shall be entitled to the disability benefit set out in this section. The covered police employee shall be entitled to the disability benefit only while the disease or injury renders the employee unfit for the regular duties of the employee's covered employment. 
Upon the termination of the disability, payment of the benefit shall cease; provided, however, that no disability shall be deemed to have terminated so long as the covered police employee is unable to return to the employee's former regular duties solely because of the disability or a residual effect thereof. Upon termination of a disability, no right of automatic reemployment exists. Reemployment shall be governed by the provisions of the city's personnel code. 
(b)  Eligible covered police employees shall be paid from the police retirement fund, from Workers' Compensation benefits, from Social Security benefits or from some combination thereof, the following benefits: 
(1)  To a covered police employee, disabled with a duty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the employee's highest average salary plus ten (10) percent of that salary for each unmarried dependent child under the age of eighteen (18), to an amount not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the employee's highest average salary. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(2)  To a covered police employee, disabled with a nonduty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the employee's highest average salary per year of covered employment plus an additional one-half (.5) percent of that salary per year for each unmarried dependent child under the age of eighteen (18), up to a maximum of four (4) children. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(3)  Duty and nonduty-related disability benefits paid to any covered police employee shall be offset dollar for dollar by the excess of income received by the retiree over ninety (90) percent of the employee's highest average salary. For purposes of this section, income shall be defined as the combination of disability retirement benefits provided herein, social security, workers' compensation benefits, other long-term disability benefits, and compensation for other employment. After a retiree accumulates twenty (20) years of combined service in covered employment and time receiving disability benefits or age sixty-five (65), the income offset shall cease. 
(4)  In the event of a lump sum Workers' Compensation settlement, the amount of the monthly income to be used as income offset in the disability retirement benefit shall be determined by converting the lump sum Workers' Compensation amount to a single life monthly annuity of equivalent value for the benefit recipient, using the mortality table and interest rate used in the most recent actuarial valuation of the fund. For purposes of this section, future medical awards shall not be considered a part of Workers' Compensation benefits or entitlements. In addition, the monthly disability benefit shall be reduced by the amount of the single life monthly annuity as determined herein. 
(5)  For purposes of calculating the income offset for disability retirement benefits, the final average salary shall be adjusted on the anniversary date of the retiree's becoming eligible for disability retirement benefits by the percentage change in the consumer price index for this region of the country from January 1 of the previous year to January 1 of the current year. 
(6)  An employee who receives disability benefits for a duty-related disability shall receive credit for covered employment for each year of duty-related disability retirement up to a maximum, when combined with years of actual covered employment, of twenty (20) years. At that point disability retirement benefits shall cease and the retiree shall receive retirement benefits based on years of service. 
(7)  Any person disabled prior to June 7, 1993, and any person who is receiving nonduty-related disability benefits may, upon reaching age sixty-five (65) years, elect to receive, in lieu thereof, retirement benefits based on age. 
(c)  After the approval of any disability benefit, the administrator shall from time to time, review the disability of the retiree to determine whether or not the disability continues to exist. Reexamination shall take place at least once each year unless the board shall determine otherwise. The administrator may require any retiree receiving a disability benefit to undergo a medical examination to review the status of the disability. The administrator may request the retiree to undergo an examination with a doctor of the retiree's choosing and at the retiree's expense or may require a medical examination with a doctor of the administrator's choosing at the expense of the police retirement fund. 
(1)  Any retiree refusing to submit to a medical examination after ten (10) days' written notice from the administrator shall waive and forfeit all rights to benefits from the date of the notice until such time as the retiree submits to the required examination. If such refusal continues for one (1) calendar year from the date of notice, all rights to any benefits shall immediately cease and the retiree's benefits schedule shall escheat to the police retirement fund. 
(2)  If the reexamination shows that the disability no longer exists, the right to benefits for disability shall immediately cease. A hearing on the continuance of the disability may be had before the administrator upon the retiree's written request within ten (10) days of the administrator's notification. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1800; Ord. No. 13698, § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Secs. 18-44—18-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18160, § 1, adopted July 6, 2004, repealed §§ 18-44—18-46, which pertained to physical examinations; retirement benefits due to age or service; and disability retirement benefits. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 18-47. - Death benefits. 
Upon the death of a covered police employee or retiree, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse and unmarried minor children a benefit from the police retirement fund, from Workers' Compensation and from Social Security, or from some combination thereof, as below described: 
(1)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a covered police employee a monthly benefit equal to two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the retirement benefit to which the deceased employee would have been entitled had the employee met the age or service requirement on the date of the employee's death. The benefit paid to the surviving spouse shall not be reduced by any Social Security entitlement; provided, however, that the benefit paid from the police retirement fund when added to the Social Security entitlement shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the salary which the covered police employee was receiving immediately prior to death. 
If there is no surviving spouse eligible to receive benefits under the provisions of this subsection, the surviving unmarried children under the age of eighteen (18) shall divide equally the benefit to which a surviving spouse would have been entitled. The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(2)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a retiree a monthly benefit equal to two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the retirement benefit to which the deceased retiree was receiving immediately prior to death. The benefit paid to the surviving spouse shall not be reduced by any Social Security entitlement; provided, however, that the benefit paid from the police retirement benefit when added to the Social Security entitlement shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the salary which the deceased retiree was receiving immediately prior to retirement. 
(3)  If there is no surviving spouse eligible to receive benefits under the provisions of this subsection, the surviving unmarried children under the age of eighteen (18) shall divide equally the benefit to which a surviving spouse would have been entitled. The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(4)  Upon remarriage of the surviving spouse of a covered police employee or retiree, benefits allowed under this section shall cease if the surviving spouse was not married to and living with the covered police employee or retiree for a period of at least two (2) years prior to the death of the covered police employee or retiree. 
a.  If the surviving spouse is over forty (40) years of age at the time of remarriage, benefits provided under this section shall continue for the life of the surviving spouse. 
b.  If the surviving spouse is under forty (40) years of age upon remarriage, then benefits to which the spouse is entitled shall continue for a period of ten (10) years after the remarriage. 
(5)  When a covered police employee or a retiree dies without a surviving spouse or other survivor entitled to benefits under this section, there shall be paid a funeral benefit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The funeral benefit shall be paid to the personal representative of the estate of the deceased employee, or if no personal representative has been appointed within forty-five (45) days of death, then to the person who actually paid the funeral and burial expense with respect to such deceased person, upon proof of such payments, or, if proof of such payment has not been made within sixty (60) days after such death, then to the mortuary that actually incurred the expense of the funeral and burial of such deceased person. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1840; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 10310, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 12668, § 1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 13555, § 1, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 13708, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-48. - Workers' Compensation entitlements. 
Benefits provided under the police retirement plan shall be reduced by the amount of any Workers' Compensation entitlement in the manner set forth by these sections. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or administered to work a reduction of the total of the benefits paid and the entitlements due a covered employee below the benefit which would otherwise be payable under this division had the entitlements not been considered. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1850; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-49. - Applications for benefits. 
(a)  Applications for benefits to be paid from the retirement fund must be made upon the forms provided by the administrator and contain full information from which the board may determine the eligibility of the applicant. If such application be founded upon disability, full information concerning the nature and extent of the injury must be furnished with the application, and the applicant must likewise submit to examination by a physician designated by the administrator. The administrator may hold hearings and take and preserve evidence touching the nature and extent of injuries upon which claims for benefits on account of disability are claimed, and may thereafter approve or deny such application. 
(b)  No more than one (1) monthly payment shall be made at any one (1) time; no payment shall be made more than ten (10) days in advance of the period to which it applies. This provision shall not prevent the lump sum settlement of past liability for benefits. 
(c)  Any claimant denied benefits by a decision of the administrator or any claimant or covered police employee or retiree otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the administrator may appeal such decision to the police retirement board. Such appeal must be in writing and filed within ten (10) days of the date of the administrator's decision. The board shall hold a hearing, take evidence and render a written decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such decision shall be appealable by any person aggrieved by any decision of the police retirement board or by the administrator under the provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1860; Ord. No. 13708, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-50. - Refunds. 
(a)  When the covered employment of a covered police employee ends, the employee shall have the right to withdraw in a lump sum from the fund, contributions which the employee made. The lump sum withdrawal shall include interest on the contribution at the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year in which contributions were made by the covered employee, compounded annually from the last day of the calendar year in which such covered employee contributions are made to the date of withdrawal. Withdrawal of contributions by a covered police employee under this ordinance shall terminate all rights to benefits unless reinstated as herein provided. 
(b)  A covered police employee who has withdrawn the contributions made by the employee with interest under provisions of subsection (a) hereof or received a lump-sum distribution under section 18-42(e) may, in the event of reemployment as a covered employee, reinstate benefits thereby forfeited within twelve (12) months from the date of reemployment by repaying to the fund the contributions and interest withdrawn from the fund or the lump-sum distribution, plus interest on the sum in the amount of the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year that the contribution remained withdrawn from the fund, compounded annually from the date the sum was withdrawn or lump-sum distribution was made to the date of repayment. The time which a covered police employee is absent from covered employment shall not be deemed to be reinstated by the repayment of prior contributions. 
(c)  If the covered employment of a covered police employee is terminated by the employee's death and the employee is not entitled to plan benefits other than the funeral benefit authorized by section 18-47(4), the contributions of the employee to this plan and any amounts contributed to this plan and picked up by the city under code section 414(h) for the deceased employee shall be refunded or distributed, upon request, to the estate of the deceased employee. Interest on the contributions or distributions so refunded shall be calculated as above. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1870; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 11744, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 13708, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-51. - Benefits not assignable or subject to execution. 
The benefits payable from the police retirement fund shall not be assignable or subject to counter-claim, recoupment or set off. Except for qualified domestic relations orders, benefits payable from the police retirement fund shall not be subject to assessment, garnishment, execution, injunction, or any other decree, order, process, or proceeding in any court for the payment of any debt of any beneficiary, and the sum shall be held and distributed solely for the purpose of this article. This provision shall not prevent the police retirement board from pursuing a retiree or other beneficiary of the police retirement plan for recovery of benefits erroneously paid or to recover benefits paid due to fraud, duress or the concealment of any material fact necessary to properly process a claim for benefits. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1880; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-52. - Miscalculation of benefits, payment of interest on underpayment or overpayment. 
Whenever a miscalculation of benefits due a retiree or beneficiary which results in an underpayment is discovered, interest on the underpayment shall be paid to the retiree or beneficiary at a rate equal to the annual investment rate of return on the police retirement fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of the underpayment. Whenever an overpayment is discovered, the retiree or beneficiary shall repay the amount erroneously paid in excess of the benefit due him plus interest for the time of overpayment equal to the annual investment rate of return on the fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of overpayment. If the amount of overpayment and interest thereon is greater than one (1) monthly benefit payment, repayment shall be made to the fund in the same manner as provided for reimbursement by the retiree of lump sum worker's compensation benefits in section 18-43 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13708, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-53. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits any employee would otherwise receive under the police retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-54. - Compensation limits. 
The annual compensation of each covered police employee taken into account under the police retirement plan shall not exceed the compensation limits of section 401(a)(17) of the Code, as adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-55. - Direct transfer of eligible rollover distributions; rollover notice. 
(a)  To the extent required by section 401(a)(31) of the Code, if the distributee of an eligible rollover distribution from this plan (1) elects to have all or any portion of such distribution paid directly to one individual retirement account or annuity (an "IRA") or other eligible retirement plan (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(E) of the Code, including effective January 1, 2008 a Roth IRA as described in section 408A of the Code provided that a direct rollover under this section 18-55 meets the requirements of section 408A(e) of the Code), and (2) specifies such IRA or plan on such form, at such time and subject to such permissible restrictions as the employer may specify, such distribution or elected portion thereof shall be made in the form of a direct rollover to such IRA or plan, in accordance with and subject to the conditions and limitations of section 401(a)(31) and related provisions of the Code. 
(1)  "Distributee" means a participant, a beneficiary (if the surviving spouse of a participant), or an "alternate payee" (as defined in section 414(p)(8) of the Code) (if the surviving spouse of a participant under a "qualified domestic relations order" (as defined in section 414(p) of the Code)). The term "distributee" includes a non-spouse beneficiary of a deceased participant, provided the distributee elects a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan which is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code. 
(2)  "Eligible rollover distribution" means a distribution of any portion of the balance credited to the benefit of a participant which is not one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments made over (1) a specified period of ten years or more, or (2) the life expectancy of the distributee, to the extent that it constitutes an eligible rollover distribution (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(D) of the Code). 
(b)  In the case of any mandatory distribution made on or after March 28, 2005, if the vested balance of the distributee's benefit is greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and less than or equal to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and if the distributee does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with this section 18-55, then the employer will pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the employer. 
(c)  The plan administrator shall give covered police employees an understandable written explanation of rollover rules within a reasonable period before making an eligible rollover distribution. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 23040 , § 1, 12-19-16)  
Secs. 18-56—18-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIREFIGHTERS 
 
Sec. 18-60. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division: 
Active service. The regular service of a covered firefighter employee and sick leave and vacation accrued and actually taken as a result of that employment, as well as military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended. It shall exclude periods spent by an otherwise active employee any inactive pay status such as lost time, leave of absence or other leave for military service. Such voluntary or involuntary absences of a covered firefighter employee shall not be counted as time spent in active service and covered employment. 
Administrator . The director of finance of the city. 
Child. The natural or legally adopted child of a covered firefighter employee. 
Code. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Covered employment. The active service of a covered firefighter employee and service covered by another plan established by this article. 
Covered firefighter employee. A person employed by the Columbia Fire Department as a full-time, regular firefighter. This term shall exclude clerical employees, volunteers and any other employee or associate, regardless of whether they are commissioned as a firefighter, when they are not a salaried full-time, regular firefighter of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person hired by the Columbia Fire Department on or after October 1, 2012 as a firefighter, shall participate in the firemen's retirement fund in accordance with the terms and provisions set forth in division 6 of article II of this chapter set forth herein. 
Highest average salary. The average of the thirty-six (36) months of covered employment, whether or not consecutive, in which such covered firefighter employee's salary was the highest, or, if the employee has less than thirty-six (36) months of service, then the average salary over the employee's entire period of service. For the purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) months of highest average salary, no period shorter than twelve (12) months shall be used. "Salary," as used in this definition, includes only compensation included in computing the employee's contributions to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
Pick up. This term has the same meaning in this division as it has in Code Section 414(h). 
Plan year. The twelve-month period commencing on each October 1 and ending on the following September 30. 
Retiree. A former covered firefighter employee entitled to receive benefits from the firefighters' retirement fund. 
Surviving spouse. The spouse of a covered firefighter employee or retiree to whom the employee was married at the date of the covered firefighter employee's or retiree's death. Effective September 16, 2013, "spouse" means a person, as of the earlier of an employee's or retiree's annuity starting date or death, who is alive and to whom an employee or retiree is legally married under the laws of the state where the marriage occurred (regardless of the laws of the state where the employee, retiree or spouse are domiciled); provided such marriage is evidenced by a valid marriage certificate or other proof acceptable to the administrator. For the avoidance of doubt, any references to "spousal" or "married" in this plan shall be determined in accordance with this section. 
Trustee. The City of Columbia. 
Trust fund. The assets held by the trustee at the time of the adoption of this division and such assets as thereafter increased or decreased by contribution, investment, reinvestment, expenses (including any taxes), and distributions. 
Year(s) of service. A plan year in which a covered firefighter employee scheduled for eight-hour shifts has at least two thousand (2,000) hours of service. A covered firefighter employee who has fewer than two thousand (2,000) hours of service in a plan year which includes the date the employee's employment or reemployment commenced shall in each case receive a partial year of service equal to the number of the employee's hours of service in such plan year divided by two thousand (2,000). For a covered firefighter employee scheduled for twenty-four-hour shifts, year(s) of service, means a plan year in which the covered firefighter employee has twelve (12) calendar months with at least nine (9) shifts of service per month. A covered firefighter employee who has fewer than twelve (12) months of service in a plan year which includes the date the employee's employment or reemployment commenced shall in each case receive a partial year of service equal to the number of the employee's months of service in such plan year divided by twelve (12). 
(Code 1964, § 9.1940; Ord. No. 10953, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 11745, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 15212, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 22235, § 1, 9-15-14 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-61. - Firefighters' retirement board—Memberships; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The firefighters' retirement board is hereby established. The board shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) of whom shall be members of the fire department, two (2) of whom shall be registered voters and residents of the city. The fire chief shall be an ex officio nonvoting member of the board. 
(b)  The firefighter members of the board shall be elected by a majority of the covered firefighter employees for terms of two (2) years. 
(c)  The citizen members shall be appointed by the city council to two (2) year terms. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. The citizen members shall be chosen from applicants who are not employees of the city. 
(d)  No board member shall receive any compensation for service, although reasonable expenses of members shall be reimbursed in the same manner as provided for reimbursement of council expenses. 
(e)  Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(f)  The board shall select a chair from its voting members. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2050; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-62. - Same—Meetings; quorum; attendance; vacancies. 
The board shall hold one (1) regular meeting each quarter at a time and place to be determined by the board, and may hold such additional meetings as may be required for the transaction of business. A quorum for the transaction of business at such meetings shall be a majority of the duly appointed and acting members of the board. The fire chief shall not be counted toward determining a quorum. The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from two (2) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the board to promptly notify the appointing authority of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2060; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-63. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board shall oversee and establish policies for the fire retirement trust, advise the city council and the director of finance upon the administration of the fund, shall hear appeals from the decisions of the director of finance in accordance with the provisions of this article and such additional rules as it shall adopt. 
(b)  Records of hearings before the board and its minutes shall be kept. These records of the proceedings of the board shall be open to the public during all regular business hours; however, the records of medical examinations of any retiree or applicant for retirement shall be closed records. 
(c)  The board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to receive, hear and rule upon all appeals from decisions of the administrator for benefits from the fund under the contested case provisions of chapter 536 RSMo. 
(d)  The board may prescribe rules and regulations, not inconsistent with state laws or this article, to govern and control the hearing, consideration and disposition of all appeals, and other administrative matters and proceedings before the board. 
(e)  The board shall advise the city council in order that a high degree of care is exercised to keep the firefighter's retirement fund safely invested in such securities as will afford the greatest return consistent with safety of principal, but such investments shall be limited to such securities as are, or may be eligible by the laws of the State of Missouri. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2070; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-64. - Creation of firefighters' retirement plan and fund. 
There is hereby created, pursuant to the constitution and laws of Missouri, the firefighters' retirement plan for the retirement of covered firefighter employees. The plan of retirement includes benefits paid on account of age, service, disability, and death. In order to maintain such benefits, a firefighters' retirement fund is hereby created and shall be maintained as the council deems appropriate from public funds appropriated by the council, from the contributions of covered employees and from such other funds and sources as have been previously set forth. 
This fund shall be a trust, within the meaning of section 401(a) of the Code, created for the exclusive benefit of covered firefighter employees, retirees, their spouses and minor children. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to covered firefighter employees and their beneficiaries under the trusts, shall any part of the corpus or income be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of covered firefighter employees retirees or their beneficiaries. 
Except as otherwise provided in this plan, the trust fund shall be retained for the exclusive benefit of employees and their beneficiaries, shall be used to pay benefits to such persons, to pay administrative expenses to the extent not paid by the city, and shall not revert to or inure to the benefit of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1920; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-65. - Contributions to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(a)  The contribution of each covered firefighter employee shall be fifteen and twenty four hundredths (15.24) percent of the employee's compensation. "Compensation," as used in this subsection, includes salary, wages, overtime pay, amounts contributed to a cafeteria plan under Code section 125, amounts contributed to a deferred compensation plan under Code section 457, and any amounts contributed to this plan on behalf of a covered employee and picked up by the city under Code section 414(h), sick leave buy back payments, automobile allowance payments, and cash in lieu of vacation payments under section 19-129(b). Compensation does not include payment for unused vacation days or unused floating holidays, workers compensation payments, safety awards, or any other payment or benefit not listed in this subsection. 
(b)  In addition to other employee contributions set forth in this section, each covered firefighter employee shall pay into the firefighters' retirement fund one and eight hundredths (1.08) percent of the employee's compensation. This amount is to pay for the 1997 improvements in disability retirement benefits and is subject to periodic adjustment. 
(c)  The contributions of covered firefighter employees shall be deducted from their biweekly compensation and placed in the firefighters' retirement fund. Deduction of contributions shall be a term and condition of employment; acceptance and continuance in employment shall be deemed to be the assent of an employee to deductions. 
(d)  The city shall pick up employee contributions required of covered firefighter employees. The contributions so picked-up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the code. The city shall pick up these contributions from funds established and available, which funds would otherwise have been designated as employee contributions and paid to the retirement fund. 
Pursuant to section 414(h) of the Code, these employee contributions so picked up shall not be included in gross income for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed by refund or benefit payment. 
(e)  The city shall pay into the firefighters' retirement fund all amounts that are needed, in addition to the contributions of covered firefighter employees, to make the fund actuarially and financially sound. 
(f)  The administrator, shall return to the appropriate city fund any city contribution made by mistake. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1930; Ord. No. 10299, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 18868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 13117, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 13555, § 1, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 13816, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14597, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 14982, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15381, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. 16614, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 16632, § 1, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-66. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-67. - Retirement by reason of age or service. 
(a)  A covered firefighter employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) or upon having completed twenty (20) years of active service, without regard to age. For purposes of this section and eligibility to retire after having completed twenty (20) years of active service without regard to age, active service shall include military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended (USERRA), only to the extent any contributions required under section 18-65 of this Code are made to the firefighters' retirement fund either during the period of qualified military service under USERRA or within five (5) years from the date of reemployment. 
(b)  A former covered firefighter employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65). 
(c)  The administrator shall pay to a retiree, retired on account of age or service, the following retirement benefits: 
(1)  To a retiree with less than twenty (20) years of active service, a retirement benefit equal to two (2) percent of the retiree's highest average salary multiplied by the number of years of active service. 
(2)  To a retiree who has completed at least twenty (20) years of service, a retirement benefit equal to seventy (70) percent of the employee's highest average salary plus two (2) percent per year for each year of active service in excess of twenty (20) years, up to a maximum benefit of eighty (80) percent of the highest average salary of the retiree. 
(3)  The retirement benefit shall be increased each year on the anniversary date of the retiree's retirement by two (2) percent. 
(d)  Upon approval of any application for benefits by the administrator, the applicant shall be entitled to receive monthly benefit payments beginning on the last day of the month immediately following the month in which employment ends. 
(e)  If, when a covered firefighter's employment is terminated, the reserve value of the employee's retirement benefits is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the administrator shall pay the employee the amount of the reserve value in a single lump sum payment. "Reserve value" is the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefits the covered firefighter employee would otherwise be eligible to receive under the firefighters' retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be made as soon as possible after employment is terminated and shall be in lieu of all other retirement benefits otherwise due the employee under the firefighters' retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be a complete discharge of all liabilities of the firefighters' retirement fund to the employee. This subsection shall not apply to covered firefighter employees who retire on disability. 
(f)  In accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code, distributions of retirement benefits under this section shall begin no later than April 1 of the year in which the retiree either attains the age of seventy and one-half (70½) or retires, whichever is later. Any distribution options in the firefighters' retirement plan inconsistent with the provisions of section 401(a)(9) of the Code are overridden by the provisions of the Code. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1950; Ord. No. 9917, § 1, 8-15-83; Ord. No. 10299, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-68. - Disability benefits. 
(a)  A covered firefighter employee who contracts a disease or sustains accidental injuries resulting in disability while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place, or a covered firefighter employee having completed one (1) continuous year or more of covered employment who contracts a disease or sustains accidental injuries resulting in disability at any time, shall be entitled to the disability benefit set out in this section. The covered firefighter employee shall be entitled to the disability benefit only while the disease or injury renders the employee unfit for the regular duties of the employee's covered employment. 
Upon the termination of the disability, payment of the benefit shall cease; provided, however, that no disability shall be deemed to have terminated so long as the covered firefighter employee is unable to return to the employee's former regular duties as a firefighter solely because of the disability or a residual effect thereof. Upon termination of a disability, no right of automatic reemployment exists. Reemployment shall be governed by the provisions of the city's personnel code. If a formerly disabled employee ceases to be disabled and is again available for employment with the city, the board or the administrator shall immediately notify the city human resources department of that availability. With the permission of the employee, medical records of the board shall be forwarded which document that availability. 
(b)  A covered firefighter employee, disabled as provided for in subsection (a), is eligible to receive a disability benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the employee's highest average salary plus ten (10) percent of that salary for each unmarried child under the age of eighteen (18), who was a dependent of the employee both at the time the employee became entitled to receive disability benefits and during the period for which the benefit is payable, to an amount not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the employee's highest average salary. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(c)  When a person receiving the disability benefit is eligible for the retirement benefit due to age or service, the person shall receive the greater of (a) the disability benefit being received, or (b) the age or service benefit. Eligibility for retirement due to service shall be based on years of active service plus years of service accrued while on disability retirement up to a maximum of twenty (20) years or actual years of service, whichever is greater. The age or service benefit shall be based on salary at the time of termination of employment and years of active service plus years of service accrued while on disability retirement up to a maximum of twenty (20) years or actual years of service, whichever is greater. 
(d)  After the approval of any disability benefit, the administrator shall, from time to time review the disability of a retiree to determine whether or not the disability continues to exist. Reexamination shall take place at least once each year unless the board shall determine otherwise. The administrator may require any retiree receiving a disability benefit to undergo a medical examination to review the status of the disability. The administrator may request the retiree to undergo an examination with a doctor of the retiree's choosing and at the retiree's expense or may require a medical examination with a doctor of the administrator's choosing at the expense of the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(1)  Any retiree refusing to submit to a medical examination after ten (10) days' written notice from the administrator shall waive and forfeit all rights to benefits from the date of the notice until such time as the retiree submits to the required examination. If such refusal continues for one (1) calendar year from the date of notice, all rights to any benefits shall immediately cease and the retiree's benefits shall escheat to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(2)  If the reexamination shows that the disability no longer exists, the right to benefits for disability shall immediately cease. A hearing on the continuance of the disability may be had before the administrator upon the retiree's written request made within ten (10) days of the administrator's notification. 
(Code 1964, § 9.1960; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Secs. 18-69—18-71. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-72. - Death benefits. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b), upon the death of a covered firefighter employee, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse and unmarried minor children a benefit from the firefighters' retirement fund, as below described: 
(1)  To the surviving spouse in monthly installments equal to fifty (50) percent of such deceased employee's highest average salary. 
(2)  To the lawful guardian of such deceased employee's surviving, unmarried children under the age eighteen (18), a monthly benefit equal to the Social Security benefit to which they would have been entitled, fixed as of the date of application, if the deceased firefighter had been covered by Social Security. If there is no surviving spouse eligible to receive benefits under the provisions of subsection (1), then the surviving unmarried children under the age of eighteen (18) shall divide equally one-half (½) of the benefit to which a surviving spouse would have been entitled. The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(b)  The surviving spouse and minor children of a covered firefighter employee who dies before completing one (1) continuous year of covered employment shall be entitled to death benefits only if the employee died as a result of contracting a disease or a sustaining accidental injuries while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place. 
(c)  Upon the death of a retiree, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse a monthly benefit equal to one hundred (100) percent of the deceased retiree's retirement benefit at the time of the retiree's death. 
(d)  Upon the death of a covered firefighter employee or retiree not otherwise entitled to a benefit under the provisions of this section, or of a retiree who has retired from active service subsequent to September 30, 1984, there shall be paid a funeral benefit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be distributed to the next of kin as follows: first, to the surviving spouse; if there is no surviving spouse, then to the children under eighteen (18) of the deceased who were residing with the deceased at the time of death; if there is no surviving spouse or minor children in the home, then to the other children of the deceased; if there is no surviving spouse, minor children in the home, or other children, then to the mother and father of the deceased. If there is no next of kin as enumerated above, the funeral benefit shall be paid to the personal representative of the estate of the deceased, or if no personal representative has been appointed within forty-five (45) days of death, then to the person who actually paid the funeral and burial expense with respect to such deceased person, upon proof of such payments, or, if proof of such payment is not made within sixty (60) days after such death, then to the mortuary that actually incurred the expense of the funeral and burial of such deceased person. 
(e)  Upon remarriage of the surviving spouse of a covered firefighter employee or retiree, benefits allowed under this section shall cease if the surviving spouse was not married to and living with the covered firefighter employee or retiree for a period of at least two (2) years prior to the death of the covered firefighter employee or retiree. 
a.  If the surviving spouse is over forty (40) years of age at the time of remarriage, benefits provided under this section shall continue for the life of the surviving spouse. 
b.  If the surviving spouse is under forty (40) years of age upon remarriage, then benefits to which the spouse is entitled shall continue for a period of ten (10) years after the remarriage. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2000; Ord. No. 10299, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 13555, § 1, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 14597, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-73. - Workers' Compensation entitlement. 
Benefits provided under the firefighters' retirement plan shall not be reduced by the amount of any Workers' Compensation entitlement in the manner set forth by these sections. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2010; Ord. No. 10299, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-74. - Applications for benefits. 
(a)  Applications for benefits to be paid from the retirement fund must be made upon the forms provided by the administrator and contain full information from which the board may determine the eligibility of the applicant. If such application be founded upon disability, full information concerning the nature and extent of the injury must be furnished with the application, and the applicant must likewise submit to examination by a physician designated by the administrator. The administrator may hold hearings and take and preserve evidence touching the nature and extent of injuries upon which claims for benefits on account of disability are claimed, and may thereafter approve or deny such application. 
(b)  No more than one (1) monthly payment shall be made at any one (1) time; no payment shall be made more than ten (10) days in advance of the period to which it applies. This provision shall not prevent the lump sum settlement of past liability for benefits. 
(c)  Any claimant denied benefits by a decision of the administrator or any claimant or covered firefighter employee otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the administrator may appeal such decision to the firefighters' retirement board. Such appeal must be in writing and filed within ten (10) days of the date of the administrator's decision. The board shall hold a hearing, take evidence and render a written decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such decision shall be appealable by any person aggrieved by any decision of the firefighters' retirement board or by the administrator under the provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2020; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-75. - Refunds. 
(a)  When the covered employment of a covered firefighter employee ends, the employee shall, have the right to withdraw in a lump sum from the fund contributions which the employee made. The lump sum withdrawal shall include interest on the contribution at the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year in which contributions were made by the covered employee, compounded annually from the last day of the calendar year in which such covered employee contributions are made to the date of withdrawal. Withdrawal of contributions by a covered firefighter employee under this division shall terminate all rights to benefits unless reinstated as herein provided. 
(b)  A covered firefighter employee who has withdrawn the contributions made by the employee with interest under the provisions of subsection (a) or received a lump-sum distribution under section 18-67(e) may, in the event of reemployment as a covered employee, reinstate benefits thereby forfeited within twelve (12) months from the date of reemployment by repaying to the fund the contributions and interest withdrawn from the fund or the lump-sum distribution, plus interest on the sum in the amount of the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year that the contribution remained withdrawn from the fund, compounded annually from the date the sum was withdrawn or lump-sum distribution was made to the date of repayment. The time which a covered firefighter is absent from covered employment shall not be deemed to be reinstated by the repayment of prior contributions. 
(c)  If the covered employment of a covered firefighter employee is terminated by the employee's death and the employee is not entitled to plan benefits other than the funeral benefit authorized by section 18-72(d), the contributions of the employee to this plan and any amounts contributed to this plan and picked up by the city under code section 414(h) for the deceased employee shall be refunded or distributed, upon request, to the estate of the deceased employee. Interest on the contributions or distributions so refunded shall be calculated as above. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2030; Ord. of 12-20-82; Ord. No. 11744, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 12868, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-76. - Benefits not assignable or subject to execution. 
The benefits payable from the firefighters' retirement fund shall not be assignable or subject to counter-claim, recoupment or set off. Except for qualified domestic relations orders, benefits payable from the firefighters' retirement fund shall not be subject to assessment, garnishment, execution, injunction, or any other decree, order, process or proceeding in any court for the payment of any debt of any beneficiary, and the sum shall be held and distributed solely for the purpose of this division. This provision shall not prevent the fire retirement board from pursuing a retiree or other beneficiary of the firefighters' retirement plan for recovery of benefits erroneously paid or to recover benefits paid due to fraud, duress or the concealment of any material fact necessary to properly process a claim for benefits. 
(Code 1964, § 9.2040; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-77. - Miscalculation of benefits, payment of interest on under or overpayment. 
Whenever a miscalculation of benefits due a retiree or beneficiary which results in an underpayment is discovered, interest on the underpayment shall be paid to the retiree or beneficiary at a rate equal to the annual investment rate of return on the firefighters' retirement fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of the underpayment. Whenever an overpayment is discovered, the retiree or beneficiary shall repay the amount erroneously paid in excess of the benefit due him plus interest for the time of overpayment equal to the annual investment rate of return on the fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of overpayment. If the amount of overpayment and interest thereon is greater than one (1) monthly benefit payment, repayment shall be made to the fund by deduction from the monthly retirement benefit a single life monthly annuity which has been determined from the value of the amount of overpayment and interest thereon using the mortality tables and accepted actuarial standards. 
(Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-78. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits any employee would otherwise receive under the firefighters' retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-79. - Compensation limits. 
The annual compensation of each covered firefighter employee taken into account under the firefighters' retirement plan shall not exceed the compensation limits of section 401(a)(17) of the Code, as adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 18-80. - Direct transfer of eligible rollover distributions; rollover notice. 
(a)  To the extent required by section 401(a)(31) of the Code, if the distributee of an eligible rollover distribution from this plan (1) elects to have all or any portion of such distribution paid directly to one individual retirement account or annuity (an "IRA") or other eligible retirement plan (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(E) of the Code, including effective January 1, 2008 a Roth IRA as described in section 408A of the Code provided that a direct rollover under section 18-55 of this Code meets the requirements of section 408A(e) of the Code), and (2) specifies such IRA or plan on such form, at such time and subject to such permissible restrictions as the employer may specify, such distribution or elected portion thereof shall be made in the form of a direct rollover to such IRA or plan, in accordance with and subject to the conditions and limitations of section 401(a)(31) and related provisions of the Code. 
(1)  "Distributee" means a participant, a beneficiary (if the surviving spouse of a participant or an "alternate payee" (as defined in section 414(p)(8) of the Code) (if the surviving spouse of a participant under a "qualified domestic relations order" (as defined in section 414(p) of the Code)). The term "distributee" includes a non-spouse beneficiary of a deceased participant, provided the distributee elects a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan which is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code. 
(2)  "Eligible rollover distribution" means a distribution of any portion of the balance credited to the benefit of a participant which is not one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments made over (1) a specified period of ten years or more, or (2) the life expectancy of the distributee, to the extent that it constitutes an eligible rollover distribution (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(D) of the Code). 
(b)  In the case of any mandatory distribution made on or after March 28, 2005, if the vested balance of the distributee's benefit is greater than $1,000.00 and less than or equal to $5,000.00, and if the distributee does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with section 18-55 of this Code, then the employer will pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the employer. 
(c)  The plan administrator shall give covered firefighter employees an understandable written explanation of rollover rules within a reasonable period before making an eligible rollover distribution. 
(Ord. No. 18160, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 23040 , § 1, 12-19-16)  
Secs. 18-81—18-84. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 18-85. - Generally. 
Subject to the provisions of this division 4, the deferred retirement option program, hereinafter referred to as the DROP, is a program under which a covered employee of the police retirement fund or the firefighter's retirement fund may elect to participate, deferring receipt of retirement benefits while continuing employment with the city. The deferred monthly benefits shall accrue on behalf of the covered employee, plus interest compounded monthly, for the specified period of the DROP participation, as provided herein. Upon termination of employment, the covered employee shall receive the total DROP benefits and begin to receive the previously determined normal retirement benefits. Participation in the DROP does not guarantee employment for the specified period of the DROP. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 18-86. - Eligibility of covered employee to participate in the DROP. 
(a)  The following are eligible to participate in the DROP: A covered police employee eligible to receive retirement benefits under section 18-42(a) or 18-94(a), or a covered firefighter employee eligible to receive retirement benefits under section 18-67(a) or 18-107(a). 
(b)  A covered employee eligible under subsection (a) may voluntarily make an election to participate in the DROP at any time during the period beginning on the effective date of the DROP and ending on the day prior to the sunset date provided for in section 18-91(a). 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-87. - Participation in the DROP. 
(a)  A covered employee eligible under section 18-86(a) may elect to participate in the DROP (hereafter referred to as a "DROP member") for a period not to exceed a maximum of the later of: (i) sixty (60) consecutive calendar months immediately following the date on which the employee first reaches his or her normal retirement date as provided under section 18-86(a); or (ii) sixty (60) consecutive calendar months immediately following the date of the DROP election. However, a covered employee who has reached his or her normal retirement date under section 18-86(a) prior to the effective date of the DROP shall be eligible to participate in the DROP for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive calendar months immediately following the effective date of the DROP. 
(b)  Upon deciding to participate in the DROP, the covered employee shall submit, on forms required by the administrator: 
(1)  A written voluntary election to participate in the DROP, which includes selection of the DROP participation and termination dates, which satisfy the limitations stated in subsection (a). Such termination date shall be in a binding letter of resignation with the Columbia Police Department or Columbia Fire Department, as applicable, establishing a deferred termination date. The DROP member may change the termination date within the limitations of subsection (a), but only with the written approval of the chief of police or the fire chief, as applicable; and 
(2)  Any other information required by the administrator. 
(c)  Participation in the DROP does not alter the DROP member's employment status and such DROP member shall not be deemed retired from employment until his or her deferred resignation is effective and termination occurs. 
(d)  Contributions required under sections 18-40, 18-65, 18-93 and 18-106 shall continue during the period of DROP participation by a DROP member. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-88. - Benefits payable under the DROP. 
(a)  Effective with the date of DROP participation, the DROP member's initial normal monthly benefit, including creditable service, optional form of payment, and highest average salary, and the effective date of retirement shall be fixed. The beneficiary established in sections 18-47, 18-72, 18-96 or 18-109, respectively, shall be the beneficiary eligible to receive any DROP benefits payable if the DROP member dies prior to the completion of the period of DROP participation. In the event a joint annuitant predeceases the DROP member, the DROP member may name a beneficiary to receive accumulated DROP benefits payable. Such retirement benefit, any annual cost of living adjustments and interest shall accrue monthly in the trust fund. Such interest shall accrue at an effective annual rate of four (4) percent for DROP members with an effective DROP date on or before September 1, 2012 and two (2) percent for DROP members with an effective DROP date after September 1, 2012 compounded monthly, on the prior month's accumulated ending balance, up to the month of the termination or date of death. 
(b)  The effective date of DROP participation of a DROP member shall be the first day of the month selected by the DROP member to begin participation in the DROP, provided such date is properly established, with the written confirmation and the approval of the administrator, on forms required by the administrator. 
(c)  Normal retirement benefits and interest thereon shall continue to accrue in the DROP until the established termination date of the DROP, or until the DROP member terminates employment or dies prior to such date. Although individual DROP accounts shall not be established, a separate accounting of each DROP member's accrued benefits under the DROP shall be calculated and provided periodically to DROP members. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the member's DROP, the administrator shall distribute the DROP member's total accumulated DROP benefits, subject to and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The administrator shall receive written verification that such DROP member has terminated employment. 
(2)  The terminated DROP member or, if deceased, such DROP member's named beneficiary, shall elect on forms provided by the administrator to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one of the options listed below. For a DROP member or beneficiary who fails to elect a method of payment within sixty (60) days of termination of the DROP, the administrator will pay a lump sum as provided in subparagraph a. below. 
a.  Lump sum. All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP member or surviving beneficiary. 
b.  Direct rollover. All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, shall be paid from the DROP directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
c.  Partial lump sum. A portion of the accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, shall be paid to the DROP member or surviving beneficiary, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, and the remaining DROP benefits shall be transferred directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. The proportions shall be specified by the DROP member or surviving beneficiary. 
(3)  The form of payment selected by the DROP member or surviving beneficiary shall comply with the minimum distribution requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  A DROP member who fails to terminate employment at the conclusion of the DROP period shall be deemed not to be retired, and the DROP election shall be null and void. The covered employee shall be eligible to receive, upon termination of employment, his or her normal retirement benefit determined immediately prior to the effective date of the DROP election, including creditable service accumulated after the date of the DROP election, and using the highest average salary as determined immediately prior to the effective date of the DROP election. 
(e)  The accrued benefits of any DROP member, and any contributions accumulated under the DROP, shall be subject to sections 18-51, 18-76, 18-100 or 18-113, respectively. 
(f)  DROP members shall be eligible for disability retirement benefits, as provided for in sections 18-43, 18-68, 18-95 or 18-108, respectively, and shall receive the DROP benefits, plus interest, accrued to the date of disability in accordance with the election made under subsection (d)(2). 
(g)  A DROP member shall not be eligible for refunds as provided for under sections 18-50, 18-75, 18-99 and 18-112. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 21405, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-89. - Death benefits under the drop. 
(a)  Upon the death of a DROP member, the DROP member's named beneficiary shall be entitled to apply for and receive the accrued benefits in the DROP, in accordance with sections 18-47, 18-72, 18-96 or 18-109, respectively. 
(b)  The normal retirement benefit accrued to the DROP on the day preceding the date of death of the DROP member shall be the final monthly benefit credited for such DROP member. 
(c)  Eligibility to participate in the DROP terminates on the day preceding the date of death of the DROP member. If the DROP member dies on or after the effective date of enrollment in the DROP, but prior to the first monthly benefit being credited to the DROP, death benefits shall be paid in accordance with sections 18-47, 18-72, 18-96 or 18-109, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-90. - Administration of program. 
(a)  The administrator shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this division 4. The administrator shall not be required to advise DROP members of the federal tax consequences of an election related to the DROP, but may advise DROP members to seek independent advice. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 18-91. - Sunset provisions. 
(a)  No covered employee may elect to participate in the DROP after sixty (60) consecutive months following the effective date of the DROP. 
(b)  A DROP member shall cease participation in the DROP and shall cease accruing any benefits under the DROP at the end of his or her participation period provided for in section 18-87(a). 
(c)  The effective date of the DROP under this division 4 shall be August 20, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 19636, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 21405, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 23249 , § 1, 7-17-17)  
DIVISION 5. - POLICE OFFICERS HIRED ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2012 
 
Sec. 18-92. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The definitions and rules of construction in section 18-35 apply to this division except as otherwise provided in this division. The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division in place of anything to the contrary in this Article II: 
Covered police employee. A person hired by the Columbia Police Department as a full-time, regular police officer on or after October 1, 2012. This term shall exclude clerical employees, watchmen, school traffic guards, turnkeys, volunteers and any other employee or associate, regardless of whether they are commissioned as a police officer, when they are not a salaried full-time, regular police officer of the city. This term shall exclude the chief of police. 
Highest average salary. The average of the thirty-six (36) consecutive months of covered employment in which such covered police employee's salary was the highest, or, if the employee has less than thirty-six (36) months of service, then the average salary over the employee's entire period of service. For the purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) months of highest average, no period shorter than twelve (12) months shall be used. "Salary," as used in this definition, includes only compensation included computing the employee's contributions to the police retirement fund. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-93. - Contributions to the police retirement fund. 
(a)  Covered police employees shall be assessed and required to pay into the fund four and five-tenths (4.5) percent of compensation. "Compensation," as used in this subsection, includes salary, wages, overtime pay, amounts contributed to a cafeteria plan under Code Section 125, amounts contributed to a deferred compensation plan under Code Section 457, amounts contributed to this plan on behalf of a covered employee and picked up by the city under Code Section 414(h), sick leave buy back payments, automobile allowance payments, and cash in lieu of vacation paid under section 19-129(b) of the City Code. Compensation does not include payment for unused vacation days or unused floating holidays, workers compensation payments, safety awards, or any other payment or benefit not listed in this subsection. 
(b)  The contributions of covered police employees shall be deducted from their biweekly compensation and placed in the police retirement fund. Deduction of contributions shall be a term and condition of employment; acceptance and continuance in employment shall be deemed to be the assent of an employee to deductions. 
(c)  The city shall pick up employee contributions required of covered police employees. The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the Code. The city shall pick up these contributions from funds established and available, which funds would otherwise have been designated as employee contributions and paid to the retirement fund. 
Pursuant to Section 414(h) of the Code, these employee contributions so picked up shall not be included in gross income for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed by refund or benefit payment. 
(d)  The city shall pay into the police retirement fund all amounts that are needed, in addition to the contributions of covered police employees, to make the fund actuarially and financially sound. 
(e)  The administrator, shall return to the appropriate city fund any city contribution made by mistake. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-94. - Retirement by reason of age or service. 
(a)  A covered, police employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) or upon having completed twenty-five (25) years of active service without regard to age. For purposes of this section and eligibility to retire after having completed twenty-five (25) years of active service without regard to age, active service shall include military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended (USERRA), only to the extent any contributions required under section 18-93 are made to the police retirement fund either during the period of qualified military service under USERRA or within five (5) years from the date of reemployment. 
(b)  A former covered police employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65). 
(c)  The administrator shall pay to a retiree, retired on account of age or service, retirement benefits determined by subsection (1) below. The plan benefits of subsection (1) below apply to employees hired on or after October 1, 2012. 
(1)  A retiree retired due to age or service shall receive two (2) percent of highest average salary per year of covered employment up to twenty-five (25) years. For each year of service in covered employment over twenty-five (25), the retiree shall receive an additional one and five-tenths (1.5) percent of highest average salary per year, up to a maximum of fifty-seven and five-tenths (57.5) percent for twenty-five (25) years of service. This benefit shall continue for life. In the first month of each plan year, the retirement benefit shall be increased by six tenths (0.6) percent (i.e. annual compound COLA). 
(d)  Upon approval of any application for benefits by the administrator, the applicant shall be entitled to receive monthly benefit payments beginning on the last day of the month immediately following the month in which employment ends. A married retiree eligible for survivor benefits under section 18-47(2) shall receive a fifty (50) percent joint and survivor annuity which is the actuarial equivalent of a single life annuity under this section. The actuarial equivalent shall be based on assumptions for the "applicable interest rate" and "applicable mortality table" as determined under Code Section 417(e). 
(e)  If, when a covered police employee's employment is terminated, and the reserve value of the employee's retirement benefits is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the administrator shall pay the employee the amount of the reserve value in a single lump sum payment. "Reserve value" is the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefits the covered police employee would otherwise be eligible to receive under the police retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be made as soon as possible after employment is terminated and shall be in lieu of all other retirement benefits otherwise due the employee under the police retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be a complete discharge of all liabilities of the police retirement fund to the employee. This subsection shall not apply to covered police employees who retire on disability. 
(f)  In accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code, distribution of retirement benefits under this section shall begin no later than April 1 of the year in which the retiree either attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or retires, whichever is later. Any distribution options in the police retirement plan inconsistent with the provisions of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code are overridden by the provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-95. - Disability benefits. 
(a)  A covered police employee who sustains a duty-related disability, or a covered police employee having completed one (1) continuous year or more of covered employment who sustains a nonduty-related disability, shall be entitled to the disability benefit set out in this section. The covered police employee shall be entitled to the disability benefit only while the disease or injury renders the employee unfit for the regular duties of the employee's covered employment. 
Upon the termination of the disability, payment of the benefit shall cease; provided, however, that no disability shall be deemed to have terminated so long as the covered police employee is unable to return to the employee's former regular duties solely because of the disability or a residual effect thereof. Upon termination of a disability, no right of automatic reemployment exists. Reemployment shall be governed by the provisions of the city's personnel code. 
(b)  Eligible covered police employees shall be paid from the police retirement fund, from Workers' Compensation benefits, from Social Security benefits or from some combination thereof, the following benefits: 
(1)  To a covered police employee, disabled with a duty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the employee's highest average salary plus ten (10) percent of that salary for each unmarried dependent child under the age of eighteen (18), to an amount not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the employee's highest average salary. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(2)  To a covered police employee, disabled with a nonduty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the employee's highest average salary per year of covered employment plus an additional one-half (0.5) percent of that salary per year for each unmarried dependent child under the age of eighteen (18), up to a maximum of four (4) children. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(3)  Duty and nonduty-related disability benefits paid to any covered police employee shall be offset dollar for dollar by the excess of income received by the retiree over ninety (90) percent of the employee's highest average salary. For purposes of this section, income shall be defined as the combination of disability retirement benefits provided herein, social security, workers' compensation benefits, other long-term disability benefits, and compensation for other employment. After a retiree accumulates twenty-five (25) years of combined service in covered employment and time receiving disability benefits or age sixty-five (65), the income offset shall cease. 
(4)  In the event of a lump sum Workers' Compensation settlement, the amount of the monthly income to be used as income offset in the disability retirement benefit shall be determined by converting the lump sum Workers' Compensation amount to a single life monthly annuity of equivalent value for the benefit recipient, using the mortality table and interest rate used in the most recent actuarial valuation of the fund. For purposes of this section, future medical awards shall not be considered a part of Workers' Compensation benefits or entitlements. In addition, the monthly disability benefit shall be reduced by the amount of the single life monthly annuity as determined herein. 
(5)  For purposes of calculating the income offset for disability retirement benefits, the final average salary shall be adjusted on the anniversary date of the retiree's becoming eligible for disability retirement benefits by the percentage change in the consumer price index for this region of the country from January 1 of the previous year to January 1 of the current year. 
(6)  An employee who receives disability benefits for a duty-related disability shall receive credit for covered employment for each year of duty-related disability retirement up to a maximum, when combined with years of actual covered employment, of twenty-five (25) years. At that point disability retirement benefits shall cease and the retiree shall receive retirement benefits based on years of service. 
(7)  Any person who is receiving nonduty-related disability benefits may, upon reaching age sixty-five (65) years, elect to receive, in lieu thereof, retirement benefits based on age. 
(c)  After the approval of any disability benefit, the administrator shall, from time to time, review the disability of the retiree to determine whether or not the disability continues to exist. Reexamination shall take place at least once each year unless the board shall determine otherwise. The administrator may require any retiree receiving a disability benefit to undergo a medical examination to review the status of the disability. The administrator may request the retiree to undergo an examination with a doctor of the retiree's choosing and at the retiree's expense or may require a medical examination with a doctor of the administrator's choosing at the expense of the police retirement fund. 
(1)  Any retiree refusing to submit to a medical examination after ten (10) days' written notice from the administrator shall waive and forfeit all rights to benefits from the date of the notice until such time as the retiree submits to the required examination. If such refusal continues for one (1) calendar year from the date of notice, all rights to any benefits shall immediately cease and the retiree's benefits schedule shall escheat to the police retirement fund. 
(2)  If the reexamination shows that the disability no longer exists, the right to benefits for disability shall immediately cease. A hearing on the continuance of the disability may be had before the administrator upon the retiree's written request within ten (10) days of the administrator's notification. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-96. - Death benefits. 
Upon the death of a covered police employee or retiree, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse and unmarried minor children a benefit from the police retirement fund, from Workers' Compensation and from Social Security, or from some combination thereof, as below described: 
(1)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a covered police employee a monthly benefit equal to one-half (½) of the retirement benefit to which the deceased employee would have been entitled had the employee met the age or service requirement on the date of the employee's death. The benefit paid to the surviving spouse shall not be reduced by any Social Security entitlement; provided, however, that the benefit paid from the police retirement fund when added to the Social Security entitlement shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the salary which the covered police employee was receiving immediately prior to death. 
(2)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a retiree a monthly benefit equal to one-half (½) of the retirement benefit to which the deceased retiree was receiving immediately prior to death. The benefit paid to the surviving spouse shall not be reduced by any Social Security entitlement; provided, however, that the benefit paid from the police retirement benefit when added to the Social Security entitlement shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the salary which the deceased retiree was receiving immediately prior to retirement. The surviving spouse benefit under this subsection shall be the actuarial equivalent of the fifty (50) percent joint and survivor annuity under section 18-94. The actuarial equivalent shall be based on assumptions for the "applicable interest rate" and "applicable mortality table" as determined under Code Section 417(e). 
(3)  If there is no surviving spouse eligible to receive benefits under the provisions of this subsection, the surviving unmarried children under the age of eighteen (18) shall divide equally the benefit to which a surviving spouse would have been entitled. The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(4)  Upon remarriage of the surviving spouse of a covered police employee or retiree, benefits allowed under this section shall cease if the surviving spouse was not married to and living with the covered police employee or retiree for a period of at least two (2) years prior to the death of the covered police employee or retiree. 
a.  If the surviving spouse is over forty (40) years of age at the time of remarriage, benefits provided under this section shall continue for the life of the surviving spouse. 
b.  If the surviving spouse is under forty (40) years of age upon remarriage, then benefits to which the spouse is entitled shall continue for a period of ten (10) years after the remarriage. 
(5)  When a covered police employee or a retiree dies without a surviving spouse or other survivor entitled to benefits under this section, there shall be paid a funeral benefit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The funeral benefit shall be paid to the personal representative of the estate of the deceased employee, or if no personal representative has been appointed within forty-five (45) days of death, then to the person who actually paid the funeral and burial expense with respect to such deceased person, upon proof of such payments, or, if proof of such payment has not been made within sixty (60) days after such death, then to the mortuary that actually incurred the expense of the funeral and burial of such deceased person. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-97. - Workers' compensation entitlements. 
Benefits provided under the police retirement plan shall be reduced by the amount of any Workers' Compensation entitlement in the manner set forth by these sections. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or administered to work a reduction of the total of the benefits paid and the entitlements due a covered employee below the benefit which would otherwise be payable under this division had the entitlements not been considered. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-98. - Applications for benefits. 
(a)  Applications for benefits to be paid from the retirement fund must be made upon the forms provided by the administrator and contain full information from which the board may determine the eligibility of the applicant. If such application be founded upon disability, full information concerning the nature and extent of the injury must be furnished with the application, and the applicant must likewise submit to examination by a physician designated by the administrator. The administrator may hold hearings and take and preserve evidence touching the nature and extent of injuries upon which claims for benefits on account of disability are claimed, and may thereafter approve or deny such application. 
(b)  No more than one (1) monthly payment shall be made at any time; no payment shall be made more than ten (10) days in advance of the period to which it applies. This provision shall not prevent the lump sum settlement of past liability for benefits. 
(c)  Any claimant denied benefits by a decision of the administrator or any claimant or covered police employee or retiree otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the administrator may appeal such decision to the police retirement board. Such appeal must be in writing and filed within ten (10) days of the date of the administrator's decision. The board shall hold a hearing, take evidence and render a written decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such decision shall be appealable by any person aggrieved by any decision of the police retirement board or by the administrator under the provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-99. - Refunds. 
(a)  When the covered employment of a covered police employee ends, the employee shall have the right to withdraw in a lump sum from the fund, contributions which the employee made. The lump sum withdrawal shall include interest on the contribution at the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year in which contributions were made by the covered employee, compounded annually from the last day of the calendar year in which such covered employee contributions are made to the date of withdrawal. Withdrawal of contributions by a covered police employee under this ordinance shall terminate all rights to benefits unless reinstated as herein provided. 
(b)  A covered police employee who has withdrawn the contributions made by the employee with interest under provisions of subsection (a) hereof or received a lump-sum distribution under section 18-94(e) may, in the event of reemployment as a covered employee, reinstate benefits thereby forfeited within twelve (12) months from the date of reemployment by repaying to the fund the contributions and interest withdrawn from the fund or the lump-sum distribution, plus interest on the sum in the amount of the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year that the contribution remained withdrawn from the fund, compounded annually from the date the sum was withdrawn or lump-sum distribution was made to the date of repayment. The time which a covered police employee is absent from covered employment shall not be deemed to be reinstated by the repayment of prior contributions. 
(c)  If the covered employment of a covered police employee is terminated by the employee's death and the employee is not entitled to plan benefits other than the funeral benefit authorized by section 18-96(5), the contributions of the employee to this plan and any amounts contributed to this plan and picked up by the city under Code Section 414(h) for the deceased employee shall be refunded or distributed, upon request, to the estate of the deceased employee. Interest on the contributions or distributions so refunded shall be calculated as above. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-100. - Benefits not assignable or subject to execution. 
The benefits payable from the police retirement fund shall not be assignable or subject to counter-claim, recoupment or set off. Except for qualified domestic relations orders, benefits payable from the police retirement fund shall not be subject to assessment, garnishment, execution, injunction, or any other decree, order, process, or proceeding in any court for the payment of any debt of any beneficiary, and the sum shall be held and distributed solely for the purpose of this article. This provision shall not prevent the police retirement board from pursuing a retiree or other beneficiary of the police retirement plan for recovery of benefits erroneously paid or to recover benefits paid due to fraud, duress or the concealment of any material fact necessary to properly process a claim for benefits. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-101. - Miscalculation of benefits, payment of interest on underpayment or overpayment. 
Whenever a miscalculation of benefits due a retiree or beneficiary which results in an underpayment is discovered, interest on the underpayment shall be paid to the retiree or beneficiary at a rate equal to the annual investment rate of return on the police retirement fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of the underpayment. Whenever an overpayment is discovered, the retiree or beneficiary shall repay the amount erroneously paid in excess of the benefit due him plus interest for the time of overpayment equal to the annual investment rate of return on the fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of overpayment. If the amount of overpayment and interest thereon is greater than one (1) monthly benefit payment, repayment shall be made to the fund in the same manner as provided for reimbursement by the retiree of lump sum worker's compensation benefits in section 18-97 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-102. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits any employee would otherwise receive under the police retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-103. - Compensation limits. 
The annual compensation of each covered police employee taken into account under the police retirement plan shall not exceed the compensation limits of Section 401(a)(17) of the Code, as adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-104. - Direct transfer of eligible rollover distributions; rollover notice. 
(a)  To the extent required by Section 401(a)(31) of the Code, if the distributee of an eligible rollover distribution from this plan (1) elects to have all or any portion of such distribution paid directly to one individual retirement account or annuity (an "IRA") or other eligible retirement plan (within the meaning of section 401 (a)(31)(E) of the Code, including effective January 1, 2008 a Roth IRA as described in section 408A of the Code provided that a direct rollover under section 18-55 of this Code meets the requirements of section 408A(e) of the Code), and (2) specifies such IRA or plan on such form, at such time and subject to such permissible restrictions as the employer may specify, such distribution or elected portion thereof shall be made in the form of a direct rollover to such IRA or plan, in accordance with and subject to the conditions and limitations of section 401(a)(31) and related provisions of the Code. 
(1)  "Distributee" means a participant, a beneficiary (if the surviving spouse of a participant), or an "alternate payee" (as defined in section 414(p)(8) of the Code) (if the surviving spouse of a participant under a "qualified domestic relations order" (as defined in section 414(p) of the Code)). The term "distributee" includes a non-spouse beneficiary of a deceased participant, provided the distributee elects a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan which is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code. 
(2)  "Eligible rollover distribution" means a distribution of any portion of the balance credited to the benefit of a participant which is not one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments made over (1) a specified period of ten years or more, or (2) the life expectancy of the distributee, to the extent that it constitutes an eligible rollover distribution (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(D) of the Code). 
(b)  In the case of any mandatory distribution made on or after March 28, 2005, if the vested balance of the distributee's benefit is greater than $1,000.00 and less than or equal to $5,000.00, and if the distributee does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with section 18-55 of this Code, then the employer will pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the employer. 
(c)  The plan administrator shall give covered police employees an understandable written explanation of rollover rules within a reasonable period before making an eligible rollover distribution. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 23040 , § 1, 12-19-16)  
DIVISION 6. - FIREFIGHTERS HIRED ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2012 
 
Sec. 18-105. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The definitions and rules of construction in section 18-60 apply to this division except as otherwise provided in this division. The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this division in place of anything to the contrary in this article: 
Covered firefighter employee. A person hired by the Columbia Fire Department as a full-time, regular firefighter on or after October 1, 2012. This term shall exclude clerical employees, volunteers and any other employee or associate, regardless of whether they are commissioned as a firefighter, when they are not a salaried full-time, regular firefighter of the city. 
Duty-related disability or death. A disability or death which results from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by a covered employee while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place. Duty-related disability or death shall include a disability or death which results from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by an off-duty covered employee acting under color of the employee's commission. A disability or death resulting from a disease contracted or an injury sustained by an off-duty covered employee while in paid employment of another entity shall only be considered a duty-related disability or death if the covered employee was acting under color of the employee's commission within the limits of the City of Columbia at the time the disability was sustained. 
Highest average salary. The average of the thirty-six (36) consecutive months in the last one hundred and twenty (120) consecutive months of covered employment in which such covered firefighter employee's salary was the highest, or, if the employee has less than thirty-six (36) months of service, then the average salary over the employee's entire period of service. For the purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) months of highest average salary, no period shorter than twelve (12) months shall be used. "Salary," as used in this definition, includes only compensation included in computing the employee's contributions to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
Nonduty-related disability or death. A disability or death other than a duty-related disability or death. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-106. - Contributions to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(a)  The contribution of each covered firefighter employee shall be four (4) percent of the employee's compensation. "Compensation," as used in this subsection, includes salary, wages, overtime pay, amounts contributed to a cafeteria plan under Code Section 125, amounts contributed to a deferred compensation plan under Code Section 457, and any amounts contributed to this plan on behalf of a covered employee and picked up by the city under Code Section 414(h), sick leave buy back payments, automobile allowance payments, and cash in lieu of vacation payments under section 19-129(b). Compensation does not include payment for unused vacation days or unused floating holidays, workers compensation payments, safety awards, or any other payment or benefit not listed in this subsection. 
(b)  The contributions of covered firefighter employees shall be deducted from their biweekly compensation and placed in the firefighters' retirement fund. Deduction of contributions shall be a term and condition of employment; acceptance and continuance in employment shall be deemed to be the assent of an employee to deductions. 
(c)  The city shall pick up employee contributions required of covered firefighter employees. The contributions so picked-up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the code. The city-shall pick up the contributions from funds established and available, which funds would otherwise have been designated as employee contributions and paid to the retirement fund. 
Pursuant to Section 414(h) of the Code, these employee contributions so picked up shall not be included in gross income for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed by refund or benefit payment. 
(d)  The city shall pay into the firefighters' retirement fund all amounts that are needed, in addition to the contributions of covered firefighter employees, to make the fund actuarially and financially sound. 
(e)  The administrator shall return to the appropriate city fund any city contribution made by mistake. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-107. - Retirement by reason of age or service. 
(a)  A covered firefighter employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits: (i) upon reaching the age of fifty-five (55) and upon having completed at least one (1) year of active service; or (ii) upon having combined age and active service equal to eighty (80). For purposes of this section, active service shall include military leave which qualifies under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. 4301, et seq.) as now enacted, or hereafter amended (USERRA), only to the extent any contributions required under section 18-106 are made to the firefighters' retirement fund either during the period of qualified military service under USERRA or within five (5) years from the date of reemployment. 
(b)  A former covered firefighter employee shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65). 
(c)  The administrator shall pay to a retiree, retired on account of age or service, the following retirement benefits: 
(1)  A retirement benefit equal to two and five-tenths (2.5) percent of the retiree's highest average salary multiplied by the number of years of active service. 
(2)  If a retiree is age fifty (50) and not yet age fifty-five (55) at the date of retirement, the retirement benefit payable under section 18-107(c)(1) will be reduced by five-tenths (0.5) of a percent for each month that the retirement date precedes age fifty-five (55). 
(d)  Upon approval of any application for benefits by the administrator, the applicant shall be entitled to receive monthly benefit payments beginning on the last day of the month immediately following the month which employment ends. A married retiree eligible for survivor benefits under section 18-109(c) shall receive a fifty (50) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds(66 2/3 ) percent, seventy-five (75) percent or one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor annuity based on his or her election which is the actuarial equivalent of a single life annuity under this section. The actuarial equivalent shall be based on assumptions for the "applicable interest rate" and "applicable mortality table" as determined under Code Section 417(e). 
(e)  If, when a covered firefighter's employment is terminated, and the reserve value of the employee's retirement benefits is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the administrator shall pay the employee the amount of the reserve value in a single lump sum payment. "Reserve value" is the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefits the covered firefighter employee would otherwise be eligible to receive under the firefighters' retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be made as soon as possible after employment is terminated and shall be in lieu of all other retirement benefits otherwise due the employee under the firefighters' retirement plan. The single lump sum payment shall be a complete discharge of all liabilities of the firefighters' retirement fund to the employee. This subsection shall not apply to covered firefighter employees who retire on disability. 
(f)  In accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code, distributions of retirement benefits under this section shall begin no later than April 1 of the year in which the retiree either attains the age of seventy and one-half or retires, whichever is later. Any distribution options in the firefighters' retirement plan inconsistent with the provisions of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code are overridden by the provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 22235, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 18-108. - Disability benefits. 
(a)  A covered firefighter employee who contracts a disease or sustains accidental injuries resulting in disability while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place, or a covered firefighter employee having completed one (1) continuous year or more of covered employment who contracts a disease or sustains accidental injuries resulting in disability at any time, shall be entitled to the disability benefit set out in this section. The covered firefighter employee shall be entitled to the disability benefit only while the disease or injury renders the employee unfit for the regular duties of the employee's covered employment. 
Upon the termination of the disability, payment of the benefit shall cease; provided, however, that no disability shall be deemed to have terminated so long as the covered firefighter employee is unable to return to the employee's former regular duties as a firefighter solely because of the disability or a residual effect thereof. Upon termination of a disability, no right of automatic reemployment exists. Reemployment shall be governed by the provisions of the city's personnel code. If a formerly disabled employee ceases to be disabled and is again available for employment with the city, the board or the administrator shall immediately notify the city human resources department of that availability. With the permission of the employee, medical records of the board shall be forwarded which document that availability. 
(b)  A covered firefighter employee shall be paid from the firefighters' retirement fund the following benefits: 
(1)  To a covered firefighter employee, disabled with a duty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to two and five-tenths (2.5) percent of the employee's highest average salary multiplied by the number of years of active service counted as if the employee had worked to age sixty (60). Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(2)  To a covered firefighter employee, disabled with a nonduty-related disability, a disability benefit equal to two and five-tenths (2.5) percent of the employee's highest average salary multiplied by the number of years of active service at the time of disability retirement. Such benefit shall be payable monthly. 
(c)  When a person receiving the disability benefit is eligible for the retirement benefit due to age or service, the person shall receive the greater of (i) the disability benefit being received, or (ii) the age or service benefit. Eligibility for retirement due to service shall be based on years of active service plus years of service accrued while on disability retirement. The age or service benefit shall be based on salary at the time of termination of employment and years of active service plus years of service accrued while on disability retirement. 
(d)  After the approval of any disability benefit, the administrator shall, from time to time, review the disability of a retiree to determine whether or not the disability continues to exist. Reexamination shall take place at least once each year unless the board shall determine otherwise. The administrator may require any retiree receiving a disability benefit to undergo a medical examination to review the status of the disability. The administrator may request the retiree to undergo an examination with a doctor of the retiree's choosing and at the retiree's expense or may require a medical examination with a doctor of the administrator's choosing at the expense of the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(1)  Any retiree refusing to submit to a medical examination after ten (10) days' written notice from the administrator shall waive and forfeit all rights to benefits from the date of the notice until such time as the retiree submits to the required examination. If such refusal continues for one (1) calendar year from the date of notice, all rights to any benefits shall immediately cease and the retiree's benefits shall escheat to the firefighters' retirement fund. 
(2)  If the reexamination shows that the disability no longer exists, the right to benefits for disability shall immediately cease. A hearing on the continuance of the disability may be had before the administrator upon the retiree's written request made within ten (10) days of the administrator's notification. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-109. - Death benefits. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b), upon the death of a covered firefighter employee or retiree, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse a benefit from the firefighters' retirement fund, as below described: 
(1)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a covered firefighter employee a monthly benefit equal to one hundred (100) percent of the retirement benefit to which the deceased employee would have been entitled had the employee met the age or service requirement on the date of the employee's death. The surviving spouse benefit under this section shall be the actuarial equivalent of the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor annuity under section 18-107. The actuarial equivalent shall be based on assumptions for the "applicable interest rate" and "applicable mortality table" as determined under Code Section 417(e). The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(2)  There shall be paid to the non-spouse beneficiary of a covered firefighter employee who has a duty-related death, a monthly benefit equal to one hundred (100) percent of the retirement benefit to which the deceased employee would have been entitled had the employee worked to age sixty (60) with at least five (5) years of service on the date of the employee's death. The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(3)  There shall be paid to the non-spouse beneficiary of a covered firefighter employee who has a nonduty-related death, a monthly benefit equal to one hundred (100) percent of the retirement benefit to which the deceased employee would have been entitled had the employee met the age or service requirement on the date of the employee's death The death benefit shall be payable upon the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the death occurred. 
(b)  The surviving spouse of a covered firefighter employee who dies before completing one (1) continuous year of covered employment shall be entitled to death benefits only if the employee died as a result of contracting a disease or a sustaining accidental injuries while in the actual discharge and performance of the duties of the employee's covered employment at some definite time and place. 
(c)  Upon the death of a retiree, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse a monthly benefit equal to fifty (50) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent, seventy-five (75) percent or one hundred (100) percent of the deceased retiree's retirement benefit at the time of the retiree's death as previously elected under section 18-107(d) of this chapter. 
(d)  Upon remarriage of the surviving spouse of a covered firefighter employee or retiree, benefits allowed under this section shall cease if the surviving spouse was not married to and living with the covered firefighter employee or retiree for a period of at least two (2) years prior to the death of the covered firefighter employee or retiree. 
(1)  If the surviving spouse is over forty (40) years of age at the time of remarriage, benefits provided under this section shall continue for the life of the surviving spouse. 
(2)  If the surviving spouse is under forty (40) years of age upon remarriage, then benefits to which the spouse is entitled shall continue for a period of ten (10) years after the remarriage. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 22235, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 18-110. - Workers' compensation entitlement. 
Benefits provided under the firefighters' retirement plan shall not be reduced by the amount of any Workers' Compensation entitlement in the manner set forth by these sections. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-111. - Applications for benefits. 
(a)  Applications for benefits to be paid from the retirement fund must be made upon the forms provided by the administrator and contain full information from which the board may determine the eligibility of the applicant. If such application be founded upon disability, full information concerning the nature and extent of the injury must be furnished with the application, and the applicant must likewise submit to examination by a physician designated by the administrator. The administrator may hold hearings and take and preserve evidence touching the nature and extent of injuries upon which claims for benefits on account of disability are claimed, and may thereafter approve or deny such application. 
(b)  No more than one (1) monthly payment shall be made at any time; no payment shall be made more than ten (10) days in advance of the period to which it applies. This provision shall not prevent the lump sum settlement of past liability for benefits. 
(c)  Any claimant denied benefits by a decision of the administrator, or any claimant or covered firefighter employee otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the administrator, may appeal such decision to the firefighters' retirement board. Such appeal must be in writing and filed within ten (10) days of the date of the administrator's decision. The board shall hold a hearing, take evidence and render a written decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such decision shall be appealable by any person aggrieved by any decision of the firefighters' retirement board or by the administrator under the provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-112. - Refunds. 
(a)  When the covered employment of a covered firefighter employee ends, the employee shall, have the right to withdraw in a lump sum from the fund contributions which the employee made. The lump sum withdrawal shall include interest on the contribution at the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year in which contributions were made by the covered employee, compounded annually from the last day of the calendar year in which such covered employee contributions are made to the date of withdrawal. Withdrawal of contributions by a covered firefighter employee under this division shall terminate all rights to benefits unless reinstated as herein provided. 
(b)  A covered firefighter employee who has withdrawn the contributions made by the employee with interest under the provisions of subsection (a) or received a lump-sum distribution under section 18-107(e) may, in the event of reemployment as a covered employee, reinstate benefits thereby forfeited within twelve (12) months from the date of reemployment by repaying to the fund the contributions and interest withdrawn from the fund or the lump-sum distribution, plus interest on the sum in the amount of the annual investment rate of return of the fund as determined by the annual actuarial report for each year that the contribution remained withdrawn from the fund, compounded annually from the date the sum was withdrawn or lump-sum distribution was made to the date of repayment. The time which a covered firefighter is absent from covered employment shall not be deemed to be reinstated by the repayment of prior contributions. 
(c)  If the covered employment of a covered firefighter employee is terminated by the employee's death and the employee is not entitled to plan benefits as provided in section 18-109(b), the contributions of the employee to this plan and any amounts contributed to this plan and picked up by the city under Code Section 414(h) for the deceased employee shall be refunded or distributed, upon request, to the estate of the deceased employee. Interest on the contributions or distributions so refunded shall be calculated as above. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-113. - Benefits not assignable or subject to execution. 
The benefits payable from the firefighters' retirement fund shall not be assignable or subject to counter-claim, recoupment or set off. Except for qualified domestic relations orders, benefits payable from the firefighters' retirement fund shall not be subject to assessment, garnishment, execution, injunction, or any other decree, order, process or proceeding in any court for the payment of any debt of any beneficiary, and the sum shall be held and distributed solely for the purpose of this division. This provision shall not prevent the fire retirement board from pursuing a retiree or other beneficiary of the firefighters' retirement plan for recovery of benefits erroneously paid or to recover benefits paid due to fraud, duress or the concealment of any material fact necessary to properly process a claim for benefits. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-114. - Miscalculation of benefits, payment of interest on under or overpayment. 
Whenever a miscalculation of benefits due a retiree or beneficiary which results in an underpayment is discovered, interest on the underpayment shall be paid to the retiree or beneficiary at a rate equal to the annual investment rate of return on the firefighters' retirement fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of the underpayment. Whenever an overpayment is discovered, the retiree or beneficiary shall repay the amount erroneously paid in excess of the benefit due him plus interest for the time of overpayment equal to the annual investment rate of return on the fund as determined by the annual actuarial statement for each year of overpayment. If the amount of overpayment and interest thereon is greater than one (1) monthly benefit payment, repayment shall be made to the fund by deduction from the monthly retirement benefit a single life monthly annuity which has been determined from the value of the amount of overpayment and interest thereon using the mortality tables and accepted actuarial standards. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-115. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits any employee would otherwise receive under the firefighters' retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-116. - Compensation limits. 
The annual compensation of each covered firefighter employee taken into account under the firefighters' retirement plan shall not exceed the compensation limits of Section 401(a)(17) of the Code, as adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 18-117. - Direct transfer of eligible rollover distributions; rollover notice. 
(a)  To the extent required by section 401(a)(31) of the Code, if the distributee of an eligible rollover distribution from this plan (1) elects to have all or any portion of such distribution paid directly to one individual retirement account or annuity (an "IRA") or other eligible retirement plan (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(E) of the Code, including effective January 1, 2008 a Roth IRA as described in section 408A of the Code provided that a direct rollover under section 18-55 of this Code meets the requirements of section 408A(e) of the Code), and (2) specifies such IRA or plan on such form. at such time and subject to such permissible restrictions as the employer may specify, such distribution or elected portion thereof shall be made in the form of a direct rollover to such IRA or plan, in accordance with and subject to the conditions and limitations of section 401(a)(31) and related provisions of the Code. 
(1)  "Distributee" means a participant, a beneficiary (if the surviving spouse of a participant), or an "alternate payee" (as defined in section 414(p)(8) of the Code) (if the surviving spouse of a participant under a "qualified domestic relations order" (as defined in section 414(p) of the Code)). The term "distributee" includes a non-spouse beneficiary of a deceased participant. provided the distributee elects a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan which is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code. 
(2)  "Eligible rollover distribution" means a distribution of any portion of the balance credited to the benefit of a participant which is not one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments made over (1) a specified period of ten years or more, or (2) the life expectancy of the distributee, to the extent that it constitutes an eligible rollover distribution (within the meaning of section 401(a)(31)(D) of the Code). 
(b)  In the case of any mandatory distribution made on or after March 28, 2005, if the vested balance of the distributee's benefit is greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and less than or equal to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and if the distributee does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with section 18-55 of this Code, then the employer will pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the employer. 
(c)  The plan administrator shall give covered firefighter employees an understandable written explanation of rollover rules within a reasonable period before making an eligible rollover distribution. 
(Ord. No. 21455, § 1, 9-17-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 23040 , § 1, 12-19-16)  
Chapter 19 - PERSONNEL POLICIES, PROCEDURES, RULES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Council to adopt personnel code, § 23. 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-121 et seq.; data processing department, § 2-191 et seq.; finance department, § 2-206 et seq.; arts commission, § 2-231 et seq.; Boone County Community Services Advisory Commission, § 2-326 et seq.; environment and energy commission, § 2-346 et seq.; youth advisory commission, § 2-361 et seq.; office of community services, § 2-436 et seq.; special business district board, § 2-436 et seq.; purchasing, § 2-456 et seq.; fire department, § 9-36 et seq.; human relations, Ch. 12; parks and recreation department, § 17-26 et seq.; pensions, Ch. 18; planning department, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Authority. 
These policies, procedures, rules, and regulations are established pursuant to and in conformance with authority granted to the city council by the citizens of the city pursuant to section 23 of the City Charter. 
(Code 1964, § 22.010)  
Sec. 19-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules is the formulation of sound personnel policies designed to promote efficiency and economy, reward merit, provide for the impartial settlement of grievances, develop and maintain morale, and establish equitable non-discriminatory standards for the classification and compensation of city employees. 
(Code 1964, § 22.020)  
Sec. 19-3. - Intent. 
The provisions of these policies and procedures shall not be inconsistent with, but complementary to, related state and federal legislation. Provisions which may become invalid due to subsequent passage or interpretations of related legislation or court rulings shall be modified through appropriate proceedings without harm to the remaining provisions. 
(Code 1964, § 22.030)  
Sec. 19-4. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Classification. A grouping of city positions which are substantially alike in duties and responsibilities and which require substantially the same qualifications. 
Classified employee. An employee occupying a classified position. 
Classified position. A position in the classified service. 
Classified service. All government offices and positions (full- and part-time) not specifically placed in exempt or unclassified service by these policies and procedures. 
Complaints. A written document filed: 
(a)  By the affected employee regarding any inequitable, unsafe, or malicious imposition upon an employee by a person associated with city government that alleges any violation of the terms and provisions of the existing personnel procedures; or 
(b)  By the affected employee regarding a dispute regarding the meaning, interpretation or application of personnel procedures; or 
(c)  By the affected collective bargaining group regarding a dispute regarding the meaning, interpretation or application of a collective bargaining agreement. 
Complaint does not include any disciplinary action or the review of a job performance. 
Confidential employee. Any public employee who works with or has access to information subject to use by the public employer in negotiating or who works in a close continuing relationship/capacity with public officers or representatives associated with negotiating on behalf of the employer. 
Curtailment of work. A situation in which the need for the employee's services are no longer required because the city no longer performs the function to which the employee was assigned, to the degree that the same number of employees are needed. 
Disciplinary review. A review requested by the employee of written discipline submitted to the human resources department other than suspension without pay, dismissal or disciplinary demotion. 
Domestic partner. A person who has resided together with an employee for at least six (6) months and each intend for the person to continue to reside with the employee and to share the common necessities of life. Domestic partners must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, mentally competent to contract, and not related by blood to the employee closer than would bar marriage in the State of Missouri. Neither the employee nor the domestic partner may be married to any person. 
Exempt service. Officers, appointments and positions of the city that are exempt from the provisions of this chapter unless specifically provided otherwise. The following are in the exempt service: city council members; city manager; municipal judge; city clerk; members of boards and commissions, and committees; volunteer and other personnel who serve without pay; medical director; and consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service. 
Grievance. Any dispute regarding any discipline involving suspension without pay, dismissal or disciplinary demotion. 
Lack of funds. A situation in which the city is forced to drop positions because it does not have the funds to pay the salaries of the incumbent employees. 
Overtime rate. The overtime rate is the rate of pay equal to one and one-half times the regular rate of pay. 
Pay status. An employee is in pay status when the employee is on duty or on an authorized paid leave and not on leave without pay. 
Permanent employees. A permanent appointment is one made to a position created without intent of limitation, and intended to exist for at least one budget year. A permanent appointment may be for a full-time position or a part-time position. In order to be considered a permanent appointment, a part-time position shall be specifically planned, approved and budgeted for a minimum of one thousand forty (1,040) hours per year. 
Personnel procedures. Ordinance requirements under chapter 19; city manager's administrative rules issued under section 19-27; departmental rules issued under section 19-22 and applicable to the employee or the collective bargaining unit recognized under section 19-25. 
Position. A unit of duties and responsibilities to be carried out by one employee, normally on a full work-year basis. 
Probationary period. The period of time (either six (6), twelve (12) or eighteen (18) months as established in section 19-192) following initial placement in a city position, and regarded as an integral part of the examination process and which shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to the position, and for replacing any employee whose performance does not meet the required work standards. An employee who has not successfully completed a probationary period and/or extension thereof shall not have access to grievance or appeal privileges. 
Protected category. Race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, receipt of governmental assistance, alienage or citizenship status, status as a victim of sexual or domestic violence, or order of protection status as these terms are defined in section 12-32 of this code, and any other protected category recognized under federal, state or local law. For purposes of this definition, sex discrimination shall include, but not be limited to, discrimination because of or on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions. For purposes of Chapter 19, protected category also includes creed, age, and political affiliation. 
Qualifying period. The period of time (either six (6), twelve (12) or eighteen (18) months as established in section 19-192) following transfer or promotion from one classification to another within city service, subsequent to the completion of a probationary period, shall be regarded as an integral part of the examination process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a transferred or promoted employee to the position, and for replacing any employee whose performance does not meet the required work standards. An employee who has completed a probationary period and is serving a qualifying period shall have grievance/complaint appeal privileges except in matters relating to the employee's status in the position in which the employee is serving the qualifying period. 
Supervisory employee. Any individual having the authority in the interest of the employer to hire, transfer, suspend, promote, discharge, assign, reward or discipline other public employees, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such actions, if in connection with the foregoing, exercise of such authority is not merely of a routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment. 
Temporary employees. Those individuals retained by the city on a limited, indefinite basis with the intention of limiting their total number of hours worked as provided in this chapter. 
Unclassified employee. An employee occupying an unclassified position. 
Unclassified position. A position in the unclassified service. 
Unclassified service. The following offices and positions are in the unclassified service: All department heads; all assistant department heads; deputy city manager; assistant city manager; assistant to city manager; deputy city counselor; prosecutor; assistant city counselor; internal auditor; sustainability manager; civic relations officer; deputy fire chief; assistant fire chief; assistant police chief; deputy city clerk; city management fellowship; trust administrator; cultural affairs manager; municipal court administrator; deputy court administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 22.110; Ord. No. 12386, § 1, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15035, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 15958, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17074, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 18887, § 1, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20258, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 20327, § 1, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21264, § 1, 3-5-12; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21580, § 1, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22166, § 1, 8-4-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22949 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23170 , § 1, 4-17-17; Ord. No. 23185 , § 1, 5-15-17; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23390 , § 1, 11-20-17; Ord. No. 23391 , § 1, 11-20-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2  
Secs. 19-5—19-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-21. - Responsibility. 
Administration and implementation of these provisions shall be the responsibility of the city manager as delegated to a suitably trained, experienced, and educated professional in the field of personnel/employee management whose duties and responsibilities shall be the administration and implementation of these policies, the refinement and improvement of these policies, coordination/administration of activities related to these policies (labor/management relations, safety, benefits, performance) and such other activities as required by the city manager. The individual carrying these responsibilities and hereinafter referred to as the director, shall have the title of director of human resources, and shall be in charge of personnel operations. 
(Code 1964, § 22.310; Ord. No. 14984, § 1, 9-16-96)  
Sec. 19-22. - Department rules and regulations. 
(a)  Department heads may establish department rules and regulations only by following the procedures established in this section. Department rules and regulations must be consistent with the City Charter, city ordinances and city manager policies, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Department directors wishing to establish rules and regulations shall submit the proposed rule or regulation to the director. The director shall recommend adoption or rejection to the city manager. The manager may adopt the rule or regulation as submitted, adopt it after making modifications, or reject it. The city manager may unilaterally change or eliminate any department rule or regulation. The director shall maintain the official copy of all department rules and regulations. 
(c)  The director may propose to the manager that any department rule or regulation be eliminated or rewritten as an ordinance, city manager policy or administrative rule. 
(d)  Any rule or regulation that is in conflict with the City Charter, city ordinances or city manager policies or administrative rules is void. Any rule or regulation that has not been adopted following the procedures of this section is void. 
(e)  Any rule or regulation that is in effect on December 18, 2011 shall remain in effect for six (6) months unless it is revoked sooner. The city manager may extend the effective period of any such rule or regulation for up to an additional six (6) months. 
(Code 1964, § 22.320; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 21193, § 1, 12-19-11)  
Sec. 19-23. - Personnel advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment; composition; chair, compensation. The council shall appoint a personnel advisory board composed of seven (7) members who shall designate one (1) member as chair. Two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the council to serve in the absence of, or disqualification of, the regular members. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Qualifications; oath. Members of the personnel advisory board shall be residents and qualified registered voters of the city, shall hold no other lucrative public office nor lucrative position in city government during their terms, and shall be appointed to staggered three (3) year terms of office. They shall be required to take the oath prescribed for city officers, including a statement therein that they are fully supportive of a merit, affirmative action, equal opportunity, fair and impartial system for employee management. Members of the board shall have, by virtue of their total background, significant, substantive knowledge of social, legislative, political, and administrative factors affecting personnel management and employee relations; and shall in their deliberations and recommendations consider the best interest of effective, efficient services to the public as well as consistent, equitable application of those rules, policies, procedures and regulations. 
(c)  Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the board shall be to: 
(1)  Advise the council, the city manager and the director at least once each year concerning its findings, opinions, various conclusions and recommendations on: the status of the personnel system including the city's affirmative action plan in terms of effectiveness and current state of affairs, desirable goals for improvement, identifiable problems and remedial recommendations and their activities as a board of the council. 
(2)  Review, comment on, and advise the director concerning changes in personnel policies. 
(3)  Hear appeals from corrective/disciplinary actions against city employees which result in disciplinary demotion, suspension, or dismissal of an individual. 
(4)  Perform such other adjudicatory/advisory duties with reference to personnel/employee relations management as the council may require or the city manager may request. 
(d)  Members to serve until successors selected; actions require majority note, quorum; meetings. Members of the board shall serve until such time as a successor is selected by the city council. Five (5) board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All actions of the board must be approved by a simple majority of those present at a meeting. Meetings shall be held at the request of the director or the chairperson. 
(e)  The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the board to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 22.330; Ord. No. 9993, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 11957, § 1, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 21481, § 1, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 19-24. - Applicability. 
All offices and positions of the city are hereby divided into the exempt, unclassified, and classified service. The provisions presented in this chapter shall apply only to the classified and unclassified service unless specifically provided otherwise. Except as is specially provided by charter, employees in the unclassified service serve at the pleasure of the city manager and may be removed without cause. 
(Code 1964, § 22.340; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 19-25. - Employee relations. 
(a)  This section applies to employee relations with classified public safety employees only. For purposes of this section, "public safety employees" means persons trained or authorized by law or rule to render emergency medical assistance or treatment, including, but not limited to, firefighters, ambulance attendants, attendant drivers, emergency medical technicians, emergency medical technician paramedics, dispatchers, registered nurses and physicians, and persons who are vested with the power of arrest for criminal code violations including, but not limited to police officers. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to recommend to the city council (following certified elections or other assurances of interest deemed appropriate by the city manager and not inconsistent with state law) recognition of appropriate representative units of employees with a mutually acceptable community of interest for the purpose of collective bargaining over salaries, terms and conditions of employment and other subjects mutually agreed upon as proper subjects for such discussions. 
(c)  The city manager shall designate representatives of the city to collectively bargain in accordance with Missouri law with employee group representatives. City management representatives shall request to negotiate with employee group representatives on proposed ordinance modifications to chapter 19 or the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements for the purpose of discussing proposals before a public vote of the city council. 
(d)  The city council, as a council or as individuals, shall not, in any manner, engage in any form of collective bargaining with employees, employee groups, or employee representatives; and the city council shall issue instructions on labor relations matters and working agreement provisions only to the city manager, and the city manager shall keep the council informed of all developments and potential impacts in a timely manner. The representative(s) of any recognized employee group may provide no more than one (1) public comment per month at any regular session of the city council in accordance with the city council's resolution allowing public comment. City staff and employee groups shall not otherwise publicly comment on the negotiations during the pendency of the negotiations unless done through a joint statement that has been agreed to in writing in advance of issuance by either party. 
(e)  The following timetable is established as a guideline for the collective bargaining process. It is not intended to limit the right of employee groups to present proposals to the city relative to salaries and other conditions of employment. Neither is it intended to establish absolute deadlines for subsections (1) through (3). Subsections (4), (5) and (6) must be requested timely and after completion of the preceding section. Untimely requests made under subsections (4), (5) or (6) shall be scheduled the following year in the appropriate month unless both employee representatives and management agree otherwise. 
(1)  January. Representatives of the various employee groups may prepare written summaries of their goals and objectives for the collective bargaining process. If an employee group desires to make a presentation to the city council related to goals and objectives for the collective bargaining process, the summaries shall be submitted to the city management representatives no later than December 15th. At a work session scheduled prior to a regular city council meeting in January, the various employee groups shall be given the opportunity to make oral presentations to the council. The city council shall establish policy guidelines to be followed by the city's representatives during the collective bargaining process. 
(2)  February. Representatives of the various employee groups and city management representatives shall prepare written proposals for revisions to ordinances or existing collective bargaining agreements. Proposed changes shall be provided to the other party by the first day of February each year, or, for a multiyear collective bargaining agreement, the first day of February in the year the collective bargaining agreement expires. 
(3)  February and March. Discussion sessions for non-economic issues shall proceed, with a goal of concluding discussions on non-economic issues by March 31st. 
(4)  April—June. Discussion sessions for economic issues and any remaining non-economic issues shall proceed with the goal to conclude discussions for the year on or before June 21st. After April 1 and before May 1, any employee group dissatisfied with the progress of the collective bargaining sessions may present their views directly to the city council at a work session meeting. The council shall meet at least once with the employee group requesting the opportunity of presenting directly to the city council. 
(5)  June. On or before June 1, the city's representatives or any employee group dissatisfied with the progress of the collective bargaining process may request the services of a mediator from the federal mediation and conciliation service or any other mediator mutually agreed upon by the employee group and the city's representative. The mediation shall be attended by the city manager or the city manager's designee who shall have the authority to make decisions on behalf of the city manager. The cost of any such mediation shall be borne equally by the employee group and the city. If the mediator concludes that the parties have negotiated to impasse, either party may ask that the mediator render a non-binding opinion for a proposed resolution of the issues still in dispute. The mediator has the authority to render such an opinion if the negotiations are at an impasse, the requesting party has negotiated in good faith and the mediator believes the rendering of an opinion may aid in the resolution of the dispute. The decision of whether to render an opinion is within the unreviewable discretion of the mediator, who is not required to provide an opinion. If rendered, the opinion must provide the recommended outcome and mediator's rationale for the recommended outcome. The mediation will be confidential, and before proceeding with mediation, both parties must agree in writing that any information produced in the mediation, other than the terms of an agreement but including the mediator's recommendation and rationale, will not be used for any purpose outside the mediation, including subsequent litigation or proceedings relating to the labor negotiations. 
(Code 1964, § 22.350; Ord. 12597, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21193, § 1, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-25.1. - Employee relations—Employees other than public safety employees. 
(a)  This section applies to employee relations with all classified city employees except "public safety employees" as defined in section 19-25(a). 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to recommend to the city council (following certified elections held in accordance with state law or other assurances of interest deemed appropriate by the city manager and consistent with state law) recognition of appropriate representative units of employees with a mutually acceptable community of interest for the purpose of collective bargaining over salaries, terms and conditions of employment and other subjects mutually agreed upon as proper subjects for such discussions. 
(c)  The city manager shall designate representatives of the city to collectively bargain in accordance with Missouri law with employee group representatives. City management representatives shall request to negotiate with employee group representatives on proposed ordinance modifications to chapter 19 or the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements for the purpose of discussing proposals before a public vote of the city council. 
(d)  The city council, as a council or as individuals, shall not, in any manner, engage in any form of collective bargaining with employees, employee groups, or employee representatives; and the city council shall issue instructions on labor relations matters and working agreement provisions only to the city manager, and the city manager shall keep the council informed of all developments and potential impacts in a timely manner. The representative(s) of any recognized employee group may provide no more than one public comment per month at any regular session of city council in accordance with the city council's resolution allowing public comment. City staff and employee groups shall not otherwise publicly comment on the negotiations during the pendency of the negotiations unless done through a joint statement that has been agreed to in writing in advance of issuance by either party. 
(e)  The following timetable is established as a guideline for the collective bargaining process. It is not intended to establish absolute deadlines for subsections (1) through (3). Subsections (4), (5) and (6) must be requested timely and after completion of the preceding section. Untimely requests made under subsections (4), (5) or (6) shall be scheduled the following year in the appropriate month unless both employee representatives and management agree otherwise. 
(1)  Any employee group that wants to participate in the collective bargaining process regarding the next fiscal year must have an existing certification that will be in effect on January 1st of the current fiscal year and through the remainder of the current fiscal year. 
(2)  If the labor organization is required by state law to be certified or recertified in the current fiscal year, the employee group must be certified or recertified no later than January 1st of the current fiscal year to participate in the collective bargaining process for the next fiscal year. The city management representatives and the representatives of the employee group shall meet and begin the collective bargaining process within eight weeks of such certification or recertification, as required by RSMo § 105.580.1, and all other discussions beyond the initial meeting shall be held in accordance with this section. If certification occurs after January 1st of the current fiscal year, the initial meeting shall initiate the discussions to be completed in the next fiscal year. 
(3)  January. Representatives of the various employee groups may prepare written summaries of their goals and objectives for the collective bargaining process. If an employee group desires to make a presentation to the city council related to goals and objectives for the collective bargaining process, the summaries shall be submitted to the city management representatives no later than December 15th. At a work session scheduled prior to a regular city council meeting in January, the various employee groups shall be given the opportunity to make oral presentations to the council. The city council shall establish policy guidelines to be followed by the city's representatives during the collective bargaining process. 
(4)  February. Representatives of the various employee groups and city management representatives shall prepare written proposals for revisions to ordinances or existing collective bargaining agreements. Proposed changes shall be provided to the other party by the first day of February each year, or, for a multiyear collective bargaining agreement, the first day of February in the year the collective bargaining agreement expires. 
(5)  February and March. Discussion sessions for non-economic issues shall proceed, with a goal of concluding discussions on non-economic issues by March 31st. 
(6)  April—June. Discussion sessions for economic issues and any remaining non-economic issues shall proceed with a goal to conclude discussions for the year on or before June 21st. After April 1 and before May 1, any employee group dissatisfied with the progress of the collective bargaining sessions may present their views directly to the city council at a work session meeting. The council shall meet at least once with the employee group requesting the opportunity of presenting its views directly to the city council. 
(7)  June. On or before June 1, the city's representatives or any employee group dissatisfied with the progress of the collective bargaining sessions may request the services of a mediator from the federal mediation and conciliation service or any other mediator mutually agreed upon by the employee group and the city's representative. The mediation shall be attended by the city manager or the city manager's designee who shall have the authority to make decisions on behalf of the city manager. The cost of any such mediation shall be borne equally by the employee group and the city. If the mediator concludes that the parties have negotiated to impasse, either party may ask that the mediator render a non-binding opinion for a proposed resolution of the issues still in dispute. The mediator has the authority to render such an opinion if the negotiations are at an impasse, the requesting party has negotiated in good faith and the mediator believes the rendering of an opinion may aid in the resolution of the dispute. The decision of whether to render an opinion is within the unreviewable discretion of the mediator, who is not required to provide an opinion. If rendered, the opinion must provide the recommended outcome and mediator's rationale for the recommended outcome. The mediation will be confidential, and before proceeding with mediation, both parties must agree in writing that any information produced in the mediation, other than the terms of an agreement but including the mediator's recommendation and rationale, will not be used for any purpose outside the mediation, including subsequent litigation or proceedings relating to the labor negotiations. 
(f)  Any collective bargaining agreement reached in the meet-and-confer process shall contain all terms required by RSMo § 105.585. 
(g)  Prior to any tentative agreement being presented to the members of an employee group for ratification, such tentative agreement shall be discussed in detail in a public meeting. Any such tentative agreement shall be published on the city's website at least five business days prior to the public meeting. During such public meeting, the public shall be permitted to provide comment on the tentative agreement. 
(h)  Before any proposed agreement or memorandum of understanding is presented to a city council, the employee group, as a condition of its presentation, shall establish that it has been ratified by a majority of its members. 
(i)  The city council may approve the entire agreement or any part thereof. If the city council rejects any portion of the agreement, the city council may return any rejected portion of the agreement to the city management representatives and the employee bargaining group for further bargaining, adopt a replacement provision of its own design, or state that no provision covering the topic in question shall be adopted. Any agreement reached between the city management representatives and the employee bargaining group shall not be binding on the public body or labor organization until the completion of all bargaining under this section, the ratification of agreement by labor group employees, approval by the city council and execution of the agreement by representatives of the city and the labor group who have authority to legally bind their respective organization. 
(j)  The term of any agreement, provision of an agreement, or extension of an agreement entered into after August 28, 2018, shall not exceed a period of three (3) years. Any modification, extension, renewal, or change whatsoever to a labor agreement in effect as of August 28, 2018, shall be considered a new labor agreement for purposes of this section. 
(k)  In the event of the decertification of a labor organization as the exclusive bargaining representative of the public employees in any bargaining unit or failure to recertify a labor organization, all terms and conditions of employment existing at the time of decertification or failure to recertify may be changed in accordance with applicable city process. 
(l)  No employee shall be compensated for time spent participating in the meet-and-confer process or preparing for the meet-and-confer process on behalf of a labor organization, except to the extent the employee uses leave as provided by chapter 19, article V of this Code or as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-26. - Reserved management rights. 
Specific areas of responsibility shall be reserved to management if the public service mission of the city is to function effectively and if rules and regulations are to be administered fairly, consistently, equitably and without discrimination. The management of the city shall: 
(1)  Determine the nature, scope, and definition of the city organization including: classification, selection, number, retention, promotion, reorganization, transfer, deployment, assignment, lay-off, recall and scheduling of employees; 
(2)  Determine the methods, means, tools and equipment and personnel by which operations are to be conducted, including the right to contract and subcontract existing and future work; 
(3)  Direct employees; 
(4)  Discipline, suspend, demote, and/or discharge employees in accordance with the ordinances of the city; 
(5)  Require as a part of normal employee development, and in order to attain at least the minimal skills required of the classification, and in order to aid in the professionalization and general upgrading of the department, that employees take appropriate related training either on or off duty, in order to fulfill the responsibility of the position; 
(6)  Take the necessary measures to maintain optimum productivity in operations; 
(7)  Determine the necessity for and assignment of overtime in compliance with appropriate related legislation and/or court rulings; 
(8)  Determine the scope, priority, and amount of budget allocations; 
(9)  Determine eligibility for employee participation in employee representative unit activities in terms of the following exclusions: supervisory, confidential, or temporary employees, or those employees lacking community of interest with the general orientation of recognized representative unit activities, and where such community of interest may conflict with aforementioned management responsibilities ((1) through (8) above). This provision shall not serve to prevent supervisory employees from participating in representative unit activities as a separate unit with their own respective community of interest. 
(Code 1964, § 22.360; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-27. - Administrative personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall promulgate and establish administrative personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations including, but not limited to, the subjects in subsections (a) through (g) below. The city manager may unilaterally change or eliminate any policy, procedure, rule or regulation. The director shall maintain the official copy of all city manager rules and regulations. 
(a)  Additional terms and conditions of work: 
(1)  Hours of work; 
(2)  Maximum hours worked; 
(3)  Mandatory overtime; 
(4)  Schedule changes; 
(5)  Clean-up time; 
(6)  Multiple job assignments; 
(7)  Undercover special assignments; 
(8)  Outside employment; 
(9)  Service interchangeability; 
(10)  Pay period; 
(11)  Premium pay; 
(12)  Part-time employee salary rates; 
(13)  Seniority; 
(14)  Leave use; 
(15)  Performance evaluations; 
(16)  Personnel records; 
(17)  Use of city vehicles, accidents and parking; 
(18)  Efficient operation suggestion policy; 
(19)  Credit Union; 
(20)  Nepotism/relatives in the workplace; 
(21)  Employee assistance program. 
(b)  Conduct in the workplace: 
(1)  Attitude cordiality; 
(2)  Harassment; 
(3)  Tardiness; 
(4)  Unacceptable sick leave use; 
(5)  Political action; 
(6)  Smoking, refreshments; 
(7)  Dress, hygiene, grooming; 
(8)  Identification badges; 
(9)  Personal effects; 
(10)  Long distance phone calls; 
(11)  Cash drawers and petty cash funds. 
(c)  Drug or alcohol use. 
(d)  P.C. and network computer policy. 
(e)  Web policies. 
(f)  Official travel expenses. 
(g)  Safety. 
(Code 1964, § 22.370; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21193, § 1, 12-19-11)  
Sec. 19-28. - Job descriptions. 
The director shall establish and maintain comprehensive, up-to-date job descriptions for active classifications, and each description shall include: minimum qualifications; desirable knowledge, skills, and abilities; examples of work; and related information as needed and determined by the director. 
(Code 1964, § 22.380)  
Sec. 19-29. - Aide/trainee positions. 
Aide/trainee positions may be established as needed by the city manager specifically for the purpose of assisting socially and/or economically disadvantaged individuals in qualifying for possible subsequent competitive merit appointment to a permanent city position. Such aide/trainee appointments shall be exempt from the city's merit system provisions; shall not exceed six (6) months per individual; shall be established, as practicable, to facilitate EEO affirmative action goals; shall not over-extend departmental operating budgets; and shall be administered by the director. 
(Code 1964, § 22.390)  
Secs. 19-30—19-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-36. - False statements, etc. 
No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment held or made under the personnel provisions of the charter or ordinances of the city, or in any manner commit fraud preventing the impartial execution of such personnel provisions or of the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(1))  
Sec. 19-37. - Candidacy for public office. 
An employee of the city shall be placed on leave of absence under the provisions of this chapter after filing a declaration of candidacy for any public office. An employee, upon election to any public office, shall immediately resign the employee's position with the city as required by law. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(2); Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-38. - Payments, gifts, etc., in connection with appointments and promotions. 
No person seeking appointment to or promotion with the city shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or on account of or in connection with his/her test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(3))  
Sec. 19-39. - Political activities. 
(a)  Appointive officers or employees shall not engage in any political activity while on duty or in uniform or otherwise use equipment or resources of the city. Political activity shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Soliciting anything of value to the campaign funds of any candidate for any office; 
(2)  Soliciting contributions for any political office, cause or party; 
(3)  Coercing or dissuading or attempting to coerce, command, advise or dissuade a city officer or employee to or from giving, lending or contributing anything of value for political purposes; and 
(4)  Any other support or opposition for any political office, cause, or party. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the exercise of the rights of appointive officers or employees from engaging in any political activity while off duty and not in uniform, being a candidate for elected or appointed public office, or holding such office unless such political activity or candidacy is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, or as citizens to express their opinions and to cast their votes. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(4), (7); Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-40. - Council and commission member actions; permitted and prohibited. 
(a)  Neither the council nor any of the members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the city manager or any subordinates, nor in any way interfere with the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service to the city. 
(b)  Except for the purpose of inquiry, or as otherwise provided for in the charter, the council, its members, and members of city boards and commissions shall expedite their responsibilities with the aid of appropriate administrative officers who shall be assigned such commission duties as deemed appropriate by the city manager. Neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(5), (6))  
Sec. 19-41. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall have any interest in any contract or sale to the city of any land, materials, or supplies, or services where said interest is in violation of the laws or constitution of the State of Missouri or ordinances of the City of Columbia. 
(b)  No person shall be entitled to hold any office or employment with the city who is in arrears for any city obligation (taxes, court orders, parking tickets, traffic citations, etc.). 
(c)  A city employee shall not engage in any business, activity, or transaction and shall not have a substantial financial or personal interest, direct or indirect, which might reasonably be expected to interfere with the proper discharge of the employee's official duties, or which would impair the employee's independence of judgment or action in the public interest, or would impair the employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of the employee's official duties. This standard shall apply to an employee's personal and outside activities including outside employment, investments, property holdings, financial interests and source of income. Furthermore, this standard shall apply to an employee's actions in the performance of the employee's official duties including the acceptance of gifts and favors and the inspection or regulation of properties or activities in which the employee has an interest and would prohibit an employee from disclosing confidential information, receiving or making ex parte communications relating to official actions, or granting any improper favors, services, promises or things of value, in the performance of the employee's official duties. 
(Code 1964, § 22.210(8)—(10); Ord. No. 21701, § 2, 5-20-13)  
Sec. 19-42. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate, or conspire to violate, any provisions of the rules set out in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereon shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  Any council member, board or commission member, violating the prohibitions set forth in section 19-40, shall forfeit his/her office. 
(c)  Any violation of the prohibitions set forth in section 19-41(a) shall render the contract or sale void, and any officer or employee so violating the section shall thereby forfeit his office or employment. 
(Code 1964, § 22.220)  
Secs. 19-43—19-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15958, § 2, adopted April 19, 1999, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 19-51—19-59 and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 22.410—22.490. 
 
Sec. 19-51. - Classification plan. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt a classification plan which shall consist of a listing of all permanent employee positions grouped in classifications with pay grades. 
(b)  Classifications in the same pay grade are not necessarily equal in organizational status, difficulty, risk or required hours of work. 
(c)  The city manager may establish classifications for temporary employees. 
(Ord. No. 15958, § 2, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 19-52. - Annual budget. 
The annual budget shall establish the permanent positions authorized for each department. An employee shall not be hired, transferred or promoted to a permanent position unless the position is authorized in the budget. The city council, by ordinance, may amend the budget to change the number and classification of authorized personnel. 
(Ord. No. 15958, § 2, 4-19-99)  
Sec. 19-53. - Classification reviews. 
(a)  All permanent city positions will be reviewed for appropriate classification on a schedule to be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  Reorganization, classification reassignment, and new classification requests will be reviewed by the director on an annual basis, normally during preparation of the annual budget. 
(c)  Classification reassignment recommendations shall normally be considered by the city manager during preparation of the annual budget. The city manager shall not reassign the classification of a permanent position unless the city council has provided for the reassignment in the authorized personnel section of the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 15958, § 2, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Secs. 19-54—19-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-71. - Minimum and maximum pay ranges. 
The minimum and maximum pay ranges of permanent employees shall be established by the city council by ordinance as a part of the annual budget process. The pay ranges once established by ordinance shall be in force and effect for the applicable fiscal year and thereafter until altered by ordinance of the city council. The pay ranges established by the council may include educational incentives as the council deems appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 22.530; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Secs. 19-72—19-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PAY PLAN 
 
Sec. 19-81. - Description. 
(a)  Generally. The city manager shall present to the city council a uniform and equitable pay plan which shall consist of the minimum and maximum rates of pay for each classification in the classification plan. In arriving at salary rates, consideration will be given to the maintenance of salary grades of the classifications in the city service in a correct relationship to one another, to prevailing rates for comparable work in other public employment and private business, the current cost of living, the suggestions of the department head, responsibilities of the position, and the policy of the city council. 
(b)  Compensation level for supervisors. Supervisors shall be paid at a higher base salary rate (excluding overtime and other special considerations) than their subordinates, except as unusual circumstances may justify otherwise, with written approval of the director. If, because of differences in length of service, a supervisor is paid a rate of pay equal to or lower than one or more of the supervisor's duly assigned subordinates, the supervisor shall be advanced to a level within the pay grade for the supervisor's class which will provide a rate of pay higher than any subordinate, regardless of the supervisor's length of service. 
(c)  Compensation of temporary employees. Temporary employees shall be employed within pay ranges established by the city manager. Temporary employees are eligible for pay adjustments within the established pay ranges as allowed by the department head. 
(d)  Temporary trainee classes. The director, with the approval of the city manager, may establish temporary trainee classes and rates of pay (renewable six (6) month terms). An individual appointed to a trainee classification will be required to develop the necessary skills, knowledge and abilities for appointment to a permanent position by the conclusion of the individually arranged training program. 
(e)  Limited service compensation. An employee, who suffers a notable decrease in ability to perform normal assignments may, upon recommendation of the director, and approval (or requirement) of the city manager, be transferred to a limited service status in the same or other department. The extent to which the employee is able and needed to perform useful work, as determined by the department head and director, shall be the governing factor in determining the salary to be paid. An employee on such assignment may utilize appropriate leave accruals in conjunction with time worked in order to achieve a full paycheck. 
(Code 1964, § 22.510; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-82. - New appointees. 
(a)  Generally, the initial wage for a permanent classified employee shall be set between the minimum and the midpoint of the pay grade for the classification. 
(b)  Beginning salaries for employees shall not be set at a rate greater than the salaries of existing employees with equivalent qualifications within the same classification. 
(c)  All salary offers shall be approved by the director prior to offering employment. 
(d)  A higher initial wage may be approved by the director in unusual circumstances, such as when market conditions prohibit hiring within the assigned pay grade and/or the current pay or pay grade of employees does not stimulate upward career movement or when the new employee exceeds the minimum qualifications for the position. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(1); Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-83. - Amendments to maximum salaries. 
Amendments to maximum salaries in the pay plan may be recommended by the city manager when changes in responsibility or work of classes, living costs, recruiting experience, prevailing rates of pay, the city's financial condition and policies, or other pertinent conditions warrant such action. The city manager shall submit such recommendations to the council for approval. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(1))  
Sec. 19-84. - Promotions, reassignments, market adjustments, transfers and demotions. 
(a)  Promotion. When an employee is promoted, the employee's base rate of pay shall be increased by ten (10) percent or the minimum of the new pay grade, whichever is greater. A supervisory employee promotion shall receive a one-time pay adjustment that is five (5) percent greater than the highest paid subordinate's base pay. 
(b)  Upward reassignment. When an employee's position is reassigned to a classification in a higher pay grade, the employee's base rate of pay shall be increased by five (5) percent or the minimum of the new pay grade, whichever is greater. A supervisory employee reassignment shall receive a one-time pay adjustment that is five (5) percent greater than the highest paid subordinate's base pay. 
(c)  Downward reassignment. When an employee's position is reassigned to a classification in a lower pay grade, the employee's base rate of pay shall not be lowered. If, after reassignment, the employee's base rate of pay is higher than the maximum for the pay grade, the employee's base rate of pay shall remain unchanged and shall not be increased before the maximum for the pay grade is increased to exceed the employee's base rate of pay. 
(d)  Market adjustments. The director generally, as part of the budget process, will compare current employee pay levels to the market and make recommendations to the city manager. 
(e)  Transfers. When an employee is transferred to another position in the same pay grade, the employee shall not be eligible for a pay increase. 
(f)  Demotions. When an employee is demoted to a previously held position, the employee's rate of pay shall be lowered to the original rate of pay of the previously held position. Any across the board or performance increases received after leaving the previously held position shall be adjusted based on the rate of pay for the original position. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(3); Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-85. - Pay schedules. 
(a)  The pay of permanent city employees shall be on the basis of established schedules of salaries for their respective classifications. An allocated salary rate may consist of an entrance rate, intermediate rates, and a maximum rate or a flat rate depending on the nature of the needs of the classification as established by the city manager. The salary rates prescribed are based on full-time employment at normal working hours for the respective classes. The salaries of over-time exempt positions are fixed according to responsibilities to be fulfilled and are not based on a fixed number of hours of work per week and shall not be adjusted with variations in work schedules. All permanent classified employees shall be paid within the salary range prescribed in the pay plan for their respective job classification subject to the provisions of section 19-84. The minimum and maximum salaries established for a particular classification shall be changed by city council action only. 
(b)  All salary transactions shall be effective at the start of a new pay period unless specifically approved by the director. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(4)(A); Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21828, § 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-86. - Step-up pay; multiple positions. 
(a)  Step-up pay. When a permanent or temporary employee other than a fire department emergency service employee, is required to assume the full responsibilities of a higher level budgeted position for at least one-half (½) shift of at least four (4) hours, the employee shall be paid five (5) percent above the employee's present base rate while so assigned. Employees who work overtime while in a stepped-up position shall receive overtime pay based on the stepped up rate of pay. 
Step-up assignments for employees, other than fire department emergency service employees, shall be approved in writing by the department head and will specify the position to be filled, the circumstances which make the assignment necessary and the starting date of the assignment. Step-up assignments shall not exceed thirty (30) work days or shifts, unless recommended by the department head and approved by the director, at which time the department head shall request a permanent reassignment or appointment of the stepped-up employee to an acting position. 
Fire department emergency service employees may be assigned to step-up pay pursuant to procedures established by the fire chief and approved by the city manager. Clerical and administrative employees working for the fire department on a forty-hour basis shall be subject to the same step-up rules as other city employees. Fire department emergency service employees required to assume the full responsibilities of any higher level rank of employee shall be paid five (5) percent above the employee's present base rate while so assigned. The step-up pay rate of pay shall apply only for that time actually worked in the higher level classification. 
An employee shall be eligible for step-up pay only if fully qualified for the higher level assignment (as determined by proficiency examination or by the judgment of the duly authorized supervisor, considering such characteristics as the individual's training, experience, education, reliability, and total work performance record). "Fully qualified" means the individual is capable of performing the tasks without any closer supervision than is normally required of the position. 
Step-up pay shall not be used to avoid requesting reclassification, to reward employees for outstanding service, or any purpose other than filling an existing position temporarily vacant or as specially authorized by the department head. 
(b)  Policy against employment in multiple positions; exceptions. It shall be the policy, insofar as possible, to employ individuals in not more than one (1) permanent position at one (1) time. Exceptions to this provision must have the written approval of the director and the city manager. (See administrative rules for further clarification.) 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(4)(B)(1)—(4); Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 14984, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 20789, § 1, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-87. - Performance pay increases. 
(a)  Advancement to a higher salary rate within an established salary range shall be called a performance pay increase. The annual performance evaluation shall be used to determine eligibility for performance pay increases. A permanent classified employee may be eligible for performance pay increases until the established maximum salary for the classification has been reached. 
(b)  The department head shall submit the annual performance evaluation of the employee on appropriate forms to the director in advance of the established deadline to allow time for review and consideration. 
(c)  Performance pay shall be based upon exceptional performance of duties expected of the position as documented in the annual performance evaluation. 
(d)  Required performance evaluations (as prescribed by the city manager for a given classification) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Overtime eligible employees, other than police officers, firefighters and airport safety officers, shall serve a six (6) month probationary or qualifying period. Overtime eligible employees, other than police officers, firefighters, and airport safety officers, shall receive performance evaluations at completion of probationary and qualifying periods, on the next scheduled annual evaluation period after completion of the probationary/qualifying period, then annually thereafter. Performance pay increase eligibility begins with the first annual performance evaluation following the completion of the probationary/qualifying period. 
(2)  Overtime exempt employees shall serve a twelve (12) month probationary or qualifying period. Overtime exempt employees shall receive performance evaluations at mid-point and completion of probationary/qualifying periods, on the next scheduled annual evaluation period after completion of the probationary/qualifying period, and then annually thereafter. Performance pay increase eligibility begins with the first annual performance evaluation following the completion of the probationary/qualifying period. 
(3)  Police officers shall serve an eighteen (18) month probationary or qualifying period. Police officers shall receive performance evaluations one (1) year from the date of hire, completion of the probationary/qualifying period, six (6) months following completion of the probationary/qualifying period, and then annually thereafter. Performance pay increase eligibility begins with the first performance evaluation following the completion of the probationary/qualifying period. 
(4)  Firefighters, and airport safety officers shall serve an eighteen (18) month probationary or qualifying period. Firefighters and airport safety officers shall receive performance evaluations every six (6) months during the eighteen (18) month probationary/qualifying period, six (6) months following the completion of the probationary/qualifying period, and then annually thereafter. Performance pay increase eligibility begins with the first performance evaluation following completion of the probationary/qualifying period. 
(e)  Service requirements for advancement within pay ranges and for other purposes as specified in these regulations shall have the implication of continuous service, which means employment in the city service without break or interruption, such as resignation, leave without pay for more than two (2) calendar weeks, unauthorized leave and so forth. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520(5)(a)—(e); Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22299, § 1, 12-1-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-88. - Additional payments. 
(a)  The city manager may authorize the establishment of employee incentive programs based generally on the following set of criteria and subject to available funding from the city's procurement card rebate program: 
(1)  Department level incentive program. The city manager may authorize department heads to provide additional compensation to employees in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) based on one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Supports one of the city's core competencies—Full service city, excellent customer service, opportunities for citizens involvement and strong financial management; 
b.  Provides exceptional Customer Service that supports the City of Columbia Service Standards—Responsive, professional, helpful, knowledgeable and friendly; 
c.  Action aligns with the outcome objectives of the city's strategic plan and/or department's goals; 
d.  Models one or more of the city's six (6) Core Values—Service, communication, continuous improvement, integrity, teamwork and stewardship; 
e.  Utilizes Plan Do Study Act (PDSA) as a tool for continuous improvement. 
Funds available for this program shall be allocated at the beginning of the fiscal year to a city-wide pool. No employee shall receive more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) from the employee's own department under this program in any fiscal year. Department heads may award incentive payments to employees of other departments of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per individual. Department heads should monitor the awards and ensure the reason for the additional compensation is documented. 
Based on the same criteria listed above and subject to availability of funds, the city manager is authorized to provide additional compensation to employees. These payments are separate from annual department allocations. 
(2)  Major cost savings incentive program. This program is designed specifically for actions or suggestions that provide a major cost savings to the city. Department heads will forward nominees to a committee, established by the city manager, which will make the recommendations to the city manager for approval. The city manager shall establish guidelines for payment amounts based on the level of savings and fiscal impact. Documentation is required to justify the cost savings and employees are eligible for a maximum of one (1) payment per year not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without the approval of the city council. 
(3)  The city manager may establish award programs to encourage job safety and to acknowledge length of city service or other remuneration incentives for effective and productive work and similar considerations. 
(Code 1964, § 22.520; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21555, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 23403 , § 1, 12-4-17)  
Sec. 19-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22234, § 1, adopted September 15, 2014 , repealed § 19-89, which pertained to awards programs and derived from Ord. No. 13532, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10.  
Sec. 19-90. - Pay plan beneficiary designation. 
To the extent authorized by Chapter 461 RSMo, an employee may designate a beneficiary to receive pay for work or accrued leaves due the employee upon the employee's death while still employed by the city subject to the following rules: 
(1)  The employee must make the beneficiary designation in writing, signed and dated by the employee, witnessed by an employee designated by the director. The director is authorized to create forms for the designation, revocation or change of beneficiary. 
(2)  The employee may only designate one (1) beneficiary but may change or revoke that designation at any time in writing, witnessed as above. 
(3)  The beneficiary must be a natural person at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the designation. 
(4)  If a beneficiary is disqualified as being too young or shall predecease the employee, the designation shall be revoked and the final pay check from the city shall be paid to the decedent's estate. If the beneficiary does not survive the employee by more than twenty-four (24) hours, the beneficiary shall be deemed to have predeceased the employee. 
(5)  Except as set out in these rules, the designation of a beneficiary, including the designation of a spouse as beneficiary, shall not be automatically terminated or revoked. 
(6)  The amount due the beneficiary under this section may be reduced by amounts owed the city by the employee and any amounts lawfully garnished or owed in taxes, social security or otherwise authorized as deductions from pay by the decedent. 
(Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 19-91—19-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL 
 
Sec. 19-95. - Mutual aid emergency pay. 
(a)  Mutual aid emergency pay. 
(1)  Whenever the city manager either requests the emergency assistance of others under a mutual aid agreement or authorizes city employees to provide emergency assistance to others under a mutual aid agreement, overtime eligible city utility employees working in response to the emergency shall be paid mutual aid emergency pay as described in subsection (a)(2). The city manager shall determine when the period for receiving mutual aid emergency pay begins and when it ends. 
(2)  For every twenty-four-hour period during which an overtime eligible city utility employee works in response to the emergency, the employee shall, at minimum, be paid at the employee's overtime rate for sixteen (16) hours and at the employee's regular rate of pay for eight (8) hours; in the event the entity receiving aid has prevailing wage obligations that require reimbursement for rates of pay that exceed those provided in this section, the city manager may accept reimbursement at the higher rate and pay employees working in response to the emergency at the rate that is reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 20595, § 1, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 21920, § 1, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 23294 , § 1, 9-5-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-96. - Overtime. 
(a)  Positions eligible for overtime pay shall be designated on the classification plan and the pay plan. 
(b)  Work periods for city employees are defined as follows: 
(1)  Through 7:00 a.m. February 20, 2020, fire department shift employees shall work a twenty-seven-day work period (fifty-six (56) hours per week average) and shall be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of two hundred four (204) hours during the work period. Beginning 7:00 a.m. February 20, 2020, fire department shift employees may work an eighteen-day work period (fifty-six (56) hours per week average) and be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of one hundred thirty-six (136) hours during the work period if so provided by an agreement between the City of Columbia and the recognized employee group representatives for the fire department shift employees. The eighteen (18) day work period may be implemented for no more than two (2) years, except that a transition period may be established by the director. At the conclusion of the two (2) year period, or such shorter time as is established by the terms of the agreement, fire department shift employees shall return to the twenty-seven (27) day work period established by this paragraph, with the transition to the twenty-seven (27) day work period (fifty-six (56) hours per week average) being completed at the earliest practical date as determined by the director. Upon returning to a twenty-seven (27) day work period (fifty-six (56) hours per week average), fire department shift employees shall be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of two hundred four (204) hours during the work period. 
(2)  Police officers and sergeants shall work a fourteen-day work period and shall be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of eighty (80) hours during the work period. 
(3)  Airport fire/safety officers shall work a fourteen-day work period and shall be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of eighty (80) hours during the work period. 
(4)  All other overtime eligible employees shall work a seven-day work period beginning at seven on Sunday morning and shall be paid at the overtime rate (or compensatory time in accordance with FLSA standards) for all hours in pay status in excess of forty (40) hours during the work period; except, however, the city manager may establish work periods beginning on a different day and time. 
(c)  Overtime work shall be kept to a minimum, and in order to be considered as overtime, the work and the time of doing it must have been assigned by the employee's department head or duly authorized supervisor. Supervisors may limit or alter the scheduled hours of overtime eligible employees in order to avoid or limit the accrual of overtime by overtime eligible employees. 
(d)  The positions of those city employees and officials excepted from the payment of overtime: 
(1)  Shall be noted in the classification and pay plan and shall generally include administrative, professional and supervisory positions. 
(2)  Shall have salary ranges based on all services rendered and the realization that the employee will not be separately compensated for overtime. 
(e)  Employees in positions not eligible for overtime pay: 
(1)  Shall not be specifically compensated for overtime in either money or compensatory time. 
(2)  Shall be expected to average at least forty (40) hours per week. 
(3)  May have their contributions to the development and accomplishment of departmental goals evaluated in terms of total performance, output, effectiveness, and achievement rather than on adherence to set specific working hours. 
(4)  Shall, at the discretion of the department head, not be held rigidly to the established city schedule of leave accumulation and usage. Time absent from work and deviations from the official work hours of the employee's department must be with the approval of the employee's department head who shall have the responsibility for evaluating the employee's performance and justifying permitted deviations from established hours of work and earned leaves. 
(f)  The city does not make deductions from the salaries of overtime exempt employees because of variations in the quality or quantity of work performed. Rather, unsatisfactory quantities or quality of work are addressed through regular performance management methods including the evaluation and discipline processes. The city also does not make deductions from overtime exempt employees' salaries for any of the following: 
(1)  Absences of less than a full workweek occasioned by the city; 
(2)  Absences of less than a full workweek caused by jury duty, or attendance as a witness in a judicial proceeding, or due to temporary military leave (although the city may offset against the regular salary any amount paid as jury, witness or military pay); and 
(3)  Approved partial day absences for personal reasons. 
Based on principles of public accountability which require that employees not be paid for time not worked, deductions from an overtime exempt employee's salary will be made in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Full-day and unapproved partial day absences for personal reasons other than sickness or disability; 
(2)  Full-day and partial day absences caused by sickness or disability if the employee is not yet eligible for paid leave or paid leave has been exhausted under the city's sick leave or other policies providing pay for those absences; 
(3)  Hours taken as unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); 
(4)  Disciplinary suspensions of one (1) or more full days for infractions of written workplace conduct rules; 
(5)  All disciplinary suspensions for infractions of safety rules of major significance; and 
(6)  Where an overtime exempt employee works less than a full workweek in the initial or final week of employment or due to a budget-required furlough (overtime exempt employees who work less than forty (40) hours during their first or last week of employment or due to a furlough will be paid a proportionate part of their full salary for the time actually worked). 
(g)  Any overtime exempt employee whose salary has been subject to improper deductions should promptly report the problem to the director. Any improper deductions will be reimbursed, and there will be no retaliation against any employee. 
(h)  Overtime assignments will be distributed as equally as practicable among members of each overtime equalization unit. Such overtime equalization units shall consist of the qualified employees in a job classification or employee work group. No employee will be given an overtime assignment unless he is qualified to perform it. The department head or supervisor shall maintain a roster showing the overtime hours worked by employees in each overtime equalization unit, or work group. If an employee refuses an overtime assignment he will be credited, for purposes of overtime equalization, with the number of hours refused. 
(i)  Overtime eligible police officers shall be paid at the overtime rate for court appearances and emergency call-outs that occur during scheduled time off only if they are entitled to overtime pay under subsection (b). 
(Code 1964, § 22.610; Ord. No. 10733, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 12386, § 2, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-97. - Standby/on-call provisions. 
(a)  A department head or duly authorized supervisor shall prepare a roster of permanent employees assigned to standby duty. Employees shall receive, insofar as possible, a month's notice, and assignments shall be posted on accessible bulletin boards. Emergency employees such as police and fire may be excluded from this provision pursuant to departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  All personnel assigned to standby shall be instructed that they must be easily reached, capable, sober and ready to work at any time during their standby period. This condition shall be a mandatory part of the assignment. 
(c)  No employee on standby duty is expected to attempt any procedure which the employee considers unsafe within requirements of the operation. If additional help is required to perform a job, the employee shall follow specified department procedures. Safety equipment and procedures shall be used as during regular working hours. 
(d)  Standby duty normally shall be one (1) week in duration, rotated among qualified employees. An employee shall be removed from standby duty if deemed incapable due to illness, or other sanctioned, cleared emergency as determined by the duly authorized supervisor; and remunerated on a daily basis. A permanent employee must have been in pay status during the normal working day in order to be eligible for the daily fifteen dollars ($15.00) standby remuneration, except on weekends or normally scheduled days off. If an employee requests sick leave during a part or whole day standby duty is assigned, it shall be up to the supervisor to determine whether or not the employee should be allowed to remain on standby, taking into account all circumstances pertinent to the matter. 
(e)  Employees designated by the city manager or department head may be provided with beepers or cellular telephones so that they may be reached in the event of an emergency. Unless such employees are specifically told that they are in on-call status or are instructed as set out in subsection (b) above they are not on standby or on-call status and are not entitled to additional compensation. 
(f)  A permanent employee on standby shall receive standby compensation of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day except that an employee on standby during the permanent employee's scheduled day off shall receive standby compensation of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day. A permanent employee on standby during a recognized city holiday shall receive an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for being on standby on such a day. 
(Code 1964, § 22.615; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 10314, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 13112, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 15947, § 1, 4-3-99; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-98. - Minimum call-in compensation. 
(a)  Employees in positions eligible for overtime pay who have left their normal place of work for their residence or elsewhere and have completed at least one (1) full, normal shift of work (time on the job) and who are called back to work shall be credited a minimum of three (3) hours pay for the first occurrence of call-back. If more than one (1) call is received, the employee shall continue to earn pay in addition to the first three-hour minimum. In all cases, the minimum call-in of three (3) hours shall be counted as hours worked, and the standard overtime pay provisions shall apply. Only one (1) minimum three-hour call-in allowance shall be provided per day. Call-in time shall start when the call is made and employees shall be subject to minimum response times established by classification or department. An employee actually working more than three (3) hours shall not receive any special travel-time pay. Minimum call-in compensation shall not be allowed during normal shift hours, breaks or meal periods. 
(b)  Employees who report for snow removal work within one (1) hour after being contacted will receive "reporting time" payment equal to one-quarter hour of pay. 
(Code 1964, § 22.620; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20595, § 2, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-99. - Temporary assignment pay and educational incentives. 
(a)  Temporary assignment pay. Employees in the following temporary assignments are eligible for assignment pay or reimbursement as follows: 
(1)  Police field training officers shall be paid five (5) percent above the employee's present base rate only for the hours while so assigned. All police field training officers shall be qualified for the temporary assignment (as determined by proficiency examination or by the judgment of the department head, considering such characteristics as the individual's training, experience, education, reliability and total work performance record). The assignment may be ended at any time. 
(2)  Commercial Drivers License (CDL) examiners. Certified CDL examiners shall be paid two and one-half (2.5) percent above the employee's present base rate while serving as an examiner for the city. Any certified CDL examiner designated to serve as examiner coordinator of the city's third party examiner program shall be paid an additional two and one-half (2.5) percent while serving as the examiner coordinator. These assignments may be ended at any time. 
(b)  Educational incentives. All educational incentives that affect employee pay shall be approved in advance by the City manager and director. The following have been approved: 
(1)  The fire chief, contingent upon appropriate budgetary allocations, may pay fire department emergency service employees two and one-half (2.5) percent above the employee's present base rate of pay as long as the employee is a certified paramedic meeting all the requirements of the fire chief. 
(2)  The Public Works Director, contingent upon appropriate budgetary allocations, may pay designated permanent classified employees assigned to the Street Division an additional fifty cents ($0.50) per hour above the employee's base rate as long as the employee has a Commercial Driver's License and a Hazardous Materials Endorsement. 
(3)  The City Utilities Director, contingent upon appropriate budgetary allocations, may pay permanent employees in the CDL Operator classification, assigned to Water Distribution, an additional seventy-five cents ($0.75) per hour above the employee's base rate as long as the employee has a Water Distribution System Operator III Certification. 
( Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22234, § 1, adopted September 15, 2014 , repealed the former Section 19-99, and enacted a new Section 19-99 as set out herein. The former Section 19-99 pertained to show-up time and derived from § 22.625 of the 1964 Code; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11.  
Sec. 19-100. - Meal allowance; job site meal compensation. 
(a)  Eligible fire department employees on a fifty-six-hour week schedule shall be allowed fourteen dollars ($14.00) per day for meal reimbursements for days actually worked. Eligible airport fire/safety officers on a sixteen-hour shift assignment shall be allowed nine dollars and thirty-three cents ($9.33) per day for meal allowance for days actually worked. 
(b)  Except as otherwise indicated, an overtime eligible employee shall be allowed an allowance of eleven dollars ($11.00) for a meal after having worked a continuous two (2) hours in excess of the employee's regular shift of at least eight (8) hours without time off for meals. An additional meal allowance of eleven dollars ($11.00) will be allowed for every five (5) consecutive hours worked thereafter. Individuals on continuous sixteen- or twenty-four-hour shift assignments shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Code 1964, § 22.630; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 13113, § 1, 9-29-91; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 14716 § 1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 14984, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22166, § 1, 8-4-14 ; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-101. - Shift differential. 
(a)  Beginning with the pay period on August 17, 2014, all overtime eligible city employees, except temporary employees and employees on twenty-four (24) hour service shifts, shall be paid a shift differential for all hours worked between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of sixty-five cents ($0.65) per hour. 
(Code 1964, § 22.635; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 10514, § 1, 4-1-85; Ord. No. 13114, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14984, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 21285, § 1, 4-2-12; Ord. No. 22166, § 1, 8-4-14)  
Sec. 19-102. - Severance pay. 
(a)  A classified employee who is discharged shall be paid severance pay in addition to other entitlement; provided that termination is due to one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Reduction in force; 
(2)  Inability to perform duties for the reason of age or poor health, except retirement by reason of reaching the mandatory retirement age; or 
(3)  General incompetence or inefficiency; provided, the employee has been cooperative and has made a sincere effort to perform satisfactorily (as recommended and documented by the department head). 
(b)  A classified employee discharged for such reasons as gross incompetence, insubordination, willful neglect or abuse of duties and/or authority, committing an illegal act, deliberate disregard of regulations or other reasons of a similar nature shall not be entitled to severance pay. 
(c)  Any classified employee who resigns shall not be entitled to severance pay. 
(d)  Those eligible to receive severance pay shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule: 
Length of Service 	Amount of Pay (Weeks) 
Less than one (1) year ..... 	None 
One (1) year to five (5) years ..... 	2 
Five (5) years to ten (10) years ..... 	4 
Over ten (10) years ..... 	8 
 
(e)  Unclassified employees shall not be eligible for severance pay provisions. 
(f)  In addition to, or in lieu of, the foregoing, the city manager, in the manager's sole discretion and on a case by case basis, may provide separation pay to classified employees equivalent to eight (8) weeks pay and separation pay to unclassified employees of up to three (3) months salary. 
(Code 1964, § 22.640; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-103. - Professional dues and licensing fees. 
(a)  The city shall pay the job-related professional organization dues of permanent city employees when approved by their department head. 
(b)  The city shall pay fees for professional and other licenses required by permanent employee job descriptions other than basic drivers licenses. Such payments made by the city shall be deducted from an employee's last pay check if the employee leaves the city service within six (6) months after the payment was made. 
(c)  The city's public works department shall pay the fee for any permanent employee to obtain a commercial driver's license (CDL) to work snow removal for the public works department. 
(Code 1964, § 22.645; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 21156, § 1, 11-21-11)  
Sec. 19-104. - Tools. 
(a)  Tools. Department heads may at their discretion (provided funds are budgeted for this purpose) establish departmental policies providing and/or replacing professional tools of a trade used specifically for city operations, depending on the need of the operations in the best interest of efficient, effective work. 
(Code 1964, § 22.650; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 10733, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 13817, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-105. - Employee development—Generally. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for development incentive programs an employee must be eligible for the city's full benefit package pursuant to relevant provisions of the rules and regulations set out in this chapter and be a permanent full-time employee in a regularly budgeted position, having completed at least one (1) full year of service and a probationary period successfully. An employee's total performance record shall be considered in determinations of eligibility and desirability for participating in these incentive programs. 
(b)  Individual departments may establish, with the aid of the human resources department, employee development programs in terms of specific needs of their operations. These development programs may consist of in-service training, seminars, short courses, lectures, reading materials, formal course work, films, tapes and so forth. Funds for programs shall be appropriated in the departmental budget, and remain effective within the limit of allocation of funds for this purpose. Implementation of development programs shall be within the purview of the EEO affirmative action program. 
(c)  The purpose of employee development programs is to promote professionalism in all areas of city employment with the ultimate goal of upgrading the working scope, ability, and total effectiveness of city employees, thereby improving productivity, efficiency, and economy of operations. Such training programs shall be considered as a benefit to those individuals interested in continued employment with the city; and approval of an individual's participation shall be relative to the employee's present or probable future city position and relative worth of such activity to the city organization (as determined by the department head and the director). 
(d)  Where applicable (police and fire operations specifically) educational incentive and tuition reimbursement programs shall be considered as temporary, interim steps toward a more valid proficiency evaluation of relative worth of employee services. Once the desired, increased capability and educational level of current employees has been developed, new employees will be placed requiring the same higher level of competence, thereby perpetuating quality service and eventually phasing out of formalized incentive education/training oriented programs. Monetary incentives added to an employee salary shall be recommended by the director and approved by the city manager as set forth in this Code. 
(e)  Employees may be allowed time off from work to attend approved formal classes or training sessions; provided, the employee makes up the hours in full, on the job, in a meaningful, responsible work assignment; and such absence does not impose additional expense to the department in terms of overtime pay or burden on other employees, as determined by the department head. 
(f)  Attendance at training sessions of any type shall be on the employee's own time unless such attendance is required by the department head, and under no circumstances shall class/training time and associated travel time be considered as time on the job for overtime eligibility or extra pay unless specifically designated so eligible by the department head. Participation in development programs shall be considered a mutually rewarding situation, with an employee's commitment of interest, job dedication, and personal sacrifice being inherent, required elements for eligibility to participate. 
(Code 1964, § 22.655(l)(A)—(F); Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-106. - Cost reimbursement. 
(a)  Employees required to attend special training-development on city time by the department head shall be reimbursed in full for course and travel costs. Basic training, enabling the employee to meet the primary responsibility level of a position may be required at any time in the course of the employee's service. Employees may, if their performance is less than acceptable for their classification, be required by their department head to complete relevant training on their own time and at their own expense in order to maintain further employment in their present capacity. 
(b)  Reimbursement for cost of eligible formal college credit course work taken on the employee's own time shall be: 
(1)  Limited to tuition expenses only, and not books, transportation, meals, lodging, activity, or any special fees; 
(2)  Limited in participation to annual budgetary allotments for this purpose; 
(3)  Limited to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or the cost of the course(s), whichever is less, per full-time permanent employee, per fiscal year (part-time permanent employees are limited to pro-rated reimbursement); 
(4)  Limited to those courses passed with a grade of "C" or better, or "passed" if on an ungraded basis; 
(5)  Approved for full or part payment by the director prior to enrollment in the course, with reimbursement by the city being made subsequent to presentation of official documentation of successful completion and receipt of cost for the course. 
(c)  Employees shall be required to sign an agreement to reimburse the city for tuition costs if the employee leaves permanent city employment within twenty-four (24) months following completion of reimbursed coursework. 
(d)  Costs incurred by the city shall be deducted from an employee's check if: 
(1)  General conditions in subsection (b) of this section are not met; or 
(2)  The employee leaves the city service within twenty-four (24) months subsequent to completion of the course. 
(e)  After October 1, 1978, employees receiving aid for educational/training endeavors from military programs, scholarships, or any other similar assistance shall not be eligible for tuition reimbursement from the city to the extent aid is received from military programs, scholarships, or similar assistance for such time as other aid is being received. 
(Code 1964, § 22.655; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19) 
Cross reference— Educational leave, § 19-125.  
Sec. 19-107. - Uniform clothing allowance and personal protective equipment. 
(a)  Employees required to wear uniform clothing, specifically those individuals readily visible to the general public, will be provided with such clothing allocations as deemed appropriate by the department head. If allocations are provided, the employee shall be required to wear the uniform clothing, to maintain the garments in a clean and maintained fashion, and to return the full allocation of garments upon separation from city service (or be docked the fair value of missing articles from the final paycheck). The city shall replace uniform clothing damaged through natural wear on the job, but not due to negligence by the employee. The employee shall wear uniform clothing only en route to and from work and while on duty, and police and fire personnel shall be subject to specific departmental policies concerning clothing allotments and/or allowances. Uniformed police officers will have uniforms dry cleaned at city expense within limits of the annual department budget allocation for such purpose. Upon the expiration of available funds, the individual employee will be responsible for dry cleaning of the uniforms. Rules and procedures for dry cleaning of uniforms by the city may be established by the police chief, and when established must be followed by the employee. Classified commissioned police assigned to plain clothes operations, as specified and defined by the police chief, shall be eligible to receive additional compensation of nine hundred sixteen dollars ($916.00) per fiscal year to purchase the required clothes. The compensation shall be paid on the second payroll check of each quarter in the amount of two hundred twenty-nine dollars ($229.00). To be eligible to receive a quarterly compensation payment, the employee must be employed on the first day of the quarter. If the employee is employed by the city after the first day of the quarter, the employee will receive the compensation beginning with the subsequent quarter. 
(b)  An employee required to wear standard dark blue denim jeans on the job shall be eligible to receive additional compensation in the amount of three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00) per fiscal year for the purchase of jeans. The compensation will be paid on the second payroll check of each quarter in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00). To be eligible to receive a quarterly jean compensation payment, the employee must be employed on the first day of the quarter. If the employee is employed by the city after the first day of the quarter, the employee will receive the compensation beginning with the subsequent quarter. 
(c)  Employees represented by Laborers' International Union of North America, Local 773 whose job duties require them to work outdoors or in unheated areas in the winter shall be eligible to receive additional compensation for the cost of winter outerwear of fifty dollars ($50.00) per fiscal year. The compensation shall be paid on the second payroll check of each quarter in the amount of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50). To be eligible to receive a quarterly winter outerwear compensation payment, the employee must be employed on the first day of the quarter. If the employee is employed by the city after the first day of the quarter, the employee will receive the compensation beginning with the subsequent quarter. 
(d)  Personal protective gear. Department heads may, at their discretion, require that employees wear safety boots and glasses which meet departmental safety standards (as defined by the department head and coordinated with the director). When additional protective footwear is required, employees shall be eligible to receive additional compensation of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per fiscal year. Department heads may likewise establish policies concerning needed eye protection. When additional protective eye protection is required, employees shall be eligible to receive additional compensation of up to a maximum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per fiscal year. The compensation shall be paid on the second payroll check of each quarter in the amount of thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for footwear and twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for eye protection. To be eligible to receive either personal protective gear compensation payment, the employee must be employed on the first day of the quarter. If the employee is employed by the city after the first day of the quarter, the employee will receive the compensation beginning with the subsequent quarter. 
(e)  If department heads elect to require any of the above equipment or clothing as a condition of employment depending on the needs of their respective operations, employees shall be subject to discipline for any failure to meet the requirements. 
(Code 1964, § 22.660; Ord. No. 10733, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 12385, § 1, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21193, § 1, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 21285, § 1, 4-2-12; Ord. No. 22166, § 1, 8-4-14 ; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 19-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22166, § 1, adopted August 4, 2014 , repealed § 19-108, which pertained to police equipment allowance and derived from § 22.661 of the 1964 Code; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 12746, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99.  
Sec. 19-108.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22234, § 1, adopted September 15, 2014 , repealed § 19-108.1, which pertained to police mounted patrol cost reimbursement and derived from Ord. No. 20594, § 1, 4-5-10.  
Sec. 19-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22166, § 1, adopted August 4, 2014 , repealed § 19-109, which pertained to flexible benefits and derived from § 22.662 of the 1964 Code; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 12416, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 12746, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97.  
Sec. 19-110. - General benefits. 
(a)  Employee health care plan. The city shall pay into the employee benefit fund four hundred ninety-six dollars and fourteen cents ($496.14) per month for the cost of medical employee health care plan coverage, and thirty-two dollars and sixty-two cents ($32.62) per month for the cost of employee dental plan coverage, for each eligible permanent employee and each eligible employee otherwise required to be covered by the city who participates in the plan. The city shall pay a portion of dependent care coverage for those eligible permanent employees who elect to purchase dependent health plan coverage under the city plan, subject to the following maximum amounts: 
Employee + Spouse ..... $592.58 
Employee + Child(ren) ..... 560.09 
Employee + Family ..... 728.70 
These payments by the city shall begin when the employee becomes an eligible employee under the health care plan and end at the date of the employee's termination of employment with the city. Employees choosing not to participate in the health care plan or dental plan or both shall not be entitled to receive the amount the city would have contributed toward the cost of such employees' health care plan and dental plan coverage. 
The city shall contribute one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per month to the health savings account of each eligible employee with single coverage under the city's high deductible health plan and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month to the health savings account of each eligible employee with single plus spouse, single plus children or full family coverage under the city's high deductible health plan. 
(b)  Life insurance. The city shall, each month pay for and on behalf of each eligible employee the entire cost of the basic term life insurance provided by the city. Payments by the city shall begin at the date of hire into a permanent position. 
(c)  Retirement systems. All permanent employees, except employees hired as full-time, regular firefighters or railroad operations employees are required to participate in the Federal Social Security System immediately upon appointment to city employment. All employees, except full-time regular firefighters, full-time regular police officers, and railroad operations employees, working one thousand five hundred (1,500) hours or more in a calendar year shall participate in the Missouri Local Government Retirement System (LAGERS). Participation in LAGERS for eligible employees begins following completion of the first six (6) months of city employment. Full-time regular firefighters and full-time regular police officers participate in the retirement plans set out in chapter 18 of this Code. Railroad operations employees are covered by the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974. 
(d)  Deferred compensation. 
(1)  Employees may participate in a group deferred compensation plan adopted by the city council. The city manager may recommend to the city council, and the council may adopt any necessary contractual agreements, and subsequent changes or modifications. This program shall be monitored by the human resources department. 
(2)  Employees shall, if interested, participate in such plan via payroll deduction of individually arranged contributions. 
(3)  The city shall contribute to the deferred compensation plan account selected by each employee covered by the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 an amount equal to nine and eight-tenths (9.8) percent of the employee's total compensation. 
(e)  Money purchase plans. Permanent employees may, at their option, participate in the City of Columbia, Missouri Money Purchase Plan, a defined contribution plan operating under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Subject to the provisions of the plan and the limitations imposed by Section 401(a)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the city will contribute to the plan trust fund on behalf of each participating employee who contributes to a group deferred compensation plan (457 plan) at the minimum rate of two dollars ($2.00) per pay period, an amount equal to the employee's contribution to the 457 plan up to a maximum of two (2) percent of the employee's compensation. Police and firefighter employees participating in the city's Police and Fire Pension Plans are not eligible to participate in the City of Columbia, Missouri Money Purchase Plan. 
(f)  Post employment health plan. The city shall make sick leave conversions to the health care insurance premium reimbursement subaccounts of each eligible employee leaving city employment if the employee has been employed by the city for ten (10) years or more, or if the employee is retiring or has previously retired pursuant to the terms of a city-sponsored retirement plan (based on either age or disability). Such sick leave conversions shall be made at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) for every hour of final accumulated sick leave. Participation in the sick leave buyback program pursuant to section 19-130(p) will reduce the number of hours converted to the post employment health plan. This subsection shall not apply to employees hired after September 30 2011. 
(g)  Long term disability insurance. Each month the city shall pay the entire cost of the long term disability insurance provided by the city for eligible permanent employees. Payments by the city shall begin at the date of hire into a permanent position. 
(Code 1964, § 22.665; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 10714, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 10733, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 10768, § 1, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 12024, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 12122, § 4, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 12417, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 12716, § 1, 8-22-90; Ord. No. 12841, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 13046, § 1, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 13135, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. 13430, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 13440, § 5, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 13487, § 11, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 13495, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 13817, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 13894, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 14660, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 14700, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 14982, § 2, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 14982, § 2, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 14985, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15035, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 15063, § 1, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 15300, § 2, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16406, § 1, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20234, § 2, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21480, § 1, 10-15-12; Ord. No. 21827, § 1, 9-16-13, eff. 1-1-14; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22301, § 1, 12-1-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22949 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 23982 , § 2, 9-3-19; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22234, § 1, adopted September 15, 2014 , repealed § 19-111, which pertained to productivity incentive compensation and derived from § 22.670 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 19-112. - Unclassified employee's benefits. 
The city manager or the manager's designee shall evaluate unclassified employees other than the city clerk and municipal judge at least annually. In making these evaluations, the city manager or the manager's designee shall consider the following: total performance; extent and finality of responsibility; diversity, difficulty and impact of the individual's work. The city manager or the manager's designee shall, based on such evaluation, determine the salary to be paid an unclassified employee, which salary shall be within established salary ranges for that employee's position. The city manager shall, in addition, have discretionary authority to make available additional fringe benefits to unclassified employees on an individual basis, which may include additional leave accrual and limits, increased insurance coverage, deferred compensation allowance, severance pay, vehicle allowance and similar fringe benefit considerations as are appropriate in the individual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-113. - Reimbursement for use of personal vehicles. 
(a)  Mileage reimbursement for those employees who are occasionally required to drive their own cars will be the current mileage reimbursement rate established by the Internal Revenue Service, subject to reporting procedures established by the city manager. 
(b)  Employees who are required to own and use their own vehicle as a condition of employment will be paid a monthly amount starting October 1, 1994, equal to their latest reported twelve-month mileage, less the mileage of one (1) daily round trip home, based on two hundred forty (240) workdays per year times the current mileage reimbursement rate established by the Internal Revenue Service per mile divided by twelve (12) months per year. The city will pay any required equipment installation, no more than one (1) time in any fiscal year. A mileage report will be kept and an annual adjustment will be made for mileage in excess of the base amount. The following year the base amount will be adjusted in accordance with the prior year's actual experience. This subsection shall not apply to any employee not using this reimbursement method on or before September 21, 2019. 
(c)  Permanent full-time classified employees who are required to own and regularly use their own vehicle in the course of their employment, may receive a vehicle allowance of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month. Such employees who drive more than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) miles per year on city business will be required to keep a daily mileage report for review by their department head. An annual adjustment will be made in those employees' monthly allowance for mileage over eight thousand four hundred (8,400) miles per year at the current mileage reimbursement rate established by the Internal Revenue Service per mile. Department heads are authorized to decide which of their employees shall fall under this policy based on the employee's position and job requirements, business necessity, frequency of required use, and availability of city vehicles for the employee's use. Department heads shall review all allowances granted in this subsection annually and verify necessity of continuing the allowance. 
(d)  Each full-time unclassified employee may receive a vehicle allowance of up to two hundred eighty-five dollars ($285.00) per month at the discretion of the city manager, based on the employee's need to use a personal vehicle in connection with the employee's job. The city manager shall receive a vehicle allowance equal to that received by the department head receiving the highest vehicle allowance. When such employees leave Boone County on city business, the city shall reimburse the employees at the current mileage reimbursement rate established by the Internal Revenue Service, for trips with total mileage of more than fifty (50) miles. 
(Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-114. - Cell phone allowance. 
(a)  In the sole determination of the department head, an employee required to own and regularly use a personal cellular telephone in the course of their employment may receive an allowance. The allowance is based on expected usage as defined below. 
(b)  The amount of the allowance is dependent on the expected business use of the personal cellular telephone, the employee's position and the employee's job responsibilities. The personal cellular telephone must be capable of receiving both text and voice calls. The allowance level allowed shall be based on the combined business usage for voice, text messaging and data transmission. 
(1)  Basic usage plan: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per month. 
(2)  Medium usage plan: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. 
(3)  High usage plan: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per month. 
(c)  Business use of a personal cellular telephone is subject to sunshine law provisions. 
(Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Secs. 19-115—19-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LEAVES 
 
Sec. 19-121. - Holidays. 
Following local and national custom in order to allow city employees to celebrate certain holidays by having a day off work without loss of pay, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Permanent employees shall be entitled to the following designated paid holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1; 
(2)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; 
(3)  Independence Day, July 4; 
(4)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September; 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; 
(6)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(b)  Permanent employees shall be entitled to a paid holiday, to honor Martin Luther King, Jr., on the third Monday in January. Permanent employees shall be entitled to a paid holiday for the day after Thanksgiving. Rather than time off, fire department shift employees shall receive additional compensation in the amount of eleven and one-quarter (11.25) hours at their regular pay for these two (2) days. All other permanent employees shall receive time off or their regular compensation in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(c)  Permanent employees, upon completion of twelve (12) continuous months of service, shall be entitled to four (4) floating holidays per fiscal year and granted on October 1st of each year. Newly hired permanent employees shall have these four (4) floating holidays prorated for the remainder of the fiscal year following their first twelve (12) continuous months of service. 
(1)  Upon leaving city service, an employee shall be reimbursed for accrued floating holidays, provided that in the case of resignation, required notice has been given. (See section 19-202.) 
(2)  An employee may accrue a maximum of ten (10) floating holidays. An employee shall receive pay at the regular rate at the end of each fiscal year for each hour of floating holiday which the employee would have accrued if the maximum accrual limit had not been established. 
(3)  Floating holiday leave must be requested at least two (2) calendar days in advance. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by an employee's supervisor. 
(4)  In order to ensure fire department constant staffing requirements are met, employees of the fire department may not take floating holiday hours unless approved, in advance, by the department head, or duly authorized representative. If a request to use floating holiday hours is denied, the employee may be paid in lieu of such leave at the regular rate of pay during the next regular pay period. This subsection shall not apply to unclassified positions or civilian employees in the fire department. 
(d)  Overtime eligible employees shall be eligible for a holiday only when they are in pay status the entire working day or shift preceding and following the holiday. 
(e)  Holiday leave shall not be combined with other leaves or other forms of paid absence to increase the compensation due when a holiday occurs. Employees shall not take compensatory time off or vacation leave on a holiday or a day that is treated as a holiday pursuant to this section. If an employee is on sick leave or injury leave on a holiday or a day treated as a holiday pursuant to this section, the employee shall not be charged with or paid for sick leave or injury leave, but rather shall be paid only for the holiday. 
(f)  It is the purpose of this section to provide overtime eligible employees with a day off work without loss of pay rather than an extra day's pay when the employee must work. Acknowledging that some employees must work on days treated as holiday, the following rules apply to overtime eligible employees: 
(1)  All non-shift employees shall take off the exact date of a designated holiday, except that if the holiday falls on Saturday employees shall take off the preceding Friday and if the holiday falls on Sunday employees shall take off the following Monday. 
(2)  When the holiday falls on any shift employee's regularly scheduled day off, the holiday shall be treated as though it had fallen on the next scheduled work day. 
(3)  Overtime eligible employees, other than fire department shift employees, whose normal job or shift does not ordinarily, but because of unique circumstances may, require a performance of duty on a holiday shall be paid eight (8) hours pay at their regular rate for the holiday plus be paid time and one-half (½) for all hours worked on the holiday. 
(4)  Overtime eligible employees, other than fire department shift employees, whose normal job or shift requires performance of work on holidays shall be paid eight (8) hours pay at their regular rate for the holiday and in addition be paid at the regular rate for all hours worked within their regular working hours. For all hours worked outside of regularly scheduled working hours, overtime rates shall apply. 
(5)  Fire department shift employees required to work on a holiday or a day treated as a holiday shall be paid for the holiday as provided for in this section and in addition be paid at the regular rate for all hours actually worked within their regular working hours. 
(Code 1964, § 22.710; Ord. No. 10733, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 11649, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 12788, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 13490, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 23012 , § 1, 11-21-16; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-122. - Leave of absence without pay. 
(a)  A leave of absence without pay is a predetermined amount of time off from work, which has been requested by the employee, recommended by the employee's department head and approved by the director. Such leave shall not extend beyond six (6) months, but may be extended with the written approval of the department head. An employee must use all accumulated eligible leave accruals before beginning a leave of absence. 
(b)  The fact that such a leave is possible does not mean that the requested leave must be granted. A leave of absence deprives the employee's department of the services of an employee, who it is assumed is needed if the department is to properly perform its services. Leaves of absence without pay, except in the case of disciplinary leaves, should be considered as a privilege, and the best interests of city service must be the determining factors in whether such leaves are granted or not. 
(c)  When an employee is granted a leave of absence without pay, the department head makes a commitment to allow the employee to return to work at the end of the leave to a position for which the employee is fully qualified at the prevailing salary for the position, provided there is a vacancy. If no vacancy exists in the department, the individual may be placed on eligibility rosters pursuant to the person's qualifications and as approved by the director. 
(d)  A mandatory leave of absence occurs after an employee files a declaration of candidacy and the leave ends when the results of the election are certified. In the case of a mandatory leave of absence, an employee shall use all accumulated eligible leave accruals and then shall be placed on unpaid leave of absence status and follow the requirements of subsections (e), (f) and (g) of this section. The department head shall allow the employee to return to work at the end of the leave of absence to a position for which the employee is fully qualified. 
(e)  If an employee's position is officially eliminated or reassigned while the employee is on such leave, the employee shall relinquish any claim to the position. 
(f)  When granted a leave of absence without pay, the employee makes a commitment to return to work at the end of the leave. Failure to contact the department head at the end of the leave shall be grounds for considering the matter as a resignation. 
(g)  During the leave of absence without pay, the employee: 
(1)  Does not receive pay from the city; 
(2)  Does not accrue any leave; 
(3)  Cannot pay retirement contributions if the leave exceeds one (1) month in duration; 
(4)  Must pay all employee's share of elected benefits; 
(5)  Shall not receive any other benefits during the period of absence; 
(6)  Shall, upon return to active duty, carry over accrued and unused sick leave earned prior to commencement of the leave without pay. 
(Code 1964, § 22.715; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-123. - Occupational injury leave. 
(a)  An employee injured while performing assigned duties shall be entitled to the provisions of the worker's compensation act. 
(b)  An employee injured on the job who draws pay in accordance with the worker's compensation act shall have related absence charged against appropriate paid leave (vacation, sick, floating holidays, etc.) on a prorated basis to offset the difference in pay between the worker's compensation payment and city pay. (See on-the-job injury procedures in the administrative rules.) 
(c)  No employee on occupational injury leave shall receive a combination of worker's compensation and paid leave in excess of regular full pay. 
(d)  Length of authorized occupational injury leave shall be determined on an individual case basis by the department head and the director, in consideration of staffing needs of the department, extent and degree of impairment, employee's eligibility for disability retirement and similar factors. 
(e)  Individuals may be eligible for leave of absence without pay provisions upon the recommendation of the department head upon expiration of paid leaves. (Note: See section 19-130(p) for police and fire injury leave provisions.) 
(Code 1964, § 22.720; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 19-124. - Compensatory time leave. 
(a)  Compensatory time shall only be granted pursuant to section 19-96. 
(b)  Compensatory time accruals shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours per individual (two hundred forty (240) hours annual accumulation/use limit for power plant utility (relief) workers and parks services workers assigned to athletic field and golf course operations), subject to further restrictions pursuant to department rule and regulations; and compensatory time accruals shall be paid upon separation, at a rate not less than: 
(1)  The average regular rate received by the employee during the last three (3) years of employment, or 
(2)  At the final regular rate received by the employee, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Employees shall be given an option of receiving paid overtime remuneration or compensatory time off. 
(d)  An employee moving from an overtime eligible position to an overtime exempt position shall be paid for all compensatory time on the books in the employee's paycheck that includes final hours worked in the overtime eligible position. 
(Code 1964, § 22.725; Ord. No. 9936, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20767, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 19-125. - Education leave. 
(a)  Individuals may be allowed time off during working hours to attend individual classes pursuant to section 19-105. 
(b)  Extended non-required educational leave shall be pursuant to section 19-122. 
(Code 1964, § 22.730)  
Sec. 19-126. - Jury and/or witness duty leave. 
(a)  Employees on jury duty shall be paid by the employer in an amount equal to the difference between the amount of wages the employee would have earned by working during straight-time hours for the employer on that day and the daily jury duty fee paid by the courts (not including traveling expenses or reimbursement of expenses), for each day on which the employee otherwise would have been scheduled for work. 
(b)  An employee shall not have deductions made from accrued leaves for the purpose of these provisions. 
(c)  Employees (except those testifying in the line of duty or testifying in a case in which they are a party) shall be granted leave with pay when required to be absent to serve as a court witness and shall be paid in an amount equal to the difference between the amount of wages the employee would have earned by working during straight-time hours for the employer on that day and the compensation received as a witness. An employee on such leaves shall return to work for the balance of the day when the employee is excused by the court from further attendance. Time spent by employees testifying in the line of duty are hours worked. 
(d)  An employee shall not be eligible for paid leave under this provision until a probationary period is successfully completed. 
(Code 1964, § 22.735; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 19-127. - Military leave; temporary training periods. 
(a)  Any employee enlisting or inducted into the Armed Forces of the United States or who as a member of a Reserve or National Guard Unit is obligated to perform military service in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days in the Armed Forces and who satisfactorily completes such service and makes application for reemployment within ninety (90) days of release from active duty shall be returned to city employment. Obligated military service of thirty-one (31) days or less requires a service member to return to work the next scheduled work day with allowances for safe travel time and eight (8) hours rest. Periods of service of thirty-one (31) to one hundred eighty (180) days duration require the employee to notify the city of intent to return to a position of employment within fourteen (14) days of release from duty. The employee shall be entitled to the same pay, status and seniority the employee would have had if the employee continued employment, except that the employee shall not accrue vacation, holiday or sick leaves during the period the employee is absent from city employment. The employee shall not be eligible for automatic reinstatement under this section if the employee reenlists in other than a Reserve component of the Armed Forces after exceeding five (5) years of cumulative qualifying service. 
(b)  Any employee who is a member of a military reserve or National Guard unit shall be entitled to leave without loss of time, pay or regular leave or any other benefits for all periods of military services in the service of the state at the call of the governor and as ordered by the adjutant general without regard to length of time, and for military services in the service of the United States for a period not to exceed a total of one hundred twenty (120) work hours in any federal fiscal year. Employees shall be entitled to full compensation (based on an hourly daily rate of eight (8) hours, not exceeding forty (40) hours in a week; or for shift fire employees based on two (2) fifty-six-hour average work weeks; and in any instance excluding overtime) for what would otherwise be normally assigned work hours during the one hundred twenty (120) work hours of military assignment. The minimum time period charged to military leave shall be one (1) hour increments. All employees must present orders to their supervisors in order to obtain paid leave. 
(c)  Any employee who is a member of a military reserve or National Guard unit who receives training in excess of one hundred twenty (120) work hours, and not at the call of the governor and in the service of the state as set out above shall be entitled to leave without pay for the duration of the training. An employee entitled to leave without pay shall not accrue any leaves while receiving military leave without pay, but shall not lose any previously accrued leaves and shall return to the same position if still in existence if leave is for less than ninety-one (91) days or another position similar in pay, seniority and status if leave exceeds ninety (90) days. While on military leave without pay for thirty-one (31) days or more, the employee shall not be covered by the city's medical benefits and may only continue family medical benefits by paying the appropriate premiums. 
(Ord. No. 12933, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 17545, § 1, 1-6-03; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12933, § 1, passed on April 1, 1991, repealed § 19-127 derived from Code 1964, § 22.740 and Ord. No. 9994, § 1, passed on November 11, 1983, and enacted a new section 19-127 as herein set out.  
Sec. 19-128. - Pregnancy/disability leave. 
(a)  Disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, and recovery therefrom are, for all job-related purposes, temporary disabilities and shall be treated as such under applicable provisions of these rules. Accrued leaves may be granted for preparation for or recovery from such situations. In addition a woman anticipating maternity may be entitled to a leave of absence. (See section 19-122.) 
(b)  All employees requesting such leave shall notify the department head significantly in advance of the anticipated date of delivery, and employees may remain on the job as long as health permits. Employees granted such leave shall present a doctor's statement concerning status of the pregnancy, limitations imposed by the individual case, and recovery therefrom. Any employee who does not report back to work by the expiration date as set forth in the leave of absence notice, or does not receive an approved extension or who accepts other employment while on leave from the city, or who withdraws retirement savings, will be considered to have terminated employment with the city. Disposition of all requests for leaves of absence and extensions thereof shall be in writing and processed through the department head. 
(c)  While a leave of absence without pay may be granted for a predetermined time to allow for prenatal necessities and postnatal child care, sick leave shall be granted only for such time as the woman is determined medically unable to complete the duties of her position by the employee's physician. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be subject to and adjusted in conformity with subsequent legislation and court rulings. 
(Code 1964, § 22.745; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 19-129. - Vacation leave. 
(a)  Vacation shall be earned and accumulated by pay periods and granted on the last day of each pay period in hourly amounts accrued according to the following charts: 
General Employees 
Length of Service 
(Years) 	Pay Period Accrual (hours) 	Maximum 
Balance (hours) 
 0—4 	3.08 	160 
 5—9 	3.85 	200 
10—14 	4.62 	240 
15—19 	5.38 	280 
20+ 	6.15 	320 
 
Fire Department 56-Hour Employees 
Length of Service 
(Years) 	Pay Period Accrual 
(hours) 	Maximum Balance 
(hours) 
 0—4 	5.54 	288 
 5—9 	5.54 plus 28 hours pay 	288 
10—14 	5.54 plus 56 hours pay 	288 
15—19 	5.54 plus 84 hours pay 	288 
20+ 	5.54 plus 112 hours pay 	288 
 
(b)  Unless approved by the department head or duly authorized representative, members of the fire department will not take more than two (2) working weeks or any additional time allotted to vacation. Instead, they will be paid in cash in lieu of such leave (this provision does not apply to unclassified positions or civilian employees in the fire department). 
(c)  In other departments all vacation time shall be taken, except that at the discretion of the department head, when in the best interest of the operations, may (on an individual and year-to-year basis) decide whether to give time off or additional pay. This provision does not allow vacation pay-out for the purpose of enhancing the employee's highest average salary prior to retirement. 
(d)  All employees shall accrue vacation leave from the date of hire into a permanent position and shall be eligible to use vacation leave after six (6) months of employment. Permanent part-time employees shall accrue leave on a prorated basis. 
(e)  Any vacation leave denied by a department head which causes an employee to lose vacation time shall be paid at the employee's current rate of pay unless the employee consents to an alternative vacation schedule that will compensate for the threatened loss of vacation time. 
(f)  Vacations will, as far as possible, be scheduled at a time desired by the employee, based on total seniority with the city; but the final right of allotment rests with the department head to ensure continuity of service. 
(g)  Vacation time cannot be taken in advance of accrual. 
(h)  Whenever separation from the city occurs prior to the completion of the first six (6) months of employment, the employee shall forfeit accrued vacation leave. Otherwise, an employee is entitled to reimbursement for unused, unexpired, accrued vacation leave; provided that, in case of resignation, required notice of such intention has been given. (See section 19-202.) For an employee to receive pay out for accruals accumulated in the last pay period, the employee must be actively employed on the date the accrual is granted. 
(i)  Temporary employees shall not be eligible for compensated vacation leave. A temporary employee who is subsequently appointed to a permanent position shall accrue vacation leave from the original date of appointment to the permanent position. 
(j)  An employee must be actually engaged in performing assigned duties or on authorized paid leave in order to accumulate vacation leave. An employee in a non-pay status such as leave of absence, shall not accumulate vacation leave for the duration of the leave. 
(k)  An employee may donate accrued vacation leave to another employee with the prior approval of the department head and verification by the director, provided that the employee receiving the donation is unable to work because of a Family and Medical Leave Act qualifying event and has exhausted all eligible accrued leaves. Each hour of donated leave shall be considered an hour of leave the employee receiving the donation has accrued and shall be accounted to the employee receiving the donation at that employee's rate of pay. Unused donated hours will be maintained in a pool to be distributed to eligible employees according to procedures established by the director. Employees may also donate accrued vacation leave to the pool in lieu of losing vacation time under the maximum accrual restrictions. 
(l)  The city manager may grant additional vacation leave to employees. The city manager may raise the maximum accrual balance of vacation of any employee for a set period of time not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Code 1964, § 22.750; Ord. No. 11105, § 1, 6-16-86; Ord. No. 11649, § 1 10-5-87; Ord. No. 13442, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15304, § 1, 8-4-97; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 19-130. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave shall be earned and accumulated by pay periods and granted on the last day of each pay period in hourly amounts accrued according to the following chart: 
	Earned per Pay Period (hours) 	Maximum Balance 
General employees 	5.54 	Unlimited 
56-hour employees 	9.23 	Unlimited 
 
(b)  Sick leave shall be granted to an employee for the following: 
(1)  Inability to perform duties because of personal sickness, injury, city job-related disability or exposure to contagious disease that could be transmitted to others on the job. 
(2)  Necessary medical, dental and optical examination and treatment, and counseling for the employee and immediate family. "Immediate family" as used in this section means the employee's spouse, child, mother, father, or other relative or member of the immediate household permanently residing under the same roof. Sick leave granted for such purposes shall not exceed the actual time necessary for examination or treatment and reasonable travel time as determined by the department head. 
(3)  Illness in the employee's immediate family if no one else is available to care for the individual involved. 
(4)  Illness in the employee's immediate family requiring in-patient care when all of the employee's eligible accruals have been exhausted such as vacation, floating holiday, compensatory time, etc. 
(5)  Birth or adoption of a child by an employee, an employee's spouse or an employee's domestic partner. Generally, the employee will be allowed up to two hundred forty (240) hours of sick leave for this purpose. 
(6)  Attending the funeral of the employee's spouse, domestic partner, child, parent, step-parent, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt or uncle, immediate in-laws, parents or step-parents, or member of the immediate household who has permanently resided under the same roof; or for providing pallbearer services (except for hire or as a public service) if the employee had such services verified and approved by the department head before the scheduled funeral. Note: Travel time for pallbearer activities shall not be granted from sick leave accruals. Generally, the employee will be allowed up to twenty-four (24) hours of sick leave per funeral. Determination of eligibility for sick leave use to attend a funeral shall be made by the department head or duly authorized supervisor, exercising reasonable discretion. 
(7)  Extreme, extenuating circumstances which threaten the health or welfare of the immediate family such as: household fire or automobile accident. Sick leave may not be used for transportation problems, home repairs, babysitting problems, or similar reasons. Determination of eligibility for sick leave use shall be made by the department head or duly authorized supervisor, exercising reasonable discretion. Additional time, if needed and approved, may be allowed from eligible accruals, or pursuant to leave of absence without pay provisions if all eligible accruals are exhausted. 
(c)  Temporary employees shall not be eligible for this benefit; and permanent part-time employees shall accrue leave on a prorated basis. 
(d)  An employee must be actually engaged in performing assigned duties or on authorized paid leave to accumulate sick leave. 
(e)  Sick leave shall accrue from the date of appointment, but may not be used until after successful completion of the first thirty (30) days of permanent employment. If an employee utilizes sick leave during the first six (6) months of employment, and leaves city service within that six (6) months, the employee's final pay will be reduced by the number of sick leave days utilized, provided final pay does not fall below minimum wage rate for hours worked. 
(f)  A department head may request that an employee be given an advance of sick leave not to exceed twenty (20) working days per calendar year, provided such employee has been a satisfactory employee of the city for a period of at least one (1) year. Requests shall be in writing and shall offer adequate justification for the request. The advancement shall be authorized by the city manager provided the employee has exhausted all eligible leave accruals and there is a reasonable chance that the employee will be able to offset the advance by future unused accruals of sick, vacation, and other authorized leaves as soon as possible. Sick leave cannot be used in advance of an employee's accrual except as provided in this subsection. 
(g)  On separation from the city's service, an employee shall not be entitled to receive reimbursement for accrued sick leave, except under the provisions of the post employment health plan. 
(h)  A temporary employee who is subsequently retained in a permanent position shall accrue sick leave from the date of appointment to the permanent position. 
(i)  Any employee who is indebted to the city for sick leave advanced but not accrued at the time of his separation shall, whenever possible, have his final pay deducted sufficiently to offset the indebtedness, provided final pay does not fall below minimum wage rate for hours worked. 
(j)  Sick leave may be used only with the permission of the employee's duly authorized supervisor. This provision shall apply to all other sections of this plan. 
(k)  Employees shall notify their supervisor that they will be unable to work before their normal work day begins, pursuant to specific departmental rules concerning deadlines for such notification. 
(l)  Use of sick leave shall be extended by the city for proper cause and concern for the employee's future welfare as a city employee; and it is not an inherent right of the employee to be absent from work. As such, identifiable misuse of sick leave shall be just cause for not extending this benefit and abuse shall be just cause for dismissal. 
(m)  Individuals injured in the course of employment with another employer shall not be eligible for use of sick leave accruals for the purpose of recovering from such situations. Employees involved in such circumstances may be eligible for leave of absence provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(n)  Except as may be provided in departmental rules and upon the approval of the city manager, employees who claim sick leave and are concurrently gainfully employed, selfemployed or otherwise, shall not be eligible for sick leave; and if they are to remain employed, must request, and have approved, a leave of absence without pay (provided that they have exhausted all eligible accruals). 
(o)  Employees working in bona fide, full-time police and fire-fighting classifications may be entitled to receive separate injury leave in addition to sick leave allocations provided the employee is injured while performing assigned duties, as herein provided: 
(1)  Injury leave may be allocated in renewable eighty-hour (or less) increments at the discretion of the city manager (seventy-two-hour increments for fire department employees); 
(2)  To be eligible for injury leave provisions, the injury must be fully documented within one (1) week of the actual occurrence pursuant to established on-the-job injury reporting requirements. Failure to abide by this time deadline shall constitute disqualification from eligibility for injury leave allocations; 
(3)  Before being eligible for injury leave, the employee must submit a timely report of his injury to the department head, if reasonably able to do so, and the department head will request injury leave allocation by the city manager, provided the department head agrees with the request by the employee. Until such time as injury leave may be allocated, the employee will use any accrued sick leave, which may or may not be refundable depending upon circumstances encountered, as determined by the city manager; 
(4)  Injury leave will be allocated (if deemed appropriate by the city manager) only for treatment and recuperation for a specific on-the-job injury, and not for incidental ailments which may be identified in the course of addressing the job related injury; 
(5)  Injury leave will be immediately revoked and repayment required through other accrued leaves in the event the employee does not provide medical status information as required by the city manager; and injury leave will likewise be revoked in the event the injury is determined to have occurred other than on the job; 
(6)  The city manager shall reserve the option to place the injured employee into a limited capacity at whatever tasks the city manager deems appropriate, taking into account the extent and nature of the disability. The individual's salary will be adjusted commensurate with the work being performed, and the difference in salary may be made up (if the assignment is lower paid) with injury leave so long as the city manager deems appropriate, at his discretion; 
(7)  Any reasonable suspicion of misuse of injury leave or questions concerning the authenticity of the injury's extent or occurrence, shall be cause for discontinuing the injury (or any other) leave, requiring repayment for any injury days allocated, and shall also be cause for disciplinary action up to and including dismissal; 
(8)  If an employee becomes eligible for disability retirement, any and all injury days or accrued sick leave days shall be canceled; 
(9)  Injury leave provisions shall not be retroactive but shall be in effect only subsequent to adoption by the city council. 
(p)  Sick leave buy back: 
(1)  Eligibility. A permanent employee who, at the end of a fiscal year, has accumulated unused sick leave equal to or in excess of the regular hours the employee normally works in a twenty-six (26) week period (for example, one thousand forty (1,040) hours for an employee on a forty-hour workweek) shall be eligible to participate in the city's sick leave buy back program for the following fiscal year. To be eligible a person must still be employed by the city on the first day of the new fiscal year. 
(2)  Buy back provisions. The city, upon the written request of an eligible employee, shall buy back up to one hundred (100) percent of the total unused sick leave accumulated by the employee during the preceding fiscal year which is in excess of the minimum required for eligibility. For each hour of sick leave bought back by the city, the employee, except for employees in classifications represented by the Columbia Police Officers Association, shall receive fifty (50) percent of the hourly rate of pay in effect at the time that the sick leave buy back check is written or, in the case of a former employee, the former employee's final rate of pay. Employees in classifications represented by the Columbia Police Officers Association shall receive twenty-five (25) percent of the hourly rate of pay in effect at the time that the sick leave buy back check is written. The employee's total accumulated sick leave time will be reduced by the number of hours of sick leave sold back to the city. 
(3)  Procedure. The deadline for eligible employees to make written requests for sick leave buy back is November 15 of each year, unless extended by the city manager. Employees shall be given at least four (4) weeks' notice of the deadline and the proper procedure for requesting sick leave buy back. For good cause, the city manager may allow an employee to make a late request for sick leave buy back. 
(4)  Police and firefighters' injury leave. For purposes of calculating the amount of sick leave which the city will buy back, the total unused sick leave accumulated by an employee during the preceding fiscal year shall be reduced by the amount of any injury leave granted to the employee by the city manager during the preceding fiscal year pursuant to subsection (o) of this section. This provision reduces the amount of sick leave which the city will buy back from an employee. It does not reduce the employee's accumulated sick leave. 
(5)  Major illness. An employee who has participated in this program and who subsequently uses all of the employee's accumulated sick leave may be granted, at the employee's request, additional leave at one-half (½) of the employee's normal rate of pay, up to the number of hours sold back to the city between October 1, 1988 and September 30, 2000, and at three-fourths (¾) of the employee's normal rate of pay on the number of hours sold back to the city between October 1, 2000 and September 30, 2009 and at one-half (½) of the employee's normal rate of pay on the number of hours sold back to the city after October 1, 2009. 
(Code 1964, § 22.755; Ord. No. 12104, § 1, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 13817, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19230, adopted Sept. 18, 2006, repealed the provisions of former § 19-131 which pertained to emergency leave. See the Code Comparative Table for ordinance history.  
Sec. 19-132. - Voting time. 
Any employee eligible and registered to vote in any election held within this state, or any primary election held in preparation for such election, shall, on the day of such election, be entitled to leave from duty (if on duty) which would allow three (3) hours of voting time between the time of opening and the time of closing the polls. This section shall not apply to a voter on the day of election if there are three (3) successive hours, while the polls are open, in which he/she is not on duty. The duly authorized supervisor may specify any three (3) hours between the time of opening and closing of the polls during which an employee may be granted voting leave. Generally, such leave shall not exceed one (1) hour of paid on-duty time for each election day. Exceptions may be arranged with the approval of the department head. Employees are required to show current, eligible voter registration cards to their supervisor prior to release for voting purposes; and no employee shall be granted time off with pay for voting who is not eligible to participate in a given election. 
(Code 1964, § 22.765)  
Sec. 19-133. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(a)  The city will follow all applicable provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). 
(b)  Domestic partners shall be treated the same as spouses in determining qualifying events under the FMLA. 
(Ord. No. 21580, § 1, 1-22-13)  
Secs. 19-134—19-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYMENT POLICIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-146. - Medical examination. 
(a)  A city employee or job applicant may, at any time, be required by the department head with the approval of the director to undergo medical examinations or some form of work capacity assessment by physicians or specialists chosen by the city's employee health medical advisor to determine the employee's fitness or continued ability to perform the essential functions of the employee's job. The city medical examination report form shall be used to record the results of the physical examination. 
(b)  The results of such examinations or assessments shall be kept by the city's employee medical advisor for use in considering the appropriate treatments, therapies and accommodations and to determine the employee's continued fitness for work. The results may also be used when discussing accommodations with the employee and to determine the employee's continued fitness for work. 
(c)  The city's employee medical advisor and wellness educators shall, during their office hours, be available to all employees for consultation and first aid treatment. 
(Ord. No. 14617, § 2, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21480, § 1, 10-15-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14617 § 2, enacted September 18, 1995, repealed § 19-146 and enacted the new provisions set out above. Former § 19-146 derived from Code 1964 § 22.1110 and Ord. No. 13488 § 1, 10-19-92.  
Secs. 19-147—19-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPOINTMENT AND FILLING OF VACANCIES 
 
Sec. 19-156. - Employment positions. 
(a)  A permanent employee position is one created and intended to exist for at least one budget year and which is budgeted for at least one thousand forty (1,040) hours. A permanent employee position may be either part-time or full-time. 
(b)  A temporary employee position is one created and intended to exist for less than one thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) hours in any calendar year. Temporary employees have no seniority, grievance, or appeal privileges. Temporary employees shall have no benefits except as required by law, provided, however, that temporary employees may quality for LAGERS retirement under the rules of the LAGERS retirement system. A temporary employee position may be either full- or part-time. 
(Ord. No. 12932, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 15035, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 19-157. - Employee placements. 
(a)  The city manager, the municipal judge, the city clerk and all classified and unclassified employees hired into permanent employee positions are entitled to all city employment benefits; however, those hired into part-time permanent positions shall be eligible for fringe benefits according to groups established by the director. 
(b)  Employees hired into temporary positions, whether full- or part-time, are not eligible for fringe benefits except as required by law and LAGERS retirement benefits as provided for in this chapter. If a temporary employee is appointed to a permanent position, a probationary period and fringe benefits will be computed from the effective date of initial appointment to the permanent position. 
(c)  The city manager may fill any employee position vacated by military leave or as a result of the induction or enlistment of a city employee into the Armed Forces of the United States by special appointment. Such special appointment shall only be effective for the duration of the absent employee's military service and shall be subject to all terms of the City Personnel Policies, Rules and Regulations. Special appointments will terminate and expire when the absent employee is released from military service and returns to city employment as required by city ordinance. Those persons with special appointments shall have no further rights to any city employment. While employed in a special appointment the employee shall have those benefits which are attendant to the position the employee fills. 
(d)  When sufficient appropriated funds are available, the city manager may hire or promote an employee to a position currently occupied by another for the purpose of training the newly hired or promoted employee; provided that no position shall be so overfilled for more than six (6) months. 
(e)  When sufficient appropriated funds are available, the city manager may hire or promote an employee to a position currently occupied by an employee on extended leave because of illness or injury. 
(f)  All city employees requiring a Commercial Driver's License (CDL), except city transit employees, to perform the duties of their position shall be subject to the rules of the Federal Highway Administration governing drug and alcohol testing (49 CFR 382). City transit employees employed to operate a revenue service vehicle, control the dispatch or movement of a revenue service vehicle, or maintain a revenue service vehicle shall be subject to the rules of the Federal Transit Administration governing drug and alcohol testing (49 CFR 655). 
(g)  All permanent employees (as well as temporary employees requiring a Commercial Driver's License to perform the duties of their position) must pass the appropriate pre-employment testing for drugs and alcohol established by administrative rules promulgated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12932, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 14208, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 22234, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12932, § 1, passed on April 1, 1991 repealed §§ 19-156 and 19-157 derived from Code 1964 §§ 22.800 and 22.805, and enacted new §§ 19-156 and 19-157 as herein set out.  
Sec. 19-158. - Acting appointments. 
When a vacancy exists in a position and the department head is not prepared to make a permanent appointment to fill the position, the department head may appoint an employee to fill the position on a temporary basis in an acting capacity. The duration of such an appointment shall be only until a permanent appointment subject to standard procedures can be made and shall not exceed six (6) months without written authorization of the city manager. The employee shall be paid at the minimum rate of pay for the position or five (5) percent more than the employee's current rate of pay, whichever is higher. The employee may be paid at a higher rate of pay with the written authorization of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 22.810; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 19-159. - Filling of positions. 
(a)  The recruitment and selection process for all classified and unclassified positions in the city service shall be coordinated by the human resources department. Applicants, regardless of protected category will be given equal consideration based on their total qualifications and background. All placement activities will be conducted in accordance with the city's equal employment opportunity affirmative action program. Department heads shall notify the human resources department as far in advance as possible of any requirements for new personnel, setting forth such information as requested by the human resources department. The director will then certify names of those best-qualified individuals to the department head for final selection. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize the chief of police to fill a budgeted police officer position by contracting with an individual to perform undercover police work. 
(1)  The hiring practices of this chapter shall not apply in filling a position under this subsection. 
(2)  The chief of police shall consider the city's affirmative action plan in filling a position under this subsection. 
(3)  An individual employed under this subsection must meet all qualifications for the position of police officer and must comply with the minimum basic training requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Employment contracts under this subsection shall be for an initial term not to exceed two (2) years and may be renewed for no more than one (1) year. 
(5)  Any individual employed under this subsection who is retained by the city shall be treated as a permanent employee under this chapter. Such an individual's probationary period shall be extended to at least one (1) year after the individual's undercover assignment is completed. 
(Code 1964, § 22.815; Ord. No. 12678, § 1, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 21206, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 23402 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-160. - Publicity. 
The director shall determine the nature and extent of publicity required to obtain a reasonable number of qualified applicants for each vacancy, consistent with the EEO affirmative action program. All positions open to general competition (non-promotional) shall be announced to the public (through standard announcement form, newspapers, and/or other mass media) for at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the last date for filing applications. Promotional vacancies, when requested by a department head shall be announced to eligible current city employees on city bulletin boards for at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the application closing date. Job announcements with "open" application submission dates must remain open at least ten (10) calendar days, and may be closed by the director when sufficient applicant response has been achieved. 
(Code 1964, § 22.820; Ord. No. 16618, § 1, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 19-161. - Applicant screening process. 
(a)  The screening process of applicants shall include one or any combination of the following as determined by the director, in consultation with the department head: 
(1)  Oral interviews; 
(2)  Evaluation of experience; 
(3)  Education and training; 
(4)  Reference checks; 
(5)  Written examinations; 
(6)  Performance evaluations; 
(7)  Medical examinations; 
(8)  Intelligence tests; 
(9)  Psychological evaluations; 
(10)  Background investigations; 
(11)  Physical agility/dexterity tests; 
(12)  Other measures as the need arises. 
(b)  Reasonable measures shall be taken by the director to establish the reliability and validity of the various screening processes. 
(Code 1964, § 22.825)  
Sec. 19-162. - Promotion of a present employee. 
(a)  If the department head is unable or unwilling to fill a vacancy from a certified list of eligible candidates, the department head shall request that a promotional examination consisting of one or more formal procedures listed in section 19-161, be held to determine more formally the best-qualified present employees who may be contenders for a position. However, for each vacancy, the department head may promote a permanent present city employee in the department who meets the following considerations: 
(1)  Meets the minimum qualifications for the classification as shown in the current announcement for that position. 
(2)  Is a current paid employee with at least a satisfactory performance work record; and has been certified as eligible for promotion by the human resources department. 
(3)  Ranks as one of the certified candidates if a promotional examination is given. 
(4)  Has requested promotion into the vacancy in question. 
(b)  Qualified individuals requesting interdepartmental promotions must compete with outside candidates unless the proposed promotion meets the full approval of both department heads and the director, and is in conformity with the city's EEO affirmative action program. The human resources department shall keep a list of the city employees who have requested promotion in response to a formal announcement and shall certify the names of those individuals qualified for and interested in the vacancy in question if so requested by the department head. 
(Code 1964, § 22.830; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07)  
Sec. 19-163. - Open competitive appointment. 
(a)  For each vacancy, a department head shall choose a qualified individual certified in writing by the director. Any individual who has not been certified by the director as qualified and eligible for consideration shall not be placed in a permanent position. 
(b)  If the department head is unwilling to fill a vacancy from a certified list of eligible candidates, he/she may submit a written request and justification to the director, for certification of additional qualified candidates. The director shall consider the merits of such a request and make a determination in the matter. 
(Code 1964, § 22.835)  
Sec. 19-164. - Transfer of a present city employee. 
(a)  A department head may fill a vacant employee position by accepting the transfer of a current city employee to that position. Before being eligible for transfer to an open position the employee must: 
(1)  Have at least the minimum qualifications for the open position; and 
(2)  Make a request to the human resources department for transfer and be certified by the human resources department as having the minimum qualifications for the position. 
(b)  The city manager may transfer a qualified individual with a disability to an open position when it is necessary to do so to make a reasonable accommodation to the individual. 
(c)  An employee may be required by the department head or the city manager to transfer to another position if: 
(1)  The employee's total effectiveness becomes marginal; 
(2)  A conflict of interest develops; or 
(3)  If such a move is in the best interest of departmental operations. 
(d)  A transferred employee will be paid in accordance with and accrue leaves and benefits at the rate attendant to the position to which the employee is transferred. 
(e)  An employee who retires under one (1) of the city's retirement plans may continue employment with the city if the employee is transferred to a permanent, part-time position budgeted for less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) hours per year and the transfer takes effect on the date of retirement. Any such employee may elect to cash in some or all eligible accumulated leave. 
(Code 1964, § 22.840; Ord. No. 13489, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 19-165. - Reemployment of a former city employee. 
Former employees of the city, regardless of time since separation shall be required to compete for a position with any other qualified individuals. No retroactive reinstatement of former leave accruals shall be given in the event a former employee is rehired; and eligibility for advanced accruals of leave, based on longevity, shall begin with the last date of hire and not total time with the city. 
(Code 1964, § 22.845)  
Sec. 19-166. - Laid-off/demoted employees. 
(a)  Present full-time permanent employees laid off or reduced to a lower classification due to a reduction in force or reassignment of priorities, duties, or projects shall be placed at the top of the proper certification list and shall rank ahead of non-city employed individuals competing for the same positions. 
(b)  Permanent employees wishing to voluntary demote with the consent of the department head and director, may do so when all the following conditions are met: 
(1)  There is a vacant position available. 
(2)  The employee has previously successfully completed a probationary/qualifying period in the vacant position requested. 
(3)  There has been no gap in service since the successful completion of the probationary/qualifying period in the vacant position requested. 
(4)  Upon reappointment to the new classification, the employee shall be required to successfully complete a probationary or qualifying period of at least six (6) continuous months duration. 
(Code 1964, § 22.850; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 19-167. - Temporary appointments. 
(a)  If a position in the classified service is to be filled for a limited time only, appointments may be made from the list of eligible individuals interested in full-time work, except that their temporary appointment shall not affect their eligibility for full-time positions. 
(b)  Former temporary employees may be rehired without certification by the human resources department provided the human resources department is notified accordingly. All temporary appointments shall be coordinated through the human resources department. 
(Code 1964, § 22.855; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 19-168. - General examination provisions. 
(a)  The director may refuse to examine an applicant or, after examination, may disqualify such applicant and remove the name from the eligibility list if: 
(1)  The applicant is found to be lacking in any of the preliminary requirements established for the position; 
(2)  The applicant is disabled or inhibited to an extent which would render the individual unfit for the full performance of duties; 
(3)  The applicant has been found to have conflicting interests which may impair or somehow compromise total effectiveness in a given classification (including criminal background, narcotic or alcoholic addictions, business interests, and/or related areas); 
(4)  The applicant has made a false statement of material facts on the application; 
(5)  The applicant has used or attempted to use political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in the screening or appointment procedure; 
(6)  The applicant has previously been discharged or has had an unsatisfactory service record with the city; 
(7)  The applicant has presented an application beyond the formal filing deadline or has failed to sign the application form; 
(8)  The applicant requests such an action; or 
(9)  An ample number of better qualified candidates are available for the immediate or similar position. 
(b)  Individuals' application and examination records shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  The examination records of all persons who are appointed to positions in a classified service shall be kept on file and shall be retained throughout their employment and for at least fifteen (15) years after their separation. 
(d)  The examination records of individuals who fail to pass a screening procedure may be destroyed three (3) years after the date of examination. 
(e)  The City of Columbia will test job applicants for current drug and alcohol use prior to offering successful applicants city employment. 
(f)  All part-time and temporary appointments shall at least meet established minimum qualifications for their respective positions. 
(g)  Individuals placed in an acting capacity shall, if they are expected to fulfill the complete responsibilities of a position and meet the minimum qualifications of the permanent position, be paid within the established salary range of the position. 
(h)  The director may, as applicable and needed, utilize an applicant's merit examination results established and administered by other merit system agencies through cooperative, reciprocal arrangements for expediting recruitment and screening of applicants. 
(Code 1964, § 22.860; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 19230, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 19-169—19-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 19-176. - General policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to promote and ensure equal opportunity for all persons (without regard to protected category) employed or seeking employment, using city facilities or being serviced by the city. The policy of equality applies to every aspect of city employment practice and policy involving all activity areas. 
(b)  The city assures non-discrimination in recruiting, hiring, training, placement, advancement, compensation, working conditions, demotion, layoff and termination. 
(c)  It is, in addition, the policy of the city to assert leadership within the community and to put forth the maximum effort to achieve non-discriminatory, equal employment opportunities throughout the political jurisdiction of the city. Affirmative action will be taken to make known that equal employment opportunities are available on the basis of the merits of the individual and consistent with the city's goals and timetables for staffing in terms of female and minority representation on the city's work force: striving for a work force in each occupation which corresponds to the actual availability of qualified females and minorities for that job in their respective recruitment area. 
(d)  Department heads and supervisors are responsible for implementation of this policy and the affirmative action program within their responsibility areas. All applicants and employees shall be expected to be qualified for the position they are seeking, and to indicate through performance, capability of at least acceptably performing assigned duties. Encouragement, information and appropriate on-the-job orientation and training are to be provided to all new employees to assist them in performing their job assignments effectively. 
(e)  Job placements shall be made by the city manager as delegated to respective department heads. The appointing authorities (director and department heads) shall encourage, and take appropriate affirmative action from the time of job requisition to hiring decision in all job positions to achieve and maintain EEO objectives and goals as rapidly as possible. 
(f)  While EEO affirmative action shall be considered a top priority, neither shall it unreasonably infringe upon the goal of efficient, productive, continuing public service. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it shall not be unlawful discrimination because of citizenship status that which is otherwise required in order to comply with law, regulation, or executive order, or required by federal, state, or local government contract, or which the United States attorney general determines to be essential for an employer to do business with an agency or department of the federal, state or local government. 
(Code 1964, § 22.910; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21206, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 23402 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-177. - Goals and timetables. 
Based on statistical employee turnover rates and anticipated, projected changes in total work force allocations; and work force evaluation in terms of race, sex, job position, salary make-up, and related considerations, annual and long-range (if practicable) EEO affirmative action goals will be recommended by the director in consultation with the respective department heads, reviewed by the personnel advisory board, and adopted by the city manager as an administrative policy. Documentation concerning the success of projected goal attainment shall be completed annually by the director, citing conditions and circumstances which may have helped or hindered the program. Subsequent goals and timetables shall be established considering the practical experience and preceding goal success. Identifiable lack of good faith in attempting to achieve established goals shall be just cause of disciplinary action, and shall involve any and all employees. 
(Code 1964, § 22.920)  
Sec. 19-178. - Program knowledge. 
The city will take the necessary steps to ensure that all department heads and other employees and all potential employees are advised of this policy of non-discrimination, and of the city's interest in actively and affirmatively providing equal employment opportunity. These steps will include (but are not limited to) the following: 
(1)  A brief statement of the policy in all advertisements for employment. 
(2)  Periodic dissemination of policy through the media, new employee orientation discussions, bulletin boards, etc. 
(3)  Periodically advising all persons in a position within the city government of their role and responsibility in implementation of this policy. 
(Code 1964, § 22.930)  
Sec. 19-179. - Recruitment. 
(a)  EEO affirmative action will consist of active recruitment of female, disadvantaged, underemployed, and/or minority candidates for positions within the city at all levels. 
(b)  Active recruitment will mean: 
(1)  First consideration for filling all vacancies in a department shall be given to qualified employees of lower rank within the same department or qualified employees from other departments. 
(2)  Identification of agencies and programs concerned with educational and employment opportunities for female and/or minority members. 
(3)  Every effort will be made to contact a variety of agencies and individuals to identify prospective applicants, and notification will be made to such agencies of all new positions and the requirements of each as soon as each position becomes available. 
(4)  All vacancies and new positions in city departments or agencies, not initially filled by a present city employee, shall be publicly advertised; and the statement "The City of Columbia is a merit, affirmative action, equal opportunity employer: Male/Female." shall be included wherever practicable in employment advertisements. 
(c)  The director will place employment advertising in publications with a broad circulation so that a potentially large number of female and minority groups can be reached. 
(d)  Systematic contact will be kept with the local state employment security commission office and community action agencies to encourage referral of applicants for positions. 
(e)  Present employees are encouraged to refer female or minority applicants when positions are available. 
(f)  The city will aggressively seek more female and minority candidates in classifications in which females and minorities are identified as underutilized by making it known to all recruitment sources that female and minority members are being sought for consideration when positions are available. 
(g)  The director will continually review the employment situation to determine if: 
(1)  There are any job categories which, in practical effect, are closed to female and minority groups; 
(2)  Hiring practices indicate that all applicants are considered solely on the basis of their qualifications for the job openings for which they have applied; 
(3)  The initial job in which a new employee is placed is determined or materially influenced by whether or not he/she is a member of a minority group; 
(4)  Minimal entry qualifications are in fact necessary, valid, and justifiable in terms of acceptable and required performance levels; 
and if problems exist in any of these areas, the director shall take the necessary actions to correct inequities. 
(h)  The director will establish a system through which it is possible to verify the number of minority applicants and the number of minority workers newly employed or promoted in reference to the number of applications received, openings available, and salaries earned. 
(i)  All qualifications for employment shall be fully job-related. Any tests given by the city, once reliably and validly established, will be equitable and identical for all applicants for a given position. Continuous review of the tests shall be conducted by the director to ensure their validity. 
(j)  The qualifications of all employees, including females and/or those of minority background, will be reviewed regularly to ensure that qualified, interested individuals are considered for promotion and upgrading. 
(k)  As many female and minority and/or disadvantaged trainees and summer part-time employees will be used as work needs justify and expenditures allow and shall be on a representative relationship to the general community as much as possible. 
(Code 1964, § 22.940)  
Sec. 19-180. - Training. 
Female and minority employees as well as others will be encouraged to increase their skills and job potential through participation in training and education programs, and the city will regularly review and help to assure that such programs, when established or provided, are available to employees on an equal opportunity basis. The city will seek to have female and minority employees take advantage of training opportunities in numbers that are representative when compared to the size of the work force, and when training is available generally to other employees in the same classification within the parameters of departmental operations and an individual's capability to benefit from various types and degrees of training which may in some cases be significantly advanced and/or cumulative in nature. 
(Code 1964, § 22.950)  
Sec. 19-181. - General provisions. 
(a)  Any collective bargaining agreements which the city may enter into will be in accordance with the principles of placement, promotion and/or transfer of employees without regard to protected category; and shall be consistent with EEO goals. 
(b)  The director will review job categories where few female and/or minority group members are presently employed, and seek to determine the cause of such situations when shown necessary by study of the available and qualified labor market. Remedial efforts may include such actions as the following: 
(1)  More vigorous recruitment of qualified female and/or minority candidates. 
(2)  Special discussion with appropriate management, supervisory, and other personnel, regarding the city's policy and its desire to ensure full utilization of qualified female and/or minority group personnel in all operational areas. 
(3)  Evaluate qualifications of the lower echelon of female and/or minority group employees to determine whether under utilized skills and capabilities would potentially be more fully employed in other capacities, or would warrant their transfer to other types of jobs more readily leading to advancement. This practice shall be applied equally to all employees. 
(c)  Placement, promotion, and transfer activities at all levels will be monitored to ensure that reasonable, equitable, fair consideration has been given to qualified female and/or minority group employees. 
(d)  Subcontractors, vendors and suppliers shall be notified of the city's EEO affirmative action policy and requested to take appropriate EEO affirmative action within their own employment practices. 
(e)  The director shall compile at least quarterly statistics concerning applicants, placement, and related employment data for the purpose of gauging the effectiveness of the EEO affirmative action program. 
(Code 1964, § 22.960; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21206, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 23402 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-182. - Complaint procedures for allegations of discrimination. 
Employees or job applicants who feel that they have been discriminated against pursuant to EEO provisions of these policies, rules, regulations and procedures may contact the human resources department to resolve the issue, or may utilize available remedies under existing local, state and federal legislation. 
(Code 1964, § 22.970; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-183. - Policy regarding Columbia city employees infected with human immunodeficiency virus. 
(a)  Preamble. The responsibility of protecting health and privacy rights of all people is fundamental. It is known that employees who carry the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are not dangerous to others through casual contact and, therefore, should not be treated differently. Individuals having a contagious secondary infection, however, could serve as a source of that infection to others and, in those instances, a policy for specific infections should be established and followed. 
(b)  Policy. Each case involving HIV infection shall be evaluated separately in order to assess risks and benefits to the infected individual and to all others in the setting. 
(1)  These evaluations shall be made by using a team approach involving the individual's physician, public health personnel, and the city human resources department. Other advisors may be included if considered appropriate by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Employees who are determined to be physically able to work without presenting a danger to themselves will be allowed to do so. 
(3)  Only those persons who have a need to know the identity of the HIV-infected individual, in order to detect potential for disease transmission, shall be advised of the individual's identity. The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for determining those who are to be informed of the HIV-infected individual's identity. No additional release of information shall be permitted without the written consent of the individual. The city manager or his designee is authorized to release general information, appropriate to the situation, consistent with maintaining the individual's privacy rights. 
(c)  Education. An ongoing, educational program shall be conducted for all city employees. 
(Ord. No. 11858, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 15754, § 1, 9-21-98)  
Secs. 19-184—19-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROBATIONARY/QUALIFYING PERIOD 
 
Sec. 19-191. - Objective. 
The probationary or qualifying period (see section 19-4 for definitions) shall be regarded as an integral part of the screening process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new, transferred or promoted employee to the position, and for replacing any employee whose performance does not meet the required work standards. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1010)  
Sec. 19-192. - Duration. 
(a)  Every person transferred, demoted, promoted, appointed or reappointed to a permanent position with the city shall be required to complete a successful probationary or qualifying period of at least six (6) continuous months duration. 
(b)  Individuals placed in entry-level police officer, firefighter, or airport safety officer positions are required to complete a successful probationary or qualifying period of at least eighteen (18) continuous months. All other commissioned police and fire positions will serve a twelve-month probationary or qualifying period. Positions identified as ineligible for overtime in the city's pay plan, are required to complete a successful probationary or qualifying period of at least twelve (12) continuous months; other positions shall serve a six-month probationary or qualifying period. 
(c)  The probationary or qualifying period shall begin immediately upon appointment to a permanent position. The probation or qualifying time period may be extended if deemed necessary by the department head. Such an extension must be processed as a personnel requisition, with review by the director. 
(d)  Time spent in an "acting" capacity prior to receiving a permanent appointment to the same classification and department shall be considered as time spent as a probationary or qualifying employee in the position. 
(e)  An employee who is promoted or transferred prior to completing a probationary period shall begin a new probationary (not qualifying) period in the new position, and shall have no grievance/appeal privileges until a probationary period is successfully completed in one classification. The employee shall, however, be eligible for benefits specified in these policies (or prorated equivalent thereof if in a permanent part-time position). 
(f)  An employee whose position is reclassified will not be required to complete a new probationary or qualifying period. An employee whose position is reclassified prior to completing a probationary period will not complete a new probationary period, but shall be required to successfully complete the original probationary period. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1020; Ord. No. 13115, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 14617, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 14984, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21097, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22299, § 1, 12-1-14 )  
Sec. 19-192.1. - Training hours for probationary police officers. 
A probationary police officer shall not be retained in the position of full-time police officer unless the officer successfully completes the minimum certification requirements under the State of Missouri Peace Officers Standards and Training (POST) Program within one (1) year of employment. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1025; Ord. No. 10122, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 19-193. - Dismissal. 
At any time during the probationary or qualifying period, the department head may remove an employee, if, in the department head's opinion, such employee is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or the employee's attitude, habits or dependability do not merit continuation in the service. An employee removed during the probationary or qualifying period cannot appeal such removal to the personnel advisory board. Employees promoted or transferred into a position who do not successfully complete a qualifying period may be demoted into their previous or similar classification, provided such position is available (vacant) and is authorized in the budget, or may at the request of the department head be authorized and established by the city manager as a temporary position. If such a position is not available, the employee may be placed on priority reemployment or transfer certification lists for recommendation of the department head. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1030; Ord. No. 18254, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 19-194. - Report. 
(a)  At least fifteen (15) working days (three (3) calendar weeks for firefighting employees on continuous shift assignments) prior to the expiration of an employee's probationary or qualifying period, the department head shall notify the director in writing whether the services of the employee have been satisfactory and whether the department head desires to continue the employee in the position. A copy of such notice shall be given to the employee. Should the department head recommend the employee not be retained on a permanent basis, the employee shall be removed from the position. Employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary or qualifying period. Employees shall not be eligible for appeal privileges until completion of the probationary or qualifying period. 
(b)  The intent of subsection (a) of this section is to provide for the orderly administration of an employee's probationary period. Failure of the probationary employee's department to notify the director as required shall not shorten the probationary period or prevent the department from discharging the employee or extending the employee's probationary period after the 15-day report deadline, but such action must occur prior to the scheduled expiration of the probationary period. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1040; Ord. No. 14984, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Secs. 19-195—19-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SEPARATION FROM SERVICE 
 
Sec. 19-201. - Types of separations. 
Separations of employees from city services shall take one of the following forms: 
(1)  Resignation; 
(2)  Layoff (curtailment of work or lack of funds); 
(3)  Retirement (unless the employee transfers to a different position pursuant to section 19-164(e)); 
(4)  Disability; 
(5)  Death; 
(6)  Dismissal; 
(7)  General separation. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1210; Ord. No. 18710, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 19-202. - Resignation. 
All permanent employees are expected to give at least ten (10) working days' notice prior to the effective date of resignation in order to leave city service in good standing (thirty (30) calendar days for professional and supervisory employees), unless other arrangements are recommended by the department head and approved by the director. Less than the established notice shall require forfeiture of accrued vacation and floating holiday leave payment if the employee is eligible for such payment. Not leaving city service in good standing may be considered just cause for disqualification for future reemployment. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1215; Ord. No. 17442, § 1, 9-16-02)  
Sec. 19-203. - Termination date. 
The official termination date shall be the date of the employee's last day in attendance at the work station, and all eligible accumulated leave shall be by payment on the next regular pay day. The finance director may make exceptions to this rule in extenuating circumstances. If an employee is permanently leaving the geographical area, arrangements can be made to issue a check on the final day of employment. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1220)  
Sec. 19-204. - Retirement. 
There shall be no mandatory retirement age for city employees, except for police and firefighter employees, as provided in Chapter 18. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1225; Ord. No. 11417, § 1, 3-16-87)  
Sec. 19-205. - Disability. 
An employee may be separated or transferred for disability when the employee cannot perform the required duties of the position because of physical or mental impairment. The city can, at any time, require an employee to be examined by the city's employee health medical advisor or other medical consultant for the purpose of determining an employee's ability to perform the duties of the position. (See section 19-146.) 
(Code 1964, § 22.1230; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 19-206. - Dismissal. 
(a)  Nonprobationary permanent employees to be dismissed for just cause shall be given a written notification of the charges against them or the reason for their discharge, along with a written explanation of the facts that support those charges or reasons. As soon as possible thereafter, but in all cases before dismissal, the employee shall be given an opportunity to refute the charges or reasons either in writing or in person before the department head. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be implied to repeal or supplant the grievance procedures set out in this chapter which allow the appeal of discharges to the city manager or personnel advisory board, nor shall this section be interpreted to give any employee the right of a full adversary hearing prior to discharge. 
(c)  Dismissed employees may, at the request of the department head, be issued their final check upon notification of the dismissal and removal from the position. 
(d)  A dismissed employee shall be paid for any vacation, floating holiday and compensatory leave the employee has accrued. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1235; Ord. No. 10688, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 20064, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 19-207. - General separation. 
A permanent employee with at least six (6) months of service who is removed from city service by mutual agreement or by action of the city manager under circumstances and cause less urgent or extenuating than immediate dismissal, shall be paid for any vacation, floating holiday and compensatory leave the employee has accrued. Disability separation may, with the approval of the city manager, be considered under this provision depending on specific circumstances and conditions. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1240; Ord. No. 15355, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-208. - Death. 
Designated survivors and/or the estate of the deceased employee shall receive the final check issued to the individual pursuant to section 19-203. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1245)  
Sec. 19-209. - Return of city property. 
An employee leaving the city service is responsible for returning any city property which may have been in the employee's possession. Upon termination, such property must be returned to the department from which the employee is terminating. Failure to return city property will result in the final check having the amount of property value deducted from the pay check as recommended by the department head, provided final pay does not fall below minimum wage rate for hours worked. All separations shall be processed on forms provided by the director and sufficiently in advance of the effective date to enable calculation and adjustment of the final check in terms of leave debits, credit union debts (if applicable), total eligible hours to be paid; and related considerations. The director shall establish eligibility for the total final remuneration in consultation with appropriate departments. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1250; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-210. - Temporary separation (suspension). 
(a)  A supervisor, duly authorized by the department head, may temporarily suspend the services of a subordinate employee pursuant to division 6 of this article, and shall immediately report any suspension to the department head who shall investigate and, on the basis of the supervisor's findings, shall have the authority and shall be required to take actions in accordance with the following, either separately or in combination: 
(1)  Reinstatement without loss of time; 
(2)  A verbal or written reprimand; 
(3)  Suspension with or without pay; any suspension with pay longer than seven (7) working days shall be approved by the director, but shall in no circumstances exceed six (6) months; 
(4)  Discharge. 
(b)  In addition, the city manager shall have authority to suspend or remove any officer or employee of the city, unless otherwise provided in the charter, when such action becomes necessary for the good of the service. An immediate report of any action taken under the provisions of this rule shall be given to the director who shall review the action in terms of consistency, merit and related factors, and provide a recommendation to the department head for determination and disposition. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1255; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Sec. 19-211. - Separation because of curtailment of work. 
(a)  In the event of separation because of curtailment of work or lack of funds, such reductions in force shall be limited to the department involved and shall be made in the following order: 
(1)  Temporary part-time employees. 
(2)  Temporary full-time employees or employees on specially budgeted programs. 
(3)  Permanent part-time employees serving probationary periods. 
(4)  Permanent part-time employees who have completed a probationary period. 
(5)  Permanent full-time budgeted employees serving probationary periods. 
(6)  Permanent full-time employees with probation completed. 
Employees who have been promoted but who are serving a qualifying period at the time of such reduction in force shall be considered as holding a position in the highest classification in which they have completed a probationary or qualifying period. 
(b)  When making decisions regarding separation within each category listed in paragraph (a), the department head shall base decisions regarding separation on an evaluation of the following factors: 
(1)  The remaining workload of the department. 
(2)  The classification and type of experience of the affected employees. 
(3)  The length of city and departmental service of the affected employees. 
(4)  The quality of city and departmental service of the affected employees. 
(c)  If the city intends to propose separation because of curtailment of work or lack of funds to city council for council's consideration, and the affected employees are members of an employee bargaining group recognized by the city in accordance with section 19-25, the employee bargaining group shall be given notice of the proposed separation prior to the date the proposal is scheduled to be presented to city council at a council meeting. 
(d)  Any employee separated because of lack of funds shall be given formal written notice at least two (2) weeks in advance of the date of separation or two (2) weeks of regular pay in lieu of such notice. 
(e)  Any employee separated because of curtailment of work or lack of funds shall be eligible for severance pay in accordance with section 19-102. 
(f)  The names of any employee separated due to lack of funds who has completed a probationary period shall be placed on a "reemployment list" for first consideration in case of call-backs in the same or similar capacity, provided the employee has requested such consideration and is available at the time of recall. 
(g)  As determined by operational needs and feasibility of administration, and with the approval of the director of human resources and the city manager, a department head may elect to either: 
(1)  Reduce the total working hours of an employee, and/or 
(2)  Reduce the level of pay and responsibility of any current classification in order to minimize the effect of general lay-offs. 
(h)  For permanent employees, discriminatory application of this section may be reviewed in accordance with section 19-182. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1260; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Secs. 19-212—19-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CORRECTIVE PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT, DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS 
 
Sec. 19-221. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of all employees to maintain high standards of conduct, cooperation, efficiency, and economy in their work for the city. Department heads and supervisors shall organize and direct the work of their units in a manner calculated to achieve these objectives. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1310)  
Sec. 19-222. - Attitudes. 
Whenever work habits, attitude, production, or personal conduct of an employee falls below a desirable standard, supervisors shall point out the deficiencies at the time (or as soon as practicable) they are observed. Corrections and suggestions should be made in a constructive and helpful manner. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1320)  
Sec. 19-223. - Warnings. 
Oral and written warnings with reasonable time for improvement and subsequent review shall precede formal discipline whenever, in the judgment of the department head, an infraction is readily correctable and is of lesser consequence. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1330)  
Sec. 19-224. - Appropriate corrective action. 
Corrective actions shall at all times be promptly administered and executed, thoroughly documented, appropriate to the infraction committed and shall never be on account of political considerations, personal bias, prejudice, or for classified employees, administered without just cause. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1340; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-225. - Guidelines for corrective action. 
(a)  The seriousness of an offense will often vary with the circumstances prevailing at the time it occurred and the motives which prompted it. All factors must be considered when determining the appropriate action to take in a particular situation. The violations set forth in this provision may be considered as just cause for suspension or discharge. The list of offenses presented here does not purport to be all inclusive; neither is it intended that these guidelines should be rigidly followed. 
(1)  Obtaining materials or leave time based on fraudulent information; dishonesty; stealing; and other criminal acts. 
(2)  Conviction of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude casting doubt on the ability to perform the job effectively. 
(3)  Abusive or improper treatment of a client, prisoner, citizen, or other individual in the community or on the city payroll. 
(4)  Violation of any lawful and reasonable departmental or city rule, regulation or directive. 
(5)  Destruction or loss of city property, including abuse of tools, equipment, and/or clothing allotments. 
(6)  Absence from duty without permission, proper notice or satisfactory reason. 
(7)  Falsifying records. 
(8)  Insubordination: noncompliance with rules, policies, assignments, procedures; provided the individual has been instructed (or given access to knowledge of proper systems) in what is expected. 
(9)  Being under the influence of narcotics or alcohol on the job. 
(10)  Disregard for the city's EEO affirmative action policy prohibiting discrimination on the basis of protected category. 
(11)  Incompetence, ineffectiveness, inefficiency or wastefulness in the performance of assigned duties. 
(12)  Failure to pay or make reasonable provisions for payment of debts to such an extent that such failure causes continued contact by the employee's creditors, disrupting city business. 
(13)  Disregard for safety policies, procedures, reporting requirements, and/or proper use of safety gear, clothing or equipment, or involvement in vehicular or personal accidents indicating a pattern of incidents exceeding city and/or departmental norms, and considering cost and extent of damages resulting therefrom. 
(14)  Solicitation or acceptance of money or anything of value to influence decisions in public matters or as a reward for such decisions. 
(15)  Engaging in personal business/other employment while on duty, or using city vehicles or equipment for personal use except as such use may be in conjunction with a specific program or assignment. 
(16)  An attendance record which demonstrates a consistent or continual lack of availability for work to the extent that inefficiency of services result and increased costs of maintaining the individual on the payroll become counterproductive. 
(17)  Engaging in activities which interfere with the individual's, or other employee's, performance on the job. 
(18)  Engaging in activities which constitute a conflict of interest as defined in section 19-41(c) of this chapter. 
(19)  Possessing unauthorized weapons in the workplace. 
(b)  The human resources director shall assist department heads by reviewing disciplinary actions in order to inform the department head of possible inconsistency and lack of uniformity. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1350; Ord. No. 16191, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21206, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23402 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-226. - Explanation of action; appeal. 
Any disciplinary action taken shall be documented and explained to the employee. Employees who are disciplined shall be presented with written reason at the time of the action or as soon as practical after the action and not later than ten (10) calendar days after the action is taken for discipline involving suspension, demotion or dismissal and five (5) calendar days for all other discipline. The written reasons shall be on a form provided by the human resources director, and include: 
(1)  A plain statement of why the action was taken. 
(2)  A list of evidence and documents supporting the discipline. 
(3)  The facts leading to the discipline. 
(4)  The law, ordinance or rule violated. 
(5)  Any other information deemed relevant to the disciplinary action taken. 
A copy of the disciplinary action shall be provided to the human resources director. Eligible employees may appeal disciplinary actions against them resulting in suspension without pay, dismissal or disciplinary demotion pursuant to the city's grievance procedure. Eligible employees may appeal other disciplinary actions against them pursuant to the city's disciplinary review procedure. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1360; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-227. - Suspension or termination. 
The city manager has the authority to suspend or terminate the services of any employee because of: 
(1)  A reduction in force due to lack of funds or a curtailment of work. 
(2)  For misconduct, insubordination, violation of regulations (as set forth in this section). 
(3)  When such action becomes necessary for the good of the service. 
Action taken pursuant to this section will be taken in conformity with this chapter, including sections 19-206 and 19-211 and, for eligible employees, are subject to the grievance, disciplinary review and appeal procedures in chapter 19, article VI, division 7. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1370; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-228. - Authority to administer. 
In the absence of a formal statement to the contrary by the city manager, all department heads shall have the authority and responsibility to administer all disciplinary actions including termination of services of an employee under their supervision. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1380)  
Secs. 19-229—19-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - GRIEVANCES, COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 19-236. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this division, "working day" shall be defined as Monday through Friday, except designated city holidays. The first working day following an event shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday or holiday as established in section 19-121. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1400; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-237. - Grievances, complaints and disciplinary reviews. 
(a)  All classified employees shall have the right, except as specified herein, to utilize the grievance, complaint and disciplinary review procedures of this division when they believe an action taken against them was without just cause. The grievance, complaint and disciplinary review procedures of this division shall not be available to the following: 
(1)  Probationary employees. 
(2)  Employees who are serving a qualifying period subsequent to their initial probationary period except in matters not related to their status in the position in which they are serving the qualifying period. 
(3)  Employees or job applicants who feel they have been discriminated against based on protected category. Such discrimination cases shall be handled pursuant to section 19-182. 
(4)  Temporary employees, as defined by section 19-4 and section 19-157. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the city insofar as possible to prevent the occurrence of grievances and complaints and to deal properly with those which occur. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1410; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 21206, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23402 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 19-238. - Procedures for grievances, disciplinary review and complaints. 
(a)  Whenever an employee or employee bargaining group eligible to file a grievance, disciplinary review or complaint desires to do so, the employee or employee bargaining group shall follow the procedures set out in this section. An employee may have the assistance of an attorney, a representative of the employee's bargaining group or other representative in any stage of the process. Notification of such assistance shall be given in writing signed by the employee on a form to be provided by the human resources department. A represented employee shall participate fully at all stages of the process. All documents and other submissions by employee's representative shall be read and signed by the employee to verify that submission is truthful and accurate. Employees and their representatives may, with the permission of their supervisors, be granted time off with pay for the purpose of necessary discussions and conferences with city supervisors and administrators relating to the resolution of specific grievances and complaints. 
(b)  Employees who feel that they have been discriminated against pursuant to equal employment opportunity provisions of city ordinance, state or federal laws shall follow the complaint procedures set out in section 19-182. 
(c)  An employee objecting to the content of a job performance review may forward the objection directly to the employee's department head and if the employee, department head, and supervisor cannot reach agreement, the human resources director, or the human resources director's designee, will attempt to conciliate the matter. If the conciliation effort does not resolve the problem, the human resources director shall issue a final decision regarding the objection. 
(d)  Complaint procedures. 
(1)  An employee or employee bargaining group may file a complaint. All complaints shall be in writing on a form provided by the human resources director and shall be submitted to the human resources department within ten (10) working days following knowledge of the basis for the complaint. The human resources department will refer the complaint to the department head of the appropriate department. No complaint may be filed when a grievance has been or is filed related to the same issues. The department head will have ten (10) working days from the day the complaint is received from the human resources department to try to informally resolve the complaint. The department head will provide the human resources department and the employee or employee bargaining group with a notice of the outcome of the informal discussions on a form provided by the human resources department. 
(2)  If at the end of ten (10) working days the complaint has not been resolved to the satisfaction of the employee or employee bargaining group, the employee or employee bargaining group may submit a request for elevated review to the human resources department within five (5) working days. 
The human resources director, or the director's designee, will attempt to conciliate the matter within ten (10) working days of receipt of the complaint. In the alternative, if the complaint was submitted by an employee bargaining group and involves a dispute concerning the meaning, interpretation or application of a collective bargaining agreement, either party may request mediation, in which case the mediation procedure described in this section will apply. 
(3)  If at the end of ten (10) working days of conciliation efforts, or at the conclusion of the mediation, the issue is not resolved, the employee or employee bargaining group may request in writing that the original complaint be forwarded to the city manager for determination. The request must be made within five (5) working days of the conclusion of conciliation or mediation. Within ten (10) working days of such a request, the human resources director shall make a recommendation to the city manager and forward the complaint, the department response, and all other written material deemed relevant to the city manager. 
(4)  The city manager shall, within fourteen (14) working days: 
(a)  Make a final determination; or 
(b)  Take no action and thereby uphold the human resources director's recommendation, making the recommendation final. 
(5)  No complaint may be filed for the purpose of harassing or annoying any person. The filing of complaints for that purpose may be grounds for disciplinary action or being barred from filing complaints. 
(e)  Disciplinary review procedures. 
(1)  An employee may request disciplinary review of written discipline, other than suspension without pay, dismissal or disciplinary demotion. Any employee requesting disciplinary review shall file the request for review in writing on a form provided by the human resources department within ten (10) working days of receiving the written notice under section 19-226. The request must be filed with the human resources department, which shall promptly forward a copy to the employee's department head. Within ten (10) working days of receipt, the department head, or the department head's designee, shall meet with the employee and any other necessary staff for a determination of the request, as well as review any documentation relating to the disciplinary action. The department head's designee shall not be the same person who imposed the discipline. Upon completing the review, the department head, or the department head's designee, shall issue a decision on a form provided by the human resources department either affirming the disciplinary action or making such modification as the department head, or the department head's designee, deems appropriate, and shall give notice of that decision to the employee and the human resources department. 
(2)  If the employee is dissatisfied with the department head's decision, the employee may request that the original complaint be forwarded to the human resources department within five (5) working days for elevated review. The human resources director, or the director's designee, may attempt to conciliate the matter within ten (10) working days of receipt. The determination of whether to modify the discipline shall be made by the department head. 
(f)  Grievance procedures. 
(1)  Employees suspended without pay, dismissed or given disciplinary demotion, including discharged employees, may file a grievance in response to receiving the written explanation of disciplinary action required by section 19-226. 
(2)  The employee must file the grievance with the human resources department within ten (10) working days of receiving the written notice under section 19-226. 
(3)  The written reasons shall be on a form provided by the human resources director, and include: 
(a)  A plain statement of the action taken. 
(b)  A list of evidence, documents and witnesses supporting the grievance. 
(c)  The summary of the facts supporting the grievance. 
(d)  The applicable laws, ordinances or rules. 
(e)  The specific relief requested. 
(f)  Any request that the human resources director review documents unavailable to the employee. 
(g)  As an attachment, any notice received by the employee regarding the action. 
(h)  Any other information deemed relevant by the employee. 
(4)  Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice from the employee, the human resources department shall provide a notice of receipt of the filing of the grievance to the department head. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice from the human resources department, the department head will provide a written response to the grievance on the form provided by the human resources department. If not resolved with the issuance of the department head's written response, within five (5) working days of receiving the department head's response, the human resources director shall assure that all required procedural steps have been taken by the department issuing the action and, if the required steps have not been taken, return the disciplinary action to the department, which shall, within five (5) working days, correct any deficiencies or rescind the action. 
The human resources department may independently investigate the matter and will notify the employee and the department head if an investigation is conducted. If the human resources director determines that the disciplinary action, as currently documented, appears inconsistent with prior departmental or city disciplinary actions, the human resources director, or the director's designee, shall meet with the department head to determine if any modification to the action should be taken; the determination of whether to modify the discipline shall be made at that time by the department head. 
The director of human resources shall inform the employee of the outcome of the review and conference with the department head. If the employee is not satisfied with the outcome of the review, the employee may request mediation or appeal to the personnel advisory board pursuant to section 19-239. An appeal to the personnel advisory board must be taken within five (5) working days of the date on which the human resources director informs the employee of the outcome of the review or within five (5) days of the written notice from the mediator issued pursuant to section 19-238(g) that the mediation has concluded. 
(g)  Mediation procedure. The human resources director shall arrange for mediation through the University of Missouri School of Law, or a mutually agreed mediator. The mediation will be held at a mutually agreeable time and location within the City of Columbia. The mediator shall work to reach a resolution of the dispute that is agreeable to all parties. The mediation may continue beyond the initial session if agreed by all parties, including the mediator. 
If the mediator concludes that the parties have negotiated to impasse, either party may ask that the mediator render a non-binding opinion as to the proper outcome of the dispute. The mediator has the authority to render such an opinion if the negotiations are at an impasse, the requesting party has negotiated in good faith and the mediator believes the rendering of an opinion may aid in the resolution of the dispute. The decision on whether to render an opinion is within the unreviewable discretion of the mediator, who is not required to provide an opinion. If rendered, the opinion must provide the recommended outcome and mediator's rationale for the recommended outcome. The mediation will be confidential and, before proceeding with mediation, both parties must agree in writing that the any information produced in the mediation, other than the terms of an agreement but including the mediator's recommendation and rationale, will not be used for any purpose outside the mediation, including subsequent litigation or proceedings relating to the labor negotiations. 
If the mediation concludes without an agreement, the mediator shall immediately inform all parties in writing of the date on which the mediator determines that the mediation has concluded. 
(h)  Prior to the expiration of deadlines set out herein, the human resources director may, under reasonable circumstances, grant extensions to such deadlines, except that a ten (10) day extension of the initial filing deadline for a complaint, grievance or disciplinary review will be granted on request if made in advance of the deadline. The human resources director shall provide notice of any extension to all parties. 
(i)  Grievances, disciplinary reviews or complaints which are not specifically resolved and not continued by the employee within the aforementioned time sequences, including extensions, shall be considered as satisfied and not subject to further consideration. Grievance, disciplinary review or complaint responses by the department head which are contrary to established time sequences may be elevated to the next step of the process by the human resources director on request of the employee or the employee bargaining group. The human resources director will have discretion in determining whether to elevate the dispute, but shall assure that the process is managed expeditiously. 
(j)  If an employee has been dismissed, any notice to the employee under this section or section 19-226 will be provided in person, if practical, or the human resources department may issue the notice by U.S. mail to the last permanent address provided by the employee. If sent by mail, notice shall be complete on mailing and the deadline for the employee's response will be extended three (3) days. The human resources department shall be responsible for documenting the date on which the notice was mailed. 
(Ord. No. 15754, § 2, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 19677, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20438, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 23642 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 24014 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 19-239. - Appeals to personnel advisory board. 
Eligible city employees may appeal grievance determinations involving suspensions without pay, dismissals or disciplinary demotions against them to the personnel advisory board provided the grievance procedure has been utilized by the employee. 
Personnel advisory board appeal procedures are as follows: 
(1)  The employee may file a written request with the human resources department for a hearing before the personnel advisory board. An appeal to the personnel advisory board must be taken within five (5) working days of the date on which the human resources director informs the employee of the outcome of the review provided under section 19-238(f) or within five (5) days of the written notice from the mediator issued in accordance with section 19-238(g) indicating that the mediation has concluded. The request shall be on a form provided by the human resources department. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as possible and shall be conducted by procedures and rules established by the personnel advisory board. The hearing shall be closed. The employee shall have the right to be heard and to present evidence. Testimony shall be given under oath and a record made of the hearing. 
Each party, as well as the board, may engage counsel and call witnesses. The board shall upon request of any party issue subpoenas and shall in a proper case issue subpoenas duces tecum for the hearing, but not for depositions. Subpoenas shall be issued, served and enforced in the same manner as subpoenas issued under RSMo Ch. 536, by agencies created by the constitution or state statute. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply. After hearing and consideration of the evidence and within ten (10) working days after the hearing, the board shall render its recommendations in writing to the city manager. As soon as possible after the hearing, a certified written transcript of the hearing along with all exhibits produced at the hearing shall be delivered to the city manager. The city manager shall review the transcript and exhibits and, within thirty (30) days of receiving the transcript, render a decision supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law which shall be final, binding and not subject to further administrative appeal except to the extent allowed by state law. 
(2)  For problems involving sexual harassment or a potential discriminatory situation, the employee may contact the human resources department or may utilize available remedies under existing local, state and federal legislation. 
(Code 1964, § 22.1430; Ord. No. 13821 § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 14167 § 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 17016, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17850, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22579, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23324 , § 1, 9-18-17)  
Sec. 19-240. - Deputy police chief and assistant police chief appeal rights. 
The deputy police chief and any assistant police chief shall be given, upon written request, a meeting with the chief of police within forty-eight (48) hours of a dismissal, disciplinary demotion or suspension that results in a reduction or withholding of salary. At any such meeting, the chief shall provide a brief statement, which may be oral, of the reason of the discharge, disciplinary demotion or suspension and permit the employee the opportunity to respond. The result of this meeting shall be reduced to writing. This subsection shall not apply to a deputy chief or assistant police chief serving in a probationary period. 
(Ord. No. 21456, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21828, § 1, 9-16-13)  
Chapter 21 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Chief of police to serve as marshal, § 117. 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-8; administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; civil defense, Ch. 7; fire department, § 9-36 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; guards and security patrol officers, § 13-46 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 15; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21-1—21-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of police department officials in regards to traffic, § 14-26; required obedience to police department officials' traffic directions, § 14-27; pension provisions for policemen, § 18-16 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-16. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of a chief of police who shall be the director of the department, together with such subordinate officers of police and detectives as may be deemed necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the department. 
(Code 1964, § 7.185)  
Sec. 21-17. - Uniforms. 
The uniforms of the chief of police and the regular police officers shall be prescribed by the city manager, and the costs thereof shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.205)  
Sec. 21-18. - Special temporary police officers. 
When, in the opinion of the chief of police, the regular police force of the city, provided for by ordinance, shall be insufficient to deal with any emergency or to enforce the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state within the city, the chief of police may, with the approval of the city manager, commission special temporary police officers, who shall possess the legal requirements for police officers, with or without compensation, and for such period as he may determine; provided, that no temporary police officer shall be appointed for a longer period than one year. Such appointment shall be reported to the city manager and, when approved by him, the city clerk shall issue to each special temporary police officer a commission which shall set forth the day and hour of the appointment and the day and hour of the expiration thereof. Such special temporary police officers shall have all the powers and duties of the regular police officers of the city as established by ordinances and by the laws of the state, and like responsibilities. Any or all appointments of special temporary police officers may be revoked by the chief of police by giving notice of such revocation to the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 7.200)  
Sec. 21-18.1. - City commissions for University of Missouri Police Officers. 
The chief of police may commission University of Missouri Police Officers who possess the legal requirements for police officers. Each commission shall be valid for as long as the officer is employed by the university police department or until the chief of police revokes the commission. The chief shall give notice of any such revocation to the city clerk and to the Police Chief of the University of Missouri Police Department. The city clerk shall issue to each University of Missouri Police Officer commissioned by the chief of police a commission which sets forth the date the commission was issued. University police officers commissioned by the chief of police shall have the same powers as regular police officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21088, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 21-19. - Powers and duties of chief, generally. 
The chief of police shall have general supervision and control of the department, including the enforcement of discipline among the members thereof, and the instruction of the members in their duties. 
(Code 1964, § 7.190)  
Sec. 21-20. - Duties of members, generally. 
(a)  Any police officer who has completed the basic police training program required by state statute shall have the authority to respond to an emergency situation outside the city limits. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each member of the police department to protect the life and property of all persons in the city and to obey punctually the orders of the chief thereof; and all the members thereof shall, to the best of their ability, preserve order, peace and quiet throughout the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.195; Ord. No. 11370, § 1, 2-2-87)  
Sec. 21-21. - Chief, officers as marshals of municipal court. 
The chief of police and his subordinates shall serve as marshal and deputy marshals of the municipal court and enforce its orders, judgments and decrees. 
(Code 1964, § 7.250) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 117.  
Sec. 21-22. - Supervision over city property. 
The chief of police shall have general supervision over all city property, and he and his subordinates shall have authority to arrest any trespasser on city property or portions thereof not open to the public or trespassers on property open to the public during certain specified times but who are thereon during times when such property is closed to the public, and to remove or abate nuisances or encumbrances put thereon without the authority of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7.255)  
Sec. 21-23. - Power to serve processes. 
The chief of police and officers of police shall have authority and power to serve and execute all warrants, subpoenas, writs, notices or other process issued by the municipal judge, city council or other officers having authority to issue the same, at any place within the limits of the county, and make return thereof according to law or ordinance. Their authority beyond the limits of the county shall be such as is provided by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 7.210)  
Sec. 21-24. - Reporting violations of ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his subordinates to report for prosecution all persons who shall violate any ordinances of the city, and all information and facts coming to his knowledge having reference thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 7.215)  
Sec. 21-25. - Right of entry. 
To make an arrest in criminal actions, an officer may break open any outer or inner door or window of a dwelling house or other building, or any other enclosure, if, after notice of his office and purpose, he is refused admittance. 
(Code 1964, § 7.220)  
Sec. 21-26. - Arrest with and without warrant. 
(a)  The chief of police and all members of the police department shall have the following powers to make or order arrests within the city: 
(1)  Upon a warrant issued by any judge or magistrate for violation of ordinances of the city or laws of the state. 
(2)  Upon probable cause to believe that a person is committing or has committed a felony. 
(3)  Upon probable cause to believe that a person is committing or has committed a misdemeanor in his presence. 
(b)  The power to arrest authorized by this section shall be in addition to all other powers conferred upon police officers and shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict any other powers of a police officer. 
(Code 1964, § 7.225)  
Sec. 21-27. - Procedure upon arrest. 
Any person arrested for violation of the ordinances of this city shall be immediately conveyed to the county jail or such other place of confinement as the chief of police may direct, and the chief of police and members of the police department shall have the authority and power to keep such person in the county jail or other such place of confinement and prevent his escape until a trial can be held before the proper court, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 7.230)  
Sec. 21-28. - Person arrested to be taken before municipal judge; exceptions. 
Whenever any person shall have been arrested under the provisions of this chapter, or any other law or ordinance, it shall be the duty of the chief of police forthwith to take or cause him to be taken before the municipal judge or other proper officer, after information duly made and filed as provided by law, to be dealt with according to law or ordinance; provided, that when an arrest shall be made in the nighttime or on Sunday, or any legal holiday, or the person arrested shall be in a state of intoxication, then it shall be the duty of the chief of police and members of the department to convey such person to the county jail or other place of confinement as the chief of police may direct, there to remain until the following day, or until he shall have perfectly sobered, when he shall be brought before the municipal judge or other proper official, as aforesaid. 
(Code 1964, § 7.235)  
Sec. 21-29. - Discharge of persons arrested. 
A person arrested by the chief of police or a member of the police department shall be held in accordance with section 21-27, except that such persons may be released by order of the city counselor, municipal judge or other proper officer, or upon bail or bond in such sum as may seem sufficient and proper with sufficient security for his appearance at a time and place stated in the bond. 
(Code 1964, § 7.240)  
Sec. 21-30. - Supervision of prisoners; records. 
The chief of police shall exercise supervision over all city prisoners, keeping a register of all persons imprisoned for offenses against the ordinances, by whose order the person is imprisoned, for what offense the person is imprisoned, where such person is imprisoned and when such person was committed and when he shall be discharged. 
(Code 1964, § 7.245)  
Sec. 21-31. - Records of revenues. 
The chief of police shall compile such accounts of all money collected by or in his office as may be required by the director of finance, and shall report the same to the director of finance, and pay over all money collected by him as fees, fines, or from other sources, unless other disposition shall have been provided by Law or ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 7.260)  
Secs. 21-32—21-43. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITIZENS POLICE REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 21-44. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide an external and independent process for review of actual or perceived misconduct by police officers and community service aides thereby increasing the police department's accountability to the community and community trust in the police department. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-45. - Definitions and rule of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this article: 
Board, when not otherwise specified, means the citizens police review board. 
Community service aide means a uniformed civilian employee who does not have the power of arrest and served in the Columbia police department with a position title of "community service aide." 
Complainant means a person who files a complaint with the police department or with the city clerk against a police officer or a community service aide. 
Complaint means a written statement alleging misconduct of a police officer or community service aide involving interaction with the public. 
Misconduct means any violation of federal law, state law, city ordinance, city regulation or police department policy, guideline, directive, rule, regulation or order in effect at the time of the incident. 
Notice shall be considered given when it is hand delivered or three (3) business days after it is mailed. 
Police officer and officer" means a commissioned law enforcement officer, other than the chief of police, who has the power of arrest and who serves in the Columbia Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 21157, § 1, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-46. - Establishment; membership; qualifications; terms; and removal. 
(a)  The citizens police review board is hereby established. 
(b)  The board shall consist of eight (8) members appointed by the city council and a member of the commission on human rights appointed by the commission. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Board members must be residents of Columbia and registered voters. Board members may not be employed by the city, be a party to any pending litigation against the city, be an elected public office holder, or be a candidate for elected public office. Board members should reflect the cultural and racial diversity of Columbia and have no serious criminal record. The police chief shall obtain a criminal history of all applicants for membership on the board and advise the city council of any convictions for violations of federal, state or local law. 
(d)  Three (3) of the members first appointed by the city council shall serve terms of two (2) years, three (3) shall serve terms of three (3) years and two (2) shall serve terms of four (4) years. Thereafter, members appointed by the city council shall serve terms of three (3) years. The member appointed by the commission on human rights shall serve a term of one (1) year. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as the original appointments. 
(e)  The board may recommend to the city council that a board member be removed from the board if the member persistently fails to perform the duties of office. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 21848, § 1, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 22463, § 1, 6-1-15 )  
Sec. 21-47. - Officers; meetings; quorum; rules. 
(a)  The board shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its members. The term of these officers shall be one (1) year. The chair shall preside at meetings. The vice-chair shall preside when the chair is absent or otherwise unable to preside. 
(b)  The board shall meet monthly. When requested by the board the police chief or the chief's designee shall attend board meetings to serve as an informational resource for the board. The board shall provide an opportunity for public comment at each monthly meeting. The board shall meet semi-annually with the chief of police to discuss issues of concern and to recommend ways that the police can improve their relationship with citizens. The board may also make recommendations regarding policies, rules, hiring, training and the complaint process. 
(c)  Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. 
(d)  The board may establish rules and procedures that do not conflict with this code or the rules and regulations governing internal affairs investigations. 
(e)  Board members shall follow the National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement (NACOLE) Code of Ethics. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 21-48. - Administration and training. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate staff for the administration of the board. 
(b)  New board members shall participate in orientation and training that includes review of the police professional standard unit's operating policies and procedures and a ride along with police officers. Training shall also include topics suggested by NACOLE in its recommended orientation and training for board members. 
(c)  Board members shall participate in a ride along with police officers at least one (1) time every two (2) years, with at least one (1) ride along occurring at night. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-49. - Duties. 
The citizens police review board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Review appeals from the police chief's decisions on alleged misconduct as provided for in this article. 
(2)  Conduct a jurisdictional review from the decision by the police chief that a person's allegations do not fall within the requirements set forth in this article related to complaints. 
(3)  Host public meetings and educational programs for Columbia residents and police department. 
(4)  Review and make recommendations to the police chief and city manager on police policies, procedures and training. 
(5)  Conduct audits or reviews of the records of the police department for compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council annual reports that analyze citizen complaints including demographic data on complainants, complaint disposition, investigative findings and disciplinary actions. The reports should also describe the board's community outreach and educational programs. The reports should also set forth any recommendations made on police department policies, procedures and training. The reports shall be submitted no later than March 1 for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-50. - Internal affairs procedures; police officer and community service aide rights. 
(a)  The city manager shall cause police department rules and regulations to be established that provide for internal affairs investigations. These rules and regulations must be consistent with the provisions of this article and chapter 19. 
(b)  Police department officers and community service aides under investigation shall have the following rights in connection with internal affairs investigations: 
(1)  The police officer and community service aide may provide a written or oral statement to an investigator before investigative findings are made. 
(2)  The police officer and community service aide may have an attorney or Columbia Police Officer Association representative present during the officer's or community service aide's interview to observe the interview. 
(3)  When practicable, a police officer or community service aide interview shall be conducted during the employee's normal working hours. 
(4)  The police officer and community service aide may record the interview or obtain a copy of any recording of the interview made by the city. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-51. - Complaints; police chief decision on complaint; appeals to board. 
(a)  Complaints may be filed with the police department or with the city clerk only by the following: 
(1)  Any person who is an alleged victim of misconduct of a police officer or community service aide; or 
(2)  Any family member, friend or attorney of an alleged victim of misconduct of a police officer or community service aide; or 
(3)  Any person who witnessed alleged misconduct of a police officer or community service aide in person; or 
(4)  Any resident of Boone County. 
(b)  The city clerk shall promptly forward complaints to the police chief. Complaints must be filed within one (1) year from the date of the alleged misconduct. The board shall take no action on a complaint alleging misconduct that the police department is treating as a criminal matter unless and until the police determines that the officer's or community service aide's alleged conduct was not criminal or a prosecutor has declined to prosecute the alleged offense or a prosecution of the alleged offense has concluded. 
(c)  Unless the complaint has been withdrawn or the police officer or community service aide is no longer employed by the city, the complaint investigation process shall conclude with a decision by the police chief that the complaint is unfounded (acts complained of did not occur or were misconstrued), the complaint is not sustained (insufficient facts established to either prove or disprove the acts complained of), the complaint is sustained (sufficient facts established to prove misconduct) or the officer or community service aide is exonerated (acts complained of occurred but were justified, lawful and proper). If the complaint is sustained, the police chief shall take appropriate disciplinary action. 
(d)  The police chief shall promptly give written notice of the decision and any disciplinary action to the police officer or community service aide and the complainant. The notice shall include information on the right and manner of appealing the decision of the chief to the citizens police review board. 
(e)  The police officer, the community service aide and the complainant have the right to appeal the police chief's decision to the board. An appeal to the board must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk. The clerk must receive the appeal within twenty-one (21) days after the notice of the chief's decision was given. The appeal must be either hand delivered to the office of the city clerk or sent to the city clerk by United States Mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail. 
(f)  When an appeal has been filed, the city clerk shall promptly notify all board members and the police chief. The police chief shall promptly forward to each board member a copy of all police department records pertaining to the complaint and the investigation of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 20722, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 20764, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-51.1. - Request for jurisdictional review. 
(a)  Upon a written request, the board shall conduct a jurisdictional review from the decision by the police chief that a person's allegations do not fall within the requirements set forth in this article related to complaints, including but not limited to: 
(1)  An appeal of a determination that the complaint or concern was untimely filed, as defined in section 21-51(b). 
(2)  An appeal of a determination that the person failed to allege misconduct, as defined in section 21-45. 
(3)  An appeal of a determination that the person does not meet the requirements set forth in section 21-51(a). 
(b)  Requests for limited review pursuant to this section shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty-one (21) days after the person is given notice of the determination by the police chief. 
(c)  When a request for jurisdictional review has been filed, the city clerk shall promptly notify all board members and the police chief. The police chief shall promptly forward to each board member a copy of the person's allegations, any relevant police or city policies, records relating to any police investigation, and a copy of the police chief's written notice. 
(d)  The board shall review the records provided to determine if the person timely filed a complaint within the meaning of this article. In reaching its determination, the board shall limit the scope of its review to determine if the police chief's determination was correct. The scope of the board's review shall be limited to a jurisdictional review of the records. The board shall not hear public comment and shall not call witnesses. 
(e)  If the board agrees with the police chief's determination, the board shall notify the police chief, the police officer or community service aide, and the complainant of its determination. If the board disagrees with the police chief and finds that the complainant has timely filed a complaint, the board shall notify the police chief, the police officer or community service aide and the complainant. The police chief shall proceed with an investigation of the complaint or shall refer the complaint to mediation. 
( Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-52. - Board review of police chief's decision on complaints and recommendation. 
(a)  The board shall review the record of the investigation and may request the police chief to order further investigation. Subject to the availability of appropriated funds, the city shall contract with independent investigators to assist the board in its investigations of alleged misconduct. 
(b)  The board, as part of the review of an appeal, may interview and hear comments from witnesses to the incident under investigation. The board shall not allow comments by the general public as part of the review. 
(c)  The police chief and all police officers and community service aides shall cooperate with the board in its review of appeals from the police chief's decision. Cooperation shall include, but not be limited to, appearing before the board upon request and answering all questions honestly and thoroughly. Failure to cooperate shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(d)  The board shall provide timely updates on the progress of the review and any follow-up investigation to the complainant and the police officer and community service aide, unless the specific facts of the review and investigation would prohibit such updates. 
(e)  The board may decline further action on an appeal if it determines that the alleged acts of misconduct are false and that the complainant knew they were false when the appeal was filed. 
(f)  After completing its review and investigation, the board shall report its findings and recommendations to the city manager, the police chief, the police officer, the community service aide and the complainant. 
(g)  If the board agrees with the police chief's disposition of the complaint, it shall give notice to the police officer, the community service aide and the complainant that they have the right to appeal the chief's decision as provided in section 21-53. 
(h)  If the board recommends a disposition of the complaint other than the disposition made by the police chief, the chief shall have ten (10) business days to reconsider the original decision and either reaffirm or modify it. The chief shall give written notice of the decision to the board, the city manager, the police officer, the community service aide and the complainant. The police chief shall also give notice to the police officer or community service aide and the complainant that they have the right to appeal the chief's decision as provided for in section 21-53. If the chief takes no action within ten (10) business days after the date of the board's findings and recommendation, the original decision is automatically reaffirmed and the board shall give notice to the police officer, the community service aide and the complainant that they have the right to appeal the chief's decision as provided for in section 21-53. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-53. - Appeals to city manager or personnel advisory board. 
After the board's findings and recommendation or, if applicable, the chief's decision after reconsideration, the police officer, the community service aide and the complainant shall have the right to appeal as follows: 
(a)  The police officer and community service aide may appeal the police chief's decision to the personnel advisory board if the officer or community service aide was suspended, demoted or discharged. The appeal shall be made by filing a written request with the city clerk for a hearing before the personnel advisory board. The request shall set forth the employee's grievance and reasons for appeal. The request must be filed within twenty-one (21) days after the officer or community service aide was given notice of the right to appeal. The hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19. The director of human resources shall give the complainant ten (10) days written notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the complainant shall be allowed to testify to the facts of the incident and shall be allowed to express an opinion on the appropriate personnel advisory board action. 
(b)  The police officer and community service aide may appeal the police chief's decision to the city manager if the officer's or community service aide's discipline was other than suspension, demotion or discharge. The appeal shall be made by filing a written statement with the city manager setting forth the employee's reasons for appeal. The request must be filed within twenty-one (21) days after the officer or community service aide was given notice of the right to appeal. The appeal shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19. The city manager shall give notice of the appeal to the complainant and afford the complainant the opportunity to discuss the matter with the city manager. 
(c)  The complainant may appeal the police chief's decision to the city manager. The appeal shall be made by filing a written statement with the city manager explaining the reasons for the appeal. The request must be filed within twenty-one (21) days after the complainant was given notice of the right to appeal. The city manager shall give notice of the appeal to the police officer and community service aide. The officer or community service aide shall have fourteen (14) days after notice has been given to file a written response to the complainant's appeal with the city manager. The officer, the community service aide and the complainant shall not otherwise communicate with the city manager concerning the complaint. If the employee has also appealed, the procedures of subsection (a) or (b) shall be followed. If the employee has not appealed, and the city manager determines that the alleged facts may merit more severe discipline involving the suspension, demotion or discharge of the police officer or community service aide, the city manager may refer the matter to the personnel advisory board for a hearing following the procedures set forth in chapter 19. Otherwise, the city manager may act on the appeal as the manager deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-54. - Open records and meetings. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-25.3, all records pertaining to complaints filed against police officers and community service aides alleging misconduct of the police officer and community service aides shall be open records, except those closed by state or federal law or by section 21-55(b) and except that records or portions of records that would disclose the identity of an officer working undercover shall be closed. 
(b)  The board shall meet in open session except as provided in (c) and (d). 
(c)  The board shall meet in closed session to hear statements and discuss matters: 
(1)  That cannot be heard or discussed in an open meeting under state or federal law; or 
(2)  That would involve disclosure of the identity of an officer working undercover. 
(d)  Upon a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of board members present at a meeting, the board may meet in closed session: 
(1)  To hear statements of a witness sixteen (16) years of age or younger; or 
(2)  To hear statements and discuss complaints involving sexual assault or sexual intimidation. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 21157, § 1, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-55. - Mediation. 
(a)  Unless a complaint involves an allegation of criminal activity by a police officer or community service aide, the board or the police chief may refer a complaint to mediation. 
(b)  If the complainant and the police officer or community service aide are able to reach an agreement through mediation, records relating to alleged misconduct shall be closed records to the extent allowed by law. 
(c)  If the complainant and the police officer or community service aide are unable to resolve the complaint through mediation, or a party declines to participate in mediation, the complainant and the police officer or community service aide may pursue the complaint or an appeal as set forth in this article. 
(d)  Statements by the police officer, the community service aide, or the complainant during a mediation session shall not be used by either party for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Sec. 21-56. - Advocates. 
(a)  Every complainant has a right to be assisted by an advocate. 
(b)  The board shall recruit and train community members to serve as advocates for complainants and shall maintain a roster of trained advocates. A complainant, however, may choose any person to serve as advocate. 
(c)  Every person who inquires about filing a complaint will be offered an advocate. Every person who requests mediation will be encouraged to be assisted by an advocate. 
(d)  Advocates shall not be employees of the city and the city shall not compensate them for their services. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 21-57. - Obstructing board operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to willfully intimidate, influence, impede, deter, threaten, harass, obstruct or prevent another person from freely, fully and truthfully cooperating with the board. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 21-58. - Annual evaluation by council. 
Each year, after reviewing the board's annual report, the city council shall review the effectiveness of the board and shall determine whether this article should be modified or repealed. 
(Ord. No. 20331, § 1, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 21-59. - Availability of police policies. 
The chief of police shall make available to the police department employees and the public, and place on the city's website, all police department policies, guidelines, directives, orders, rules and regulations except those that would reveal tactics that would endanger the life of any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 21157, § 1, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 22142, § 1, 7-21-14 )  
Chapter 22 - PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boone County Community Services Advisory Board, § 2-266 et seq.; Columbia Area Economic Development Commission, § 2-281 et seq.; community development commission, § 2-326 et seq.; environment and energy commission, § 2-346 et seq.; armory board, § 2-376 et seq.; special business district board, § 2-436 et seq.; city airport. Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; civil defense, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 27; Unified Development Code, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Public works, RSMo. § 88.010 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— City departments generally, § 2-176 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-16. - Director—Appointment and qualifications. 
The city manager shall appoint the director of the department of public works, who shall be an engineer registered under the laws of Missouri and qualified to perform the duties required by the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2.2200; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-17. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of public works shall serve as city engineer and shall have charge of: 
(1)  The designing, construction, reconstruction, supervision and repair of all municipal buildings, bridges, viaducts, airports, public market facilities, tunnels and structures, including alterations, replacements, additions and appurtenances thereto, and maintenance of the same. 
(2)  The grading and improvement of all streets, alleys, highways, sidewalk spaces and public ways, and keeping the same open and in a safe and clean condition. 
(3)  The construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance of all pavements, curbs and sidewalks. 
(4)  The lighting of public grounds and highways, the laying of conduits, the location, erection and construction of poles and all structures in, on or over public grounds and highways, the granting of all permits to excavate into or disturb any highway or public property or to make any special use thereof; provided that, with respect to such functions, the duties of the department of public works and the water and light department shall be coordinated by the city manager. 
(5)  The supervision and control, as far as the city can exercise it, over use of the city's rights-of-way by all privately owned or operated public utilities in the city, and the enforcement of the terms of all franchises and ordinances relating to such utilities. 
(6)  The making and keeping of records of all necessary plats, surveys, drawings and estimates, and the furnishing of all information and reports relating to public works or the public works department as may be required by the city manager. 
(b)  As director of public works and as city engineer, the director shall perform such additional duties not herein specifically set out as may be required of such director by charter, by law, by ordinance or by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 2.2210; Ord. No. 21095, § 7, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 22-18—22-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRANSPORTATION DIVISION 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Created. 
There is hereby created within the department of public works a division of transportation which shall be under the supervision and control of the director. 
(Code 1964, § 14.2000; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-27. - City to own public transportation system. 
The division of transportation is hereby authorized to purchase, hire, lease, construct, own, maintain and operate a system of public transportation, as may be directed by the city council or city manager, and to dispose of the services thereof; and to supervise and control, as far as the city can exercise it, all privately owned or operated public utilities in the city, and to enforce the terms of all franchises and ordinances relating to such utilities. 
(Code 1964, § 14.2010)  
Sec. 22-28. - Superintendent. 
There is hereby created within the classified service of the city, the position of superintendent of the division of transportation, department of public works, and such other subordinate employees of the division of transportation as may be authorized by the city manager, who shall be under the direction, supervision and control of the director. 
(Code 1964, § 14.2020; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-29. - Transportation fares. 
(a)  The following fares shall be in effect on all fixed route buses operated by the transit division: 
(1)  Regular fares 
Per ride ..... $1.50 
Daily pass ..... $3.00 
30-day Full Fare (Tickets) ..... $55.00 
25-Ride Full Fare (Tickets) ..... $30.00 
(2)  Half fares. Disabled, elderly, Medicare or Medicaid recipients, or individuals who can validate that they are persons with annual incomes equal to or below one hundred eighty-five (185) per cent of the federal poverty level. 
Per ride ..... $0.75 
30-Day Half Fare (Tickets) ..... $25.00 
25-Ride Half Fare (Tickets) ..... $15.00 
(3)  Semester passes. Students of any university, college or trade, public or private school in the City of Columbia, Missouri, with the showing of a valid student identification card. 
Per regular semester ..... $100.00 
After October 15 (fall semester) and March 15 (spring semester) ..... $50.00 
(4)  Semester pass discounts. Any agency, entity, organization or business may purchase discounted semester passes, on behalf of their customers, at the following discounted rates: 
Per regular semester if purchased in groups of 20—1,000 ..... $65.00 per pass 
After October 15 (fall semester) and March 15 (spring semester) if purchased in groups of 20—1,000 ..... $32.00 per pass 
Per regular semester if purchased in groups of more than 1,000 ..... $50.00 per pass 
After October 15 (fall semester) and March 15 (spring semester) if purchased in groups of more than 1,000 ..... $25.00 per pass 
(5)  Youth ride free. Any child or young adult, eighteen (18) years of age or younger, may ride for free when presenting a valid school identification card or transit issued identification card. Children who are not of school age do not need to present an identification card. 
(6)  Downtown employee discount fare. The first two hundred (200) employees of businesses located in the central business district who present a pay stub or equivalent document from their employer. 
30-day half fare (tickets/fast passes) ..... $25.00 
(b)  The following fares shall be in effect on all vehicles used to provide paratransit service operated by the transit division: 
(1)  Certified ADA eligible persons or companion, per ride ..... $2.00 
(2)  Registered personal care attendant accompanying a certified ADA eligible person ..... Free 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions are established: 
ADA eligible: Any person exhibiting a valid ADA eligibility card and is certified as eligible for the specific paratransit service requested. 
Central business district: The area bounded by College Avenue on the east, Elm Street and Elm Street extended on the south, Garth Avenue on the west, and Park Avenue and Park Avenue extended on the north. 
Disabled: Any person certified as disabled by reason of illness, injury, age, congenital malfunction or other permanent or temporary incapacity or disability. 
Elderly: Any person age sixty-five (65) or over who exhibits a pass showing proof of age, Medicaid, Medicare or other ID. 
Fixed route buses: Any vehicle operated on the routes published in the schedules for the Columbia Area Transit System. 
Medicare or Medicaid recipient: Any person, regardless of age, who is a Medicare or Medicaid recipient and exhibits a valid Medicare or Medicaid card. 
Regular semester: The period from January 1 to May 31 or from August 1 to December 31. 
Youth: A child age zero (0) through eighteen (18) years inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 11185, § 1, 9-2-86; Ord. No. 11377, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 13577, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 13747, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. 13982, § 1, 3-7-94; Ord. No. 20048, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20076, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 20278, § 1, 5-18-09; Ord. No. 21073, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21444, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21489, § 1, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 22154, § 1, 8-4-14 ; Ord. No. 22537, § 1, 8-3-15 ; Ord. No 23685 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 22-30. - Transportation promotion. 
The director of the department of public works is hereby authorized to promote the city's transportation system by such means as the director deems appropriate, including the authority to temporarily suspend or reduce fares for a maximum of forty-five (45) days per fiscal year, offer free or reduced fares for marketing purposes, and offer incentives in the nature of fringe benefits or time off to division of transportation employees. 
(Code 1964, § 14.2040; Ord. No. 21563, § 1, 1-7-13)  
Secs. 22-31—22-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Public improvements, §§ 71—88. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-46. - Authority to make public improvements. 
The city shall have the authority to make public improvements of every kind. The city shall follow the procedures set forth in this code when making public improvements. 
(Code 1964, § 14.290; Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 71.  
Sec. 22-47. - Condemnation proceedings. 
In exercising the power of eminent domain, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in applicable state statutes and Missouri Supreme Court Rules. 
(Code 1964, § 14.300; Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 22-48. - Condemnation of private property. 
Private property may be taken for public use for the purpose of establishing, opening, widening, extending or altering any street, avenue, alley, wharf, creek, river, watercourse, market place, public park or public square, and for establishing market houses, and for any other necessary public purposes. The council shall have the power to condemn private property for public use, occupation or possession in the construction and repair of public, district, joint district and private sewers in the same manner as other property is condemned within the city for public uses. This power of eminent domain shall include the exercise of the power of excess condemnation as authorized by the constitution or by law, and the power to condemn private property, real or personal, or any easement or use therein for public use within or without the city. 
(Code 1964, § 14.310) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 88.497.  
Sec. 22-49. - Condemnation and removal of sidewalks. 
The city council may, by ordinance, condemn wooden or defective sidewalks, or any sidewalk which may be deemed unfit for use, and provide for the removal of any sidewalk so condemned. 
(Code 1964, § 14.320) 
State Law reference— Condemnation of sidewalks, RSMo. § 88.507.  
Sec. 22-50. - Purchase or condemnation of property of public utility. 
The city shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the state; provided, that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, good will or prospective profits. 
(Code 1964, § 14.330)  
Sec. 22-51. - Condemnation proceedings. 
All proceedings for the condemnation or the damaging of property or in the exercise of the right of eminent domain shall be in accordance with the laws of the state now or hereafter applicable to cities of the third class. 
(Code 1964, § 14.340) 
State Law reference— Condemnation procedure, RSMo. §§ 88.010—88.077.  
Sec. 22-52. - Relocation policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to follow the provisions of Sections 523.200 through 523.205, RSMo., in all condemnation proceedings that may necessitate displacement of persons or businesses when such displacement is not subject to the provisions of the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. sections 4601 to 4655, as amended). 
(b)  The provisions of RSMo §§ 523.200 through 523.205, shall apply to any plan, project, or area for redevelopment under the operation of RSMo Chs. 99, 100 or 353, which is hereafter filed for approval, approved, or amended. 
(Ord. No. 19364, § 1, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 20273, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Secs. 22-53—22-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT FUND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 87. 
Cross reference— City purchasing regulations, § 2-456 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Created. 
There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "public improvement fund." 
(Code 1964, § 14.900)  
Sec. 22-62. - Sources. 
The public improvement fund may be established and maintained from any or all of the following sources: 
(1)  Appropriations from the general funds when available. 
(2)  The proceeds from bond issues as provided in the charter. 
(3)  Collections of special assessments or special tax bills, and any interest thereon, levied or issued for public work or condemnation of land theretofore paid for out of such public improvement fund. 
(4)  The proceeds from the sale of special tax bills. 
(5)  Any other source permitted by law or provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 14.910)  
Sec. 22-63. - Payment of special assessments into fund. 
Whenever the council shall authorize the cost of any public improvement to be paid out of the public fund, any special assessment, and interest thereon, that may be levied and collected on account of such improvement, or the proceeds from the collection of any such tax bills and interest thereon, shall be credited to and paid into the public improvement fund. 
(Code 1964, § 14.920; Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Secs. 22-64—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCESS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20880, § 2, adopted February 21, 2011, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 22-71—22-85, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to contract letting procedure and derived from § 14-350—14.490 of the 1964 Code; Ord. No. 18879, § 1, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 19841, § 1, 3-17-08; Ord. No. 20207, § 1, 3-2-09. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Standard public improvement process. 
(a)  Interested parties meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this code, formal proceedings for public improvements shall begin by appropriate city staff holding at least one meeting with interested parties to explain the basic concept of the proposed project and receive comments and suggestions. City staff shall make reasonable efforts to notify those most likely to be interested in or affected by the project, of the time and place of the interested parties meeting. Staff, when feasible shall attempt to personally contact by telephone or in person, the owners of property abutting the proposed public improvement to advise the property owners of the nature of the proposed improvement and the time and place of the interested parties meeting. 
(b)  Resolution of necessity. Following the interested parties meeting, the city council, if it determines to proceed with the project, shall adopt a resolution declaring the necessity of the improvement. The resolution shall describe the improvement, state the estimated cost of the improvement, state the method of payment for the improvement, and set a public hearing on the improvement. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall be published at least seven (7) days before the hearing. Staff, when feasible shall attempt to personally contact by telephone or in person, the owners of property abutting the proposed public improvement to advise the property owners of the time and place of the public hearing. 
(c)  Public hearing. At the public hearing on a public improvement project, all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, the council shall determine whether it is in the public interest to make the public improvement or any part of the improvement. If the council determines that the public improvement or any part of it should be made, the council, by motion, shall direct the city manager to proceed with having plans and specifications prepared. If plans and specifications have already been prepared and made available at an interested parties meeting, the council may determine to proceed with the project as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. If any part of the project cost is to be paid for by special assessments, the city clerk shall record a notice with the Boone County Recorder of Deeds. This notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Brief description of the improvement; 
(2)  Legal descriptions of the properties which may be specially assessed; 
(3)  Names of the property owners; 
(4)  Estimated amount of the special assessment; and 
(5)  Statement that when assessed, the special assessment shall be on file with the director of finance of the City of Columbia. 
(d)  Acquisition of property. If the public improvement project requires the acquisition of any interest in real property, an ordinance authorizing such acquisition by negotiation or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain shall normally be passed following the city council's determination to proceed with the project. 
(e)  Bid call ordinance. If the city council determines to proceed with the project, it shall, by ordinance, approve plans and specifications for the improvement and authorize the project to be constructed. The ordinance shall authorize the project to be constructed using city employees, or authorize the purchasing agent to call for bids and execute a contract for the improvement, or authorize part of the project to be constructed by city employees and part to be bid by the purchasing agent. The ordinance shall specify how the improvement shall be paid for. If any portion of the project is to be paid for by special assessments, the ordinance authorizing making the public improvement shall specify the portion of the project to be paid for by special assessments and identify the property to be assessed. 
(f)  Bidding. The purchasing agent shall advertise for bids in the same manner as bids for supplies, material, equipment or services are advertised under chapter 2 of this Code. The advertisement shall advise bidders that the city reserves the rights to reject any and all bids. All bids shall be accompanied by a certified check or bid bond with corporate surety, satisfactory to the purchasing agent, for five (5) percent of the amount of the bid. Bids submitted without such check or bid bond shall not be considered. 
(g)  Contract. The purchasing agent may reject any or all bids or may award the contract to the bidder that is, in the judgment of the purchasing agent, the lowest and best bidder. 
(h)  Bonds. The contractor on a public improvement project costing more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall give to the city performance and payment bonds, with corporate surety, satisfactory to the purchasing agent, each in an amount not less than the contract price. 
(i)  Acceptance of improvement. When the improvement has been completed, the city official charged with responsibility for the improvement shall report to the city manager whether the work has been completed according to the contract, plans and specifications. Upon determining that the improvement has been properly completed, the city manager shall accept and approve the work. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11; Ord. No. 22950 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 22-72. - Administrative public improvement process. 
(a)  Eligible projects. The city manager may authorize the following public improvement projects to follow the administrative public improvement process set forth in this section; provided that, no tax bills will be issued for the project and the project does not require the exercise of the power of eminent domain: 
(1)  Construction, upgrade or relocation of electric distribution lines less than sixty-nine (69) KV that is estimated to cost less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); 
(2)  Water and electric production facility expansion projects estimated to cost less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); 
(3)  Sanitary sewer projects estimated to cost less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00); 
(4)  Stormwater utility public improvement projects estimated to cost less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00); 
(5)  Any project estimated to cost less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(b)  Interested parties meeting. The administrative public improvement process shall begin by appropriate city staff holding at least one meeting with interested parties to explain the basic concept of the proposed project and receive comments and suggestions. City staff shall make reasonable efforts to notify those most likely to be interested in or affected by the project, of the time and place of the interested parties meeting. Staff, when feasible shall attempt to personally contact by telephone or in person, the owners of property abutting the proposed public improvement to advise the property owners of the nature of the proposed improvement and the time and place of the interested parties meeting. 
(c)  Report to council. If, following the interested parties meeting, the city manager determines that the project should follow the administrative public improvement process, the manager shall report that determination to the city council at a council meeting. The city council may direct the city manager to follow the standard public improvement process set forth in section 22-71. Unless directed to follow the standard public improvement process, the city manager may have plans and specification for the improvement prepared. 
(d)  Authorization to proceed. The city manager may authorize the purchasing agent to call for bids and execute a contract for the improvement. 
(e)  Bidding. The purchasing agent shall advertise for bids in the same manner as bids for supplies, material, equipment or services are advertised under chapter 2 of this Code. The advertisement shall advise bidders that the city reserves the rights to reject any and all bids. All bids shall be accompanied by a certified check or bid bond with corporate surety, satisfactory to the purchasing agent, for five (5) percent of the amount of the bid. Bids submitted without such check or bid bond shall not be considered. 
(f)  Contract. The purchasing agent may reject any or all bids or may award the contract to the bidder that is, in the judgment of the purchasing agent, the lowest and best bidder. 
(g)  Bonds. The contractor on a public improvement project costing more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall give to the city performance and payment bonds, with corporate surety, satisfactory to the purchasing agent, each in an amount not less than the contract price. 
(h)  Acceptance of improvement. When the improvement has been completed, the city official charged with responsibility for the improvement shall report to the city manager whether the work has been completed according to the contract, plans and specifications. Upon determining that the improvement has been properly completed, the city manager shall accept and approve the work. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11; Ord. No. 22950 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 22-73. - When interested party meetings not required. 
Not withstanding any other provisions of this Code, interested party meetings shall not be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Ordinary maintenance of public improvements. 
(2)  Projects where there are no obvious interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 22-74. - Payment of differential cost for water and sewer lines. 
When a property owner is extending a water or sewer line to serve the owner's property, the city may require the property owner to increase the size of the water or sewer line in order to provide adequate service to other areas. The city, in such cases, shall pay the property owner for the extra cost incurred in building the larger water or sewer line. The city manager may authorize such projects involving city payments of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Projects requiring city payments exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) must be authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 22-75. - Development agreements. 
(a)  The city council may, by ordinance, authorize the city manager to enter into agreements that require city contributions toward the cost of city public improvements to be constructed by developers or other persons. These public improvements shall not be subject to the public improvement process set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Any agreement with a developer or other person that requires the city to construct a public improvement shall be conditioned upon city council approval of the project in accordance with the public improvement process set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Sec. 22-76. - Design-build contracts. 
(a)  If the council determines that a public improvement should be constructed using a design-build contract, the procedure set forth in section 22-71 shall be modified as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Following the public hearing, the council shall authorize the city manager to proceed with selection of a design-build contractor. 
(c)  The city manager may award the design-build contract to the contractor that, in the opinion of the city manager, has submitted the best proposal based on the following factors: 
(1)  Proposed cost; 
(2)  City's previous experience with the contractor; 
(3)  Reputation of the contractor; 
(4)  Technical capability of the contractor; and 
(5)  Any other factors deemed relevant by the manager. 
(Ord. No. 20880, § 2, 2-21-11)  
Secs. 22-77—22-96. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS-TAX BILLS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10832, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1985, repealed former Div. 4, §§ 22-96—22-107, relative to assessment of costs and enacted in lieu thereof a new Div. 4, §§ 22-97—22-102 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 4 derived from Code 1964, §§ 14.500—14.600. 
 
Sec. 22-97. - Costs of public improvements may be assessed against lands benefitted and chargeable therewith. 
All or part of the costs of public improvements may be assessed against lands benefitted and chargeable therewith. The charges made shall be known as special assessments for improvements. The charges shall be made by levying special assessments and issuing tax bills against the property benefitted by the improvement, and chargeable with the cost of such improvement. Upon the completion of any improvement, the city official charged with the responsibility for such improvement shall compute the cost thereof, make a written report to the council that the improvement has been completed and apportion all or part of the cost of such improvement among the lots, parcels and tracts of land benefitted thereby and chargeable therewith, charging each tract of land with its proportionate part of such costs. The council shall, by ordinance, after a public hearing levy special assessments and authorize the issuance of tax bills against the lots, parcels and tracts of land benefitted by the improvement and chargeable with the costs thereof. The ordinance shall contain a description of each lot, tract or parcel of land chargeable with a part of the cost of the improvement and the amount with which it is chargeable. The city clerk shall issue the tax bills and deliver them to the director of finance for collection. Tax bills shall be signed by the clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the city. Public improvements made by city departments and employees may be paid for in the same manner as herein provided for any improvement made by contract. When an ordinance levying a special assessment is passed, a copy of the tax bill authorized thereby, shall be delivered to the then record owner of the property charged therewith. The special assessment and tax bill shall be a first lien upon the property. The lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 13242, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 13294, § 1, 4-20-92)  
Sec. 22-97.1. - Deferred tax bills for sanitary sewer projects. 
(a)  If the special assessment levied against an undeveloped lot, tract or parcel of land benefitted by construction of a sanitary sewer exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or thirty cents ($0.30) per square foot, an initial tax bill shall be issued against the property in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or thirty cents ($0.30) per square foot, whichever is less. A tax bill for the balance of the special assessment (a deferred tax bill) shall be issued when any of the following events occur: 
(1)  The lot, tract or parcel of land is split or subdivided. 
(2)  The lot, tract or parcel of land is rezoned, unless rezoning is initiated by the city council. 
(3)  The size or number of water meters serving the lot, tract or parcel of land is increased, unless such increase is solely for the purpose of fire protection or landscape irrigation. 
Deferred tax bills shall be subject to the same rules relating to interest and installment payments as other tax bills for public improvements. 
(b)  If the special assessment levied against a one-family developed lot or a two-family developed lot benefitted by construction of a sanitary sewer exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a one-family developed lot or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a two-family developed lot, an initial tax bill shall be issued against the property in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a one-family developed lot or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a two-family developed lot. For purposes of this section, a "one-family developed lot" means a lot, tract or parcel of land in zoning district R-1 or R-2 that contains a one-family dwelling; a "two-family developed lot" means a lot, tract or parcel of land in zoning district R-2 that contains a two-family dwelling. Tax bills for the balance of the special assessment (deferred tax bills) shall be issued when any of the following events occur: 
(1)  The lot, tract or parcel of land is split or subdivided; 
(2)  The lot, tract or parcel of land is rezoned, unless rezoning is initiated by the city council; and 
(3)  The size or number of water meters serving the lot, tract or parcel of land is increased, unless such increase is solely for the purpose of fire protection or landscape irrigation. 
Deferred tax bills shall be subject to the same rules relating to interest and installment payments as other tax bills for public improvements. 
(c)  When an ordinance is passed levying special assessments which involve deferred tax bills, the director of finance shall file in the office of the recorder of deeds a notice of deferred tax bill. The notice shall contain a legal description of each lot, tract or parcel of land for which a deferred tax bill shall be issued, the amount of each deferred tax bill and the events which would cause a deferred tax bill to be issued. The notice shall also state that the records of the finance department should be searched to determine whether tax bills have been issued and whether assessments have been paid. 
(d)  The total amount of tax bills deferred under this program shall not exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 15667, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 16735, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 17677, § 1, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 20146, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 20681, § 1, 7-19-10)  
Sec. 22-98. - Invalid assessments may be reassessed. 
If any tax bill or special assessment shall be invalid in whole or in part as determined by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction, or the amount assessed is not sufficient to pay the cost of the improvements, the council may, after a new public hearing, cause such assessment to be reassessed and authorize the enforcement of its collection. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 22-99. - Tax bills; form and content. 
Each tax bill shall contain a brief general statement of the facts authorizing its issue, the amount for which it is issued, the name of the record owner and the description of the property against which it is issued, the rate of interest which it bears, when it begins to bear interest, and shall state that it is a lien against the land therein described, and give the time that the lien continues. Tax bills shall bear no interest for sixty (60) days after the date of issue, at which time such tax bills shall be due and payable in full. After the expiration of sixty (60) days, tax bills shall bear interest, on the unpaid balance, at a rate equal to the Wall Street Journal's Prime Rate as published on the day the city council adopts the resolution declaring the necessity of the project or as published two (2) weeks before the first reading of the ordinance authorizing issuance of the tax bills, whichever rate is lower. Tax bills issued after January 1, 2006, for projects for which the city council has adopted a resolution of necessity before January 1, 2006, shall bear interest, on the unpaid balance, at a rate of nine (9) percent or at a rate equal to the Wall Street Journal's Prime Rate as published two (2) weeks before the first reading of the ordinance authorizing issuance of the tax bills, whichever rate is lower. The interest rate shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing issuance of the tax bills. Every tax bill shall be a lien against the lot, tract or parcel of land described therein for a period of ten (10) years after date of issue, unless sooner paid. The lien, for tax bills payable in installments, shall expire one year after the date of maturity of the last installment, except when it becomes necessary to bring suit to enforce the lien, in which case the lien shall continue until the expiration of the litigation. All tax bills shall be assignable, and the owner or holder of any tax bill may enforce the collection thereof by filing suit in a court of competent jurisdiction, in the name of the city to his own use or in an action brought by the city in its own name and for its own use. If the property owner cannot be served by legal process, a suit may be brought by attachment or by any other legal remedy. Tax bills shall be prima facie evidence of what they contain, of their own validity, of the facts authorizing their issue, that they are a lien on the land described and, in all tax bills issued in payment for sewers, the liability of the person named as the owner of such property. No mere informality or clerical mistake in any of the proceedings shall be a defense thereto. Any error made in issuing any tax bill may be corrected by the city clerk, either by interlineation or by issuing a new tax bill in lieu of the erroneous one. When a tax bill is corrected by interlineation, the date of making same shall be certified by the clerk on the margin or back of the bill. In any action brought on any tax bill, the court shall have the authority to correct any error in the tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 18865, § 1, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 22-100. - Installment payments. 
(a)  The owner of any tract of land, against which a tax bill has been issued, may, not later than sixty (60) days after the issuance of the tax bill, enter into an agreement with the city to pay the tax bill in ten (10) annual installments. Each payment shall be in an amount equal to one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the unpaid balance of the tax bill, together with all accrued interest. The agreement shall provide that if any installment is not paid when due, the balance shall be then due and payable in full, together with all accrued interest. Prepayments may be made without penalty. 
(b)  The owner of any tract of land, against which a tax bill has been issued, who shall qualify for the senior citizen installment plan, may, not later than sixty (60) days after the issuance of the tax bill, enter into an agreement with the city to pay the tax bill in ten (10) annual installments. The first nine (9) payments shall be in an amount equal to the accrued interest on the unpaid amount of the tax bill. The tenth payment shall be in an amount equal to the unpaid balance of the tax bill, together with all accrued interest. The agreement shall provide that if any installment is not paid when due, the balance shall be then due and payable in full, together with all accrued interest. Prepayments may be made without penalty. 
(1)  To qualify for the senior citizen installment plan, the applicant must meet the following qualifications at the time of signing the agreement: 
a.  The applicant must be not less than sixty (60) years of age; 
b.  The applicant must be an owner of the property subject to the tax bill and have occupied that property as his principal place of residence continuously for the previous twelve (12) months; and 
c.  The combined annual income of the applicant and those persons having an ownership interest in the property shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). 
(2)  The terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
a.  "Owner" and "ownership interest" includes one or more tenants by the entireties, joint tenants, or tenants in common. 
b.  "Income" means Missouri adjusted gross income as declared on the applicant's most recent state tax return and as defined in the Revised Missouri Statutes and increased, where necessary, to reflect the following: 
1.  Social Security, railroad retirement and veterans payment and benefits. 
2.  The total amount received from all other public and private pensions and annuities. 
3.  Public relief, public assistance, and employment benefits received in cash, other than benefits received pursuant to the Senior Citizens Property Tax Relief Statutes. 
4.  Capital gain as defined by the Internal Revenue Code unless already declared as income. 
5.  Interest earned on obligations of the United States, any state, or any of their subdivisions or agencies. 
6.  No deduction shall be allowed for losses not incurred in a trade or business. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 22-101. - Record and payment. 
The director of finance shall keep a record of all tax bills issued by the city, which shall show the date and amount of each tax bill, the rate of interest it bears, the name of the record owner and the description of the property against which it was issued, and a general description of the improvement. The director of finance shall accept partial or total payment of any tax bill and shall keep a record of all payments. When any tax bill is paid in full, he shall note the date of satisfaction on the record. The tax bill shall then be cancelled and returned to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 22-102. - Liability of public property for tax bills. 
All lands owned by any state, county or other political subdivision, cemetery company or railroad company fronting or abutting on any public improvement shall be liable for their proportionate part of the cost of such improvement, and tax bills shall be issued against such property. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
DIVISION 5. - SPRINKLING, OILING, REPAIRING, SURFACING AND RESURFACING UNIMPROVED STREETS, AVENUES, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10832, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1985, repealed former Div. 5, §§ 22-116 and 22-117, relative to payment for certain work by special tax bill and enacted in lieu thereof a new Div. 5, §§ 22-103 and 22-104 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 5 derived from Code 1964, §§ 14.610 and 14.630. 
 
Sec. 22-103. - Division of city into districts. 
The city shall be divided into sprinkling, oiling, repairing, surfacing and resurfacing districts. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 22-104. - Special assessments limited to two dollars per front foot. 
(a)  The council may cause unimproved streets, avenues, alleys and other public places of the city, or any part thereof, to be sprinkled, oiled, repaired, surfaced and resurfaced, and the cost may be defrayed by a special assessment not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per front foot. 
(b)  The council shall not levy special assessments under this section for any street maintenance project initiated after July 15, 2002. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 17377, § 1, 7-15-02)  
DIVISION 6. - STREET MAINTENANCE POLICY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10832, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1985, repealed former Div. 6, §§ 22-126—22-130, relative to streets and enacted in lieu thereof a new Div. 6, § 22-105 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 6 derived from Code 1964, §§ 14.980—14.1020. 
 
Sec. 22-105. - Maintenance policy. 
(a)  The city will maintain and repair, without charge to abutting property, all streets that are designated to be permanently improved streets by the council upon recommendation of the director. All streets hereinafter constructed or reconstructed shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the street construction standards and specifications set forth in the transportation plan and subdivision regulations. 
(b)  The city will maintain unimproved streets only to the extent of keeping such streets in a safe and passable condition. Unimproved streets shall be those which have been heretofore constructed or improved but are not designated by the council as having been permanently improved. No dust control measures will be initiated by the city for unimproved streets. Residents or owners of property abutting unimproved streets may provide, at their expense, such dust control measures as may be approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
DIVISION 7. - STREETS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10832, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1985, repealed former Div. 7, § 22-141, relative to sidewalks and enacted in lieu thereof a new Div. 7, §§ 22-107—22-109 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 7 derived from Code 1964, § 14.1500. 
 
Sec. 22-106. - Classification of streets; design standards and specifications. 
(a)  For the purpose of planning the orderly extension, construction and reconstruction of streets, all public streets and rights-of-way are classified in the transportation plan as follows: 
(1)  Local residential; 
(2)  Local nonresidential; 
(3)  Collector; 
(4)  Arterial; 
(5)  Expressway; 
(6)  Freeway. 
(b)  Street design standards and specifications are set forth in the transportation plan and the subdivision regulations. 
(c)  The council may, upon the recommendation of the director, grant a variance or exception to the minimum street widths required by the standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 15506, § 1, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-107. - Street dedications. 
Any dedication of right-of-way for street purposes shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation and to assure compliance with the Transportation Plan, the Subdivision Regulations, the requirements of this Division and other applicable City ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 22-108. - City participation in street construction or reconstruction. 
(a)  Definitions. "Local residential street portion of costs" shall mean an amount not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the city's average cost of constructing the pavement portion of local residential streets and of constructing the local residential pavement portion of collector and arterial streets during the two (2) calendar years prior to the year in which the ordinance is passed approving the engineer's final report for a particular street construction project. 
"Major drainage structure" shall mean a bridge or box culvert which is designed to convey a twenty-five (25) year storm, using established engineering criteria and which has a span of more than twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Local streets in new subdivision. The city will not participate in the cost of local residential or local nonresidential streets within new subdivisions. 
(c)  Local streets in approved subdivisions that have not been constructed by the subdivider. The city may construct local residential streets and alleys when those streets and alleys have been dedicated for public use but have not been constructed by the subdivider. The cost of the construction may be charged by the levy of special assessments and issuance of tax bills against the lots, tracts and parcels of land benefited by the construction and fronting or abutting on the street or alley. The assessment shall not exceed the full cost of construction, including engineering and design, sidewalks, drainage structures and appurtenances and any associated utility relocation or right-of-way costs. 
(d)  Local residential streets outside of new subdivisions. The cost of reconstructing local residential streets and alleys outside of new subdivisions may be charged by the levy of special assessments and issuance of tax bills against the lots, tracts and parcels of land benefitted by the construction or reconstruction and fronting or abutting on the street or alley. The assessment shall not exceed the local residential street portion of costs, as defined in subsection (a). The cost of all or any part of such reconstruction may be paid by the city as the council may determine and specify in the ordinance authorizing the improvement. 
(e)  Local nonresidential streets outside of new subdivisions. The cost of constructing or reconstructing local nonresidential streets and alleys outside of new subdivisions may be charged by the levy of special assessments and issuance of tax bills against the lots, tracts and parcels of land benefitted by the construction or reconstruction and fronting or abutting on the street or alley. The assessment shall not exceed the full cost of construction, including sidewalks, drainage structures and appurtenances and any associated utility relocation or right-of-way costs. 
(f)  Collector and arterial streets within new subdivisions. When a collector or arterial street is to be constructed within a new subdivision, the subdivider may request city participation in the project. If the city council determines that the city shall participate in the project, the procedures of division 3 of this article shall be followed. The subdivider shall provide the right-of-way and easements, engineering, clearing, grading to within +/- five-tenths (0.5) foot of final grade, and drainage improvements necessary for the project. The subdivider shall not be required to provide engineering for or to construct major drainage structures. The subdivider shall be required to provide the roadway grading to the bridge abutments or to the limits of the one hundred-year floodway if the width of the floodway is greater than the length of the major structure. The local residential street portion of cost may be charged by the levy of special assessments and issuance of tax bills against the lots, tracts and parcels of land benefitted by the construction in proportion to the number of fronting or abutting feet. 
(g)  Collector and arterial streets outside of new subdivisions. 
(1)  A part of the local residential street portion of costs, as defined in subsection (a), of constructing or reconstructing collector and arterial streets outside of new subdivisions may be charged by levying special assessments and issuance of tax bills against each lot, tract or parcel of land benefitted by the construction or reconstruction and fronting or abutting on the collector or arterial street in an amount which shall not exceed an assessment for five hundred (500) front feet. 
(2)  The criteria for determining the part of the local residential street portion of costs which shall be charged by levying special assessments and issuance of tax bills shall be the cost of curbs and gutters, improved drainage, overlay, or such other criteria as approved by the council upon the recommendation of the director. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 13513, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 15506, § 1, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 17470, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-109. - Through lots. 
In levying assessments for streets outside of new subdivisions on through lots, tracts or parcels of land, zoned for single-family residential or agricultural use, which front and back on a street, the rear footage may, within the discretion of the council upon the recommendation of the director, be assessed at seventy (70) percent of the applicable footage rate if right of access from the property to the street being constructed or reconstructed is retained. No assessments shall be made if rights of access from the property to the street being constructed or reconstructed are transferred to the city or if the right of access is denied by reason of zoning restrictions or other regulatory requirements. This section shall not apply to streets being constructed within new subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 10832, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 17358, § 1, 7-1-02; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 22-110—22-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - BEAUTIFICATION PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 22-115. - Beautification policy. 
In order to enlist the support of the residents of the city in the beautification of the city, city departments with public maintenance responsibilities may seek volunteers to assist with the development and maintenance of public beautification projects and in maintaining the cleanliness of existing public facilities and rights of way. 
(Ord. No. 14884, § 1, 6-17-96)  
Sec. 22-116. - Coordination of volunteer efforts. 
The department of public works shall coordinate the work of all volunteers for beautification and maintenance projects. 
(1)  Any city department controlling property, facilities or easements may participate in a volunteer beautification or cleanup program by submitting a description of the property, facility or easement to the director. 
(2)  Volunteers for beautification or cleanup projects shall contact the director in order to participate in beautification or cleanup projects. 
(3)  The director is authorized to establish guidelines and rules for volunteer projects and volunteer conduct and may decline to accept current or future offers of materials or labor from any source. 
(4)  The director shall evaluate all property, facilities, easements and projects submitted for inclusion as volunteer beautification or cleanup projects for suitability as a volunteer project. The director shall consider safety, accessibility, public impact, cost to the city and ultimate benefit of the project in determining which projects are most suitable as volunteer projects. 
(Ord. No. 14884, § 1, 6-17-96)  
Sec. 22-117. - Beautification projects. 
Any person or organization proposing to create, establish or participate in a beautification project on city property or right of way shall apply to the city council for a right of use permit allowing the project on city property or right of way. 
(1)  Applications for right of use permits submitted to the city council shall clearly identify the location of the intended project, explain the project in detail and be accompanied by drawings illustrating the project. 
(2)  The city staff shall review the applications and shall make a recommendation to the council after considering traffic, parking, the effect on sight distance for motorists, public safety, the suitability of proposed plantings, maintenance requirements and other aesthetic features. 
(Ord. No. 14884, § 1, 6-17-96)  
Sec. 22-118. - Adopt-a-spot programs. 
(a)  To the extent that staff and resources are available to properly support and monitor volunteer cleanup efforts, the public works department shall establish and coordinate volunteer efforts to clean up streets, right of ways, city property, or property used for city purposes. Such programs or efforts shall not be intended to replace normal maintenance responsibilities of the city, but rather to provide additional resources in areas of public use and visibility. 
(b)  The public works department shall determine the suitability of any street right of way, public area or property used for city purposes to be adopted, taking into consideration the character of the area, traffic volumes, general safety concerns and long-term maintenance responsibilities. If areas proposed to be adopted are not on properties controlled by the department of public works, the department shall serve as a coordinator with the appropriate city department and no work shall be performed until approval is received by the department of public works from the proper city department. In exercising discretion, the director may consider the following: 
(1)  Arterial and commercial collector streets. Arterial and those collector streets that serve a predominantly commercial area or along which the abutting property is unplatted and undeveloped may be adopted by adjacent property owners, individuals, or organizations and clubs. First preference shall be given to adjacent property owners. Adoption of these streets shall not be allowed for groups with participating children under twelve years of age. 
(2)  Residential collector and local residential streets. Neighborhood residential and collector streets that are obviously residential in character may be adopted only by adjacent property owners in either the form of a recognized homeowners association, church congregation or church or school sponsored social or scout groups, or by petition of more than one-half of the abutting property owners. 
(3)  Public areas. Property that is owned or controlled by the city, or where city operations are conducted, may be adopted. Areas in this category include recycling drop-off points, yard waste drop-off sites, linear parks and railroad right of ways. 
(Ord. No. 14884, § 1, 6-17-96)  
Sec. 22-119. - Volunteer agreements. 
(a)  Before any volunteer beautification or cleanup project is accepted by the city, the volunteer or volunteer group shall apply to the director and acknowledge the individual and group responsibilities attendant to the project. The application shall cover the following points: 
(1)  The location and description of the street, right of way, property or equipment site to be adopted or beautified. 
(2)  A plan for the cleanup or beautification, including start date, work schedule, completion date or length of commitment, list of materials or supplies needed, source of the supplies, support required of the city. 
(3)  A plan identifying safety hazards of the project and outlining the safety measures and training to be provided, including a schedule and outline of safety meetings that shall be conducted. 
(4)  Reporting requirements of the volunteers and a plan for meeting those requirements. 
(5)  Identification of volunteers who are responsible and methods to contact these people. 
(6)  A plan for handling materials cleaned up, including recyclables, or materials expended in the case of beautification. 
(7)  A plan for use and return of any city-supplied equipment or materials. 
(b)  The city shall support volunteer efforts by: 
(1)  Assisting the volunteer or volunteer groups in creating the plans required by this section. 
(2)  Providing (where applicable) bags, gloves, safety vests and "Volunteers at Work" signs. 
(3)  Arranging for collection and disposal of the material collected. 
(4)  Maintaining records on amounts collected, number of volunteers involved, and hours of service. 
(5)  Providing identification signs to be placed in the adopted area. 
(6)  Assisting the volunteer group in recognizing safety issues and responding to these issues. 
(c)  The safety of volunteers participating in cleanup or beautification programs is the responsibility of the individual volunteer and volunteer groups and not the city. Each volunteer shall sign a statement to this effect releasing the city from responsibility for injuries occurring during participation in the program. 
(Ord. No. 14884, § 1, 6-17-96)  
Secs. 22-120—22-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REFUSE COLLECTION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Trash storage facilities requirement under minimum properties standards code, § 6-148; garbage storage or disposal facilities under minimum properties standards code, § 6-149; disposal of garbage under minimum properties standards code, § 6-170; garbage and rubbish disposal in food service establishments, § 11-156(f); junk dealers and junkyards, § 11-176 et seq.; littering, § 16-231; discarding refuse and trash in parks, § 17-66. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-156. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Battery, or lead-acid battery. A battery designed to contain lead and sulfuric acid with a nominal voltage of at least six (6) volts and of the type intended for use in motor vehicles and watercraft. 
Bioreactor landfill. A landfill to which liquid is added to actively manage decomposition of waste and enhance gas recovery. 
Bulky item. Any single item which cannot be contained in a refuse bag, can be easily collected by two (2) persons, as determined by the director, and weighs less than fifty (50) pounds. 
Clean commingled fibers. Commingled loads of mixed paper product, such as cardboard, chipboard, newsprint, magazines and office paper, shall be considered clean if containing less than five (5) percent of non-recyclable materials and no glass. 
Clean commingled containers. Commingled loads of containers, such as #1 through #7 rigid container plastics, aluminum beverage cans, glass jars and bottles and tin cans, shall be considered clean if containing less than five (5) percent of non-recyclable materials. 
Clean fill. Uncontaminated soil, rock, sand, gravel, concrete, asphaltic concrete, cinderblocks, brick, minimal amounts of wood and metal, and inert solids as approved by rule or policy of the state department of natural resources for fill, reclamation or other beneficial use. 
Clean old corrugated cardboard. Boxes made from fibrous containerboard used in packaging applications that are free of a plastic liner, Styrofoam and other contaminants. 
Commercial. All types of solid wastes generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonresidential entities. 
Director. The director of utilities or the director's designee. 
Food waste compostables. Uneaten food and food preparation wastes, free of contaminants such as wrappers, from residences and commercial establishments such as grocery stores, restaurants, and produce stands, institutional cafeterias and kitchens, and industrial sources such as employee lunchrooms. 
Garbage. Refuse containing food wastes from homes, kitchens, apartments, hotels, restaurants, fraternity houses, sorority houses, stores, markets, and similar establishments. 
Holidays. All holidays observed by the city. 
Household hazardous waste. Small quantities of hazardous waste generated by use within residences which are exempt from regulation under the provisions of Sections 260.350 to 260.434, RSMo., but are considered flammable, explosive, corrosive, toxic or radioactive and considered a threat to the health or environment. 
Major appliance. Clothes washers and dryers, water heaters, trash compactors, dishwashers, conventional ovens, ranges, stoves, woodstoves, air conditioners, refrigerators and freezers. 
Mixed materials. Loads of commingled recyclables that have greater than five (5) percent non-recyclable material or consist of a mix of fibers and containers. 
Recyclable item. Recyclable items shall include aluminum and tin cans, #1 through #7 rigid container plastics, glass, cardboard, newsprint, magazines and catalogs, chipboard and any other item duly designated by regulation by the director. 
Refuse. All solid wastes. 
Residential unit. Premises used as residence for one or more persons which contains one kitchen unit, except for multiple kitchen residences owned or occupied by the same family. 
Separated materials. Separated materials, such as full loads of a single accepted recyclable, having less than two (2) percent of non-recyclable materials and requiring no processing other than baling or stockpile for resale. 
Solid waste. Garbage and other discarded materials including, but not limited to, solid and semisolid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities, but does not include hazardous waste. 
Tire. A continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle or trailer as defined in chapter 301, RSMo. 
Unacceptable recyclable materials. Loads that contain more than twenty (20) percent non-recyclable material, liquid saturated fibers or hazardous materials shall be deemed unacceptable and shall be directed to the landfill for disposal. 
Yard Waste. Leaves, grass clippings, brush and limbs, yard and garden vegetation and Christmas trees. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9050; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 13056, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 19873, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 20341, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 )  
Sec. 22-157. - Provision of service by city. 
(a)  Generally; powers and duties of director. The city shall provide refuse collection and disposal within the city in accordance with the provisions of this article and may provide contract services to other governmental units as further described in this article. The city shall encourage reclaiming and recycling of materials as an alternative to disposal in the city landfill. The director is authorized to make arrangements for the sale, in accordance with city ordinance, of recyclable or reclaimed items collected and of mulch and compost produced by city operations. The director shall have charge and supervision of the collection and disposal of refuse pursuant to this chapter and shall have the power to establish rules and regulations governing keeping, collection, removing and disposition of refuse not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. The director is authorized to negotiate terms and submit bids for providing solid waste transportation, processing or disposal services to other governmental units. Agreements for these services must be authorized by the city council. The director is authorized to establish rates equal to the actual costs to the city of collection and disposal of materials and objects which, by their nature or composition, require unusual or special treatment and handling. 
(1)  Nothing herein shall require the city to accept, collect or dispose of any material, the collection or disposal of which is prohibited or regulated by the state or federal government; nor to require the city to collect or dispose of any material or object which, in the sole discretion of the director, poses any undue threat of harm to the citizens or employees of the city or to any public property or improvement, except that a program to provide for the collection and safe disposal of household hazardous waste in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations shall be established by April 1, 1992. The director is hereby authorized to implement such a program by regulation. 
(2)  The director shall establish a cost list for special handling charges wherever possible and shall develop costs upon request for materials or objects of which the city has not previously collected or disposed. 
(b)  Requirement of service; waiver. Every residential owner, occupant, tenant or lessee within the city limits shall receive refuse service and tender payment therefor in accordance with the fees herein provided for, unless a waiver of service is authorized by the director, after special investigation of the conditions upon which the waiver is requested. 
(c)  Billing, deposits and discontinuance of service. Billing, deposits, discontinuance of service and all aspects thereof shall be handled in accordance with the utility billing and service provisions of section 27-16 et seq. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9060; Ord. No. 13056 § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 17836, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 )  
Sec. 22-158. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Unlawful items. The city shall not collect for disposal at its sanitary landfill, nor shall it accept for disposal at its sanitary landfill, the following items: 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
(2)  Household hazardous waste. 
(3)  Infectious waste which has not been rendered innocuous. 
(4)  Lead-acid batteries. 
(5)  Tires which have not been cut, chipped or shredded in accordance with RSMo chapter 260. 
(6)  Major appliances. 
(7)  Waste oil from motor vehicles. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or attempt to conceal any unlawful items in refuse to be collected by the city or deposited in the city's sanitary landfill. The director shall be authorized to cause inspection of any materials brought to the landfill to assure conformance with this requirement. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the refuse containers or bags of another for the disposal of his own refuse or garbage. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, deposit, drop off or set out at any residential yard waste site any materials, substances or thing other than yard waste from that person's personal residence. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any refuse by depositing the same in any public alley, street, roadway, vacant lot or property of any kind or character within the city or in any stream or body of water within the city, or by burning garbage. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the disposition of refuse by means of burning the same in an incinerator enclosed within a building and complying with applicable state law. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to block, either by parking a motor vehicle or by placing any barriers or other restrictive devices, the access to any refuse storage container by the city collection vehicles. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to place liquid fats, oils and greases into a trash compactor or dumpster. A violation of this subsection is a Class A misdemeanor as designated by this code and punishable under section 16-31 of this code. 
(7)  Information obtained from waste disposed or deposited in violation of this section may be a rebuttable presumption that the person so identified committed the violation of sections 22-158(b)(2) and (4). 
(8)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for any person to take, open or remove the contents of, commingled recycling bag placed near the street for collection by the city. This subsection shall not apply to city refuse collectors performing their job duties. 
(Ord. No. 13056 § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13055 § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 16572, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 20061, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20341, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23683 , § 2, 11-5-18) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 12820, adopted Dec. 10, 1990, added a new § 22-158 and renumbered existing §§ 22-158—22-165 as §§ 22-159—22-166.  
Sec. 22-159. - Residential customers. 
(a)  Rates. Residential service shall consist of the removal of refuse, in bags or disposable containers or in centralized containers set for grouped residential units as approved by the director, once weekly. The fees for such service shall be as follows: 
Residences, per month, per residential unit (single-family, duplex, apartment up to four (4) units) ..... $16.52 
Residences, per month, per residential unit when property is vacant and owner has requested discontinuance of a metered service ..... Fifty percent (50%) 
of the per month, 
per residential unit rate 
Grouped residential units having centralized collection containers, per unit, per month ..... 15.72 
(b)  Refuse bags. Residential customers shall be provided refuse bags by the city at the rate of twenty-five (25) bags every six (6) months. Additional refuse bags will be made available for sale to the customer at a cost and location to be determined by the director. 
(c)  Customer responsibility. It shall be the duty of every customer to place the daily accumulation of refuse in refuse bags which are securely closed or other disposable container for pickup, and it shall be the duty of every person placing garbage in any such bag or container, to eliminate, as far as possible, all water and liquid from such garbage before placing same in such bag or container. 
(d)  Location of refuse or yard waste for pickup. All material to be removed by the city, or its authorized collector, shall be placed in an easily accessible location at the back of the curb, edge of the roadway or immediately adjacent to an alley, as the case may be. Material for disposal shall not be located within a building or structure. If more than one bag is necessary to hold the refuse accumulated at a customer's premises, or if more than one bag is used for the refuse from any one building, all bags shall be placed at the same location on the premises. 
(e)  Unlawful to deposit other than refuse in bags for pickup. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in a container or bag from which refuse is to be removed by the city or its authorized collector, any material other than refuse as defined in this article. If any container or bag contains material other than refuse, the city or its authorized collector shall not be obliged to remove the contents of such container or bag. 
(f)  Roll carts prohibited. Except as otherwise provided herein for centralized containers set for grouped residential units, the purchase of roll carts for residential refuse collection is hereby prohibited. There shall be no requirement for the use of residential roll carts for residential refuse collection from customers within the city. No roll carts shall be purchased or required for residential customers. 
(g)  No automated refuse collection vehicles for roll carts. The purchase of new (or modification of existing) refuse collection vehicles designed or made for automated residential roll cart pick-up for residential refuse customers within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(h)  Unlawful to place refuse at curb, when: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to place or allow any refuse, grass clippings, leaves or brush, to remain at the curb or edge of the roadway, or in any other open and unscreened area accessible to animals, on any day other than the scheduled day of collection of refuse for that location. The "day of collection" is hereby defined to be the period from 4:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection until 6:00 p.m. the day of collection. 
(2)  The person or persons in whose name the refuse account is maintained and the owners of record of the property on which the refuse, garbage, or grass clippings, leaves or brush, is placed or allowed to remain shall be prima facie responsible for its placement and maintenance in violation hereof. 
(3)  Violation of this subsection shall constitute a class "C" misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of chapter 16, article II of this Code. 
(i)  Dimensions and weight. All material for collection must be in a bag, disposable containers, or securely bound bundles not greater than four (4) feet in length, two (2) feet in diameter, and shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds total weight each. 
(j)  Collection and pickup. Residential refuse pickup shall be made once weekly according to a schedule on file with the director. The director may vary the schedule and will post notice of any such variance because of weather conditions or other conditions which make the normal collection schedule impractical. When a holiday is observed on the normal day of collection, the collection will be made the following day or as approved and publicly announced by the director. 
(k)  Special pickup. A special pickup for residential customers will be provided on a continuous basis at no additional charge. This service is intended for disposal of quantities or items which are too large for regular pickup. All material for special collection shall be placed in a visible and easily accessible location not to extend more than fifteen (15) feet from the back of curb, edge of roadway or immediately adjacent to an alley, as the case may be. Materials resulting from the erection, destruction or major remodeling of a building, felled trees, large automobile parts, hazardous materials, etc., and items which cannot be handled by the special collection crew will not be picked up. Material meeting the special pickup criteria but placed for collection by owners of commercial businesses or rental property will be collected based on the commercial hand pickup service charge, provided previous arrangements are made. 
(l)  Suspension of bundle requirements. In the event of a storm which causes widespread tree damage, the requirement to bundle brush and tree trimmings for collection may be suspended by the director. 
(m)  House collection for physically disabled or handicapped: 
(1)  Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residential unit who, due to a physical disability or handicap, is unable to carry refuse to the curbline may receive house collection at the same service rate as curbside collection. A request for this service must be submitted in writing to the director. This request must include certification by a licensed health care provider of the applicant's physical disability or handicap. 
(2)  Refuse to be collected from the house must be in bags and shall be located in plain view in an accessible location at ground level or on an open platform not more than four (4) feet above the ground level and so placed that they may be reached from the ground by the collector. Bags shall not be located within a building or structure. Collection will be made from only one location on the premises. 
(n)  Major appliance pickup. The director shall establish a date and time for pickup of major appliances at curbside upon the payment of a fee of twenty-two dollars and seventy-five cents ($22.75) for appliances equipped for use of refrigerants, per appliance and fifteen dollars and nineteen cents ($15.19) for appliances not requiring refrigerants, per appliance and receipt of a permit for each appliance to be picked up by the person desiring the pickup. The permit shall be nonrefundable and nontransferable. Upon the applicant's request, the permit fee may be charged to the applicant's utility account. 
(o)  Special pickup of unlawfully placed material. The city may remove refuse that is untimely placed or allowed to remain at the curb or edge of the roadway in violation of subsection (h) of this section. The city may remove yard waste that is improperly deposited at curbside for pickup in violation of section 22-158(b)(3). The fee for material removal service under this subsection shall be as follows: 
Special pickup fee of unlawfully placed material ..... $50.00 
The person(s) whose refuse or yard waste is being disposed of, the person(s) who unlawfully placed the refuse or yard waste, the occupant(s) of the property where a special pickup occurs and the owner(s) of the property, if different, shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the special pickup fee of unlawfully placed material. Normally, special pickup fees of unlawfully placed material shall be billed initially to the city utility customer for the location where the special pickup was made. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9070; Ord. No. 9931, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 12023, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 13055 § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13057, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13925 § 1, 1-3-94; Ord. No. 14213 § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 16776, § 1, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 17020, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17836, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 19207, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19678, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20263, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 20341, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 20741, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21075, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22574, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22639, § 1, 11-2-15/3-15-16 ; Ord. No. 23303 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23637 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 22-159.1. - Residential recycling program. 
(a)  As part of its basic service to residential customers, as set out in section 22-159, the city will also provide, by August 1, 1998, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, weekly pickup of recyclable material. The schedule for pickup shall be on file with the director. Any variances from the schedule shall be made in accordance with section 22-159(j). 
(b)  Duties of customer. It shall be the duty of the customer to place recyclable items in bags identified for that purpose at the curb as provided for residential pickup (section 22-159(d)) or in designated bulk storage recycling containers. All recyclable items shall be separated and packaged according to rules promulgated by the director. 
(c)  Three (3) blue bag vouchers will be provided per year. Each voucher may be redeemed for eighteen (18) bags. Commingled recycling bags will be provided to all customers not receiving centralized pickup and having access to curbside recycling. Additional bags will be made available for sale to the customer at a cost and location to be determined by the director. 
(d)  No roll carts. Except as otherwise provided herein for centralized containers set for grouped residential units, the purchase of roll carts for residential recycling collection is hereby prohibited. There shall be no requirement for the use of residential roll carts for residential recycling collection from customers within the city. No roll carts shall be purchased or required for residential recycling customers. 
(e)  No automated refuse collection vehicles for roll carts. The purchase of new (or modification of existing) refuse collection vehicles designed or made for automated residential roll cart pick-up for residential recycling customers within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 13056, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22639, § 1, 11-2-15/3-15-16 ; Ord. No. 23303 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17)  
Sec. 22-160. - Apartments in excess of four units per structure. 
(a)  Refuse collection containers. Bulk refuse storage containers shall be provided by the city for apartments in excess of four (4) units. It shall be within the discretion of the director to determine whether or not to place bulk storage containers for use of apartments containing less than four (4) units per structure. If bulk refuse containers are not placed at these structures, rates for residential customers shall apply. 
(b)  Collection methods and rates. The following collection methods and rates shall apply to apartment complexes with more than four (4) units per structure: 
(1)  The occupant, tenant or lessee of each apartment unit shall be charged fifteen dollars and seventy-two cents ($15.72) per month for pickup from bulk containers. 
(2)  The owner or manager of an apartment complex may make application to the director for billing of an entire apartment complex to a single customer. This service with pickup from a bulk storage container shall be fifteen dollars and forty-five cents ($15.45) per apartment unit per month, provided all apartment units in a complex are billed the same rate to a single customer. 
(3)  Apartment complex owners or managers may request permanent recycling containers be provided as part of the residential refuse collection service. 
(c)  Use of bulk storage containers. The owner or manager of any such apartment complex, regardless of the collection method applicable, shall provide and maintain a location for a bulk storage container as approved by the director. It shall be the duty of every occupant, tenant, lessee and owner to place the daily accumulation of refuse in the container required above and when placing garbage in such container, to eliminate, as far as possible, all water and liquid from such garbage, and to securely wrap garbage in paper before placing the same in such container. 
(d)  Size of container. The director shall determine the size and type of bulk storage containers to be placed at the apartment complex based upon the number of residential units and shall determine the number of times the containers shall be emptied. If additional pickups are needed, the director is authorized to set rates by duly promulgated regulation for the additional pickups, which shall not exceed the actual cost of service. 
(e)  Collection and pickup. Pickup shall be available once daily, except Sundays and legal Holidays, and shall be made as determined necessary by the director. 
(f)  Upkeep and maintenance. The owner of the premises shall bear the sole responsibility for upkeep and maintenance of bulk storage container enclosures and gates, private drives, parking lots or other paved surfaces over which city vehicles must travel to reach bulk storage containers. 
(g)  A compactor shall be required for refuse collection at any multi-family housing structure or series of structures under common ownership which contains two hundred (200) or more bedrooms. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9080; Ord. No. 12023, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 13055; § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13057, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14213 § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 16776, § 1, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 17020, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17836, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 19207, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19678, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20341, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 20741, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 23303 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23637 , § 1, 9-17-18) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-161. - Commercial service. 
(a)  Customer responsibility. Commercial customers shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premises where excessive amounts of refuse and/or recycling accumulate shall maintain a metal bulk storage container or containers, approved by the director, of sufficient size to contain all refuse and/or recycling which the establishment accumulates between collections. 
(2)  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises shall place the daily accumulation of refuse and/or recycling in the required container or containers. 
(3)  Every person placing garbage in any such container shall eliminate, as far as possible, all water and liquid from the garbage, and shall securely wrap the garbage in paper before placing it in the container. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person required to maintain a metal bulk storage container or containers to allow refuse and/or recycling to be deposited anywhere except within the container or to allow the container to become overly filled to the extent that all material cannot be confined to the container. 
(5)  Material shall be collected at a point jointly agreed to by the solid waste collections staff and the customer. 
(6)  Recycling material shall be separated the same as residential recyclables. Dumpsters will be placed for containers such as glass, plastic, aluminum and metal or for fibers such as newspapers, cardboard, chipboard, office paper and magazines, or multiple carts will be placed if both containers and fibers are to be collected. 
(7)  Food waste compost customers shall separate the food waste compostables from all non-compostable wrappers and containers and customers shall place food waste compostables loosely in the collection containers. 
(b)  Commercial collection methods and rates. The following refuse collection methods and rates shall apply to commercial customers as approved by the director: 
(1)  Commercial hand pickup: 
a.  Reoccurring and/or scheduled commercial hand pickup services may be provided for commercial customers who produce minimal amounts of refuse and/or recycling or in situations where bulk storage containers are not feasible and must be approved by the director. 
b.  The service charge for hand pickup of businesses or commercial places, boarding and rooming houses, fraternities and sororities, shall be at the rate of three dollars and twenty-three cents ($3.23) per collection minute, or a minimum of five (5) minutes which is equivalent to sixteen dollars and seventeen cents ($16.17) per occurrence. 
c.  Commercial customers served by hand pickup service, shall conform to container capacity of twenty (20) to thirty-three (33) gallons and weighing, with contents when full, not over fifty (50) pounds, or the equivalent thereof. 
(2)  Bulk storage container collection. Rates per month for bulk storage containers shall be shown in the following table for container sizes indicated and number of collections per week: 
Front Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection: 
Container Size 	Number of Collections per Week 	Extra Collections 
Cubic Yards 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	Each 
2 	$89.48 	$143.81 	$210.93 	$290.84 	$383.54 	$489.02 	$103.00 
4 	103.74 	185.97 	289.50 	414.35 	560.52 	727.95 	165.00 
6 	122.36 	228.61 	360.43 	517.80 	700.77 	909.31 	208.00 
8 	139.88 	276.14 	446.47 	650.93 	889.48 	1,162.12 	273.00 
 
Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection: 
Container Size 	Number of Collections per Week 	Extra Collections 
Cubic Yards 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	Each 
2 	$104.39 	$162.99 	$234.38 	$318.55 	$415.50 	$525.25 	$110.00 
4 	117.28 	205.89 	315.82 	447.06 	599.61 	773.46 	173.00 
6 	136.57 	259.79 	414.97 	602.10 	821.22 	1,072.30 	251.00 
8 	152.60 	308.00 	506.01 	746.65 	1,029.92 	1,355.81 	327.00 
Roll Cart 	26.10 	40.75 	58.60 	79.64 	103.88 	131.31 	28.00 
 
Pickup shall be available once daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, and shall be made as determined necessary by the director. The director is authorized to order special collections or extra collections in the event containers are found to be overly filled prior to the regularly scheduled collection date and to direct that the customer be billed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Clean Old Corrugated Cardboard Only Recycling Bulk Storage Container Collection: Eighty percent (80%) of the Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection Rate. 
Clean Mixed Fiber Material Recycling Bulk Storage Container Collection: Eighty-five percent (85%) of the Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection Rate. 
Clean Aluminum, Metal or Plastic Containers Recycling Bulk Storage Container Collection: Eighty-five percent (85%) of the Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection Rate. 
Clean Food Waste Compost Bulk Storage Container Collection: Eighty-five percent (85%) of the Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection Rate. 
Glass or Mixed Fiber Material with Containers in the Same Bulk Storage Container Collection: One hundred percent (100%) of the Rear Loading Bulk Storage Container Refuse Collection Rate. 
Pickup shall be available once daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, and shall be made as determined necessary by the director. The director is authorized to order special collections or extra collections in the event containers are found to be overly filled prior to the regularly scheduled collection date and to direct that the customer be billed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Front loading compactor boxes, per cubic yard capacity ..... $24.51 
(4)  Large volume user. When a commercial, institutional or governmental customer has refuse and/or recycling collection needs which are of a larger volume than for the number of collections per week and number of containers for bulk container collection set out in subsection (2) above, and the director determines that a variation from the stated rates or methods of collection is appropriate, the director is hereby authorized to establish methods of collection and rates not less than the actual cost to the city of collection and disposing of the refuse of such large volume user. The city manager and city clerk are hereby authorized to enter into and execute agreements for this service with such large volume users when necessary or appropriate. 
(c)  The owner of the premises shall bear the sole responsibility for upkeep and maintenance of private drives, parking lots or other paved surfaces over which city vehicles must travel to reach collection containers. 
(d)  Front loading construction dumpsters. The city shall set a dumpster at a construction site for a rate of ninety-three dollars and eighty-one cents ($93.81). Collection service from the dumpster shall be made upon request at a rate of one hundred thirty-eight dollars and eighty-two cents ($138.82) per collection with a minimum (calendar) monthly charge of one hundred thirty-eight dollars and eighty-two cents ($138.82). In the event service is not requested within each full calendar month following placement, the container may be removed and a new placement charge will be levied to set the container again. Payment can be required at the time a container is requested to be set. 
(e)  Roll-off and compactor refuse containers. The fees for such service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Full-sized compactor style roll-off containers: One hundred one dollars and forty-seven cents ($101.47) per collection plus fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per ton with a minimum (calendar) monthly charge of one hundred one dollars and forty-seven cents ($101.47). 
(2)  Full-sized non-compacted roll-off containers: One hundred one dollars and forty-seven cents ($101.47) per collection plus fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per ton with a minimum (calendar) monthly charge of one hundred one dollars and forty-seven cents ($101.47). 
(3)  Mini-sized compactor style roll-off containers: Seventy-two dollars and thirteen cents ($72.13) per collection plus fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per ton with a minimum (calendar) monthly charge of seventy-two dollars and thirteen cents ($72.13). 
(4)  Mini-sized non-compacted style roll-off containers: Seventy-two dollars and thirteen cents ($72.13) per collection plus fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per ton with a minimum (calendar) monthly charge of seventy-two dollars and thirteen cents ($72.13). 
(f)  Recycling roll-off or compacting containers. The fees for such service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Clean old corrugated cardboard: No charge. 
(2)  Clean mixed fiber material only: 85% of current roll-off and compactor refuse container rates. 
(3)  Clean aluminum, metal or plastic containers only: 85% of current roll-off and compactor refuse container rates. 
(4)  Glass or mixed fiber and container materials in same dumpster (uncompacted only): 100% of current roll-off and compactor refuse container rates. 
(Code 1964, § 14.895; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 13055, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13057, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 14213, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 17836, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 20049, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20341, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 20414, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22574, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 22926 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23303 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23637 , § 1, 9-17-18; Ord. No. 23670 , § 1, 10-15-18) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-162. - Billing and credit. 
All service fees provided for by this article and those uniform utility charges set by chapter 27, article II, shall be billed and collected as provided for by the procedures of chapter 27, article II. All service fees collected shall be credited to the fund(s) designated by the director of finance for such purpose. 
Mobile home parks and apartment complexes. If individual units in a mobile home park or an apartment complex do not have any city-provided metered services, the park or complex owner shall pay the applicable residential per unit fee for every unit within the park or complex. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9100; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 ) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-163. - Landfill and disposal areas. 
(a)  Rates for landfill. Landfill fees shall be determined by weight unless scales are temporarily out of commission. The current state solid waste tonnage fee will be added to all rates where applicable except the "per ton" rate, set forth in subsection (1) below, which includes that fee. Charges for use of the landfill shall be determined by weight or volume as follows: 
(1)  Per ton, or any fraction thereof ..... $55.00 
Minimum fee ..... 25.00 
(2)  Automobiles, each ..... 25.00 
Pickups, vans and trailers without specified rates, each ..... 25.00 
(3)  Any vehicle one ton or larger (trailers with dual wheels or more than one axle will be included in this category unless other specified rates apply), each ..... 140.40 
(4)  Noncompacted roll-off boxes, trailers greater than eighteen (18) feet in length (length to be determined by dimension of cargo area) and truck with haul bed greater than eighteen (18) feet in length, each ..... 280.89 
(5)  Vehicle towing trailer: 
a.  No charge if empty. 
b.  Regular charge if hauling material to be deposited in the landfill. 
(6)  Compactor trucks and compactor roll-off boxes, per cubic yard capacity ..... 24.51 
(7)  Uncovered or unsecured loads that may either blow or fall off of the haul vehicle during transit will be charged a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)* service fee in addition to the basic charge for the haul vehicle. 
(8)  The city may establish a monthly billing processing for regular customers of the landfill when approved by the director. 
(9)  Construction demolition, clean fill, or other soil material which is determined by the director or his duly appointed representative to contain material that is totally compostable or recyclable on site will be charged at one-half (½) the normal rate, subject to standard minimum charges provided the material is delivered to a designated area at the landfill. 
(10)  Yard waste consisting of limbs, brush, clean wood waste, grass clippings, leaves, and chipped brush and chipped tree limbs will be accepted at the landfill at no charge provided it is delivered to the designated compost area free of any contaminants. Yard waste that requires any further separation and handling will be charged at one-half (½) the normal rate subject to standard minimum charges. 
a.  Non-yard waste material used in the composting operation that does not require extra handling will be accepted at no charge. 
(11)  Major appliances delivered to a designated location at the landfill: 
a.  Appliances equipped for use of refrigerants, per appliance ..... $22.75 
b.  Appliances not requiring refrigerants, per appliance ..... 15.19 
(12)  Grease trap waste disposed at the landfill, per ton, or any fraction thereof ..... 27.86 
(b)  Operation of disposal area: 
(1)  Loitering at disposal area unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at any area maintained by the city for disposal of refuse and which is posted as such by conspicuous signs; and further it shall be unlawful for any person to remove refuse or rubble from any such area without authority from the director, or in any way disturb, mar, mutilate any equipment, facility or property owned by the city or being used by the city at such areas. 
(2)  Authority to establish hours. The director shall have authority to establish the hours of operation for the disposal area. 
(c)  Items received at the material recovery facility. Recyclable material approved by the director or the director's designee may be delivered to the material recovery facility at the landfill by the general public, other governmental units or private businesses, or may be transported to the material recovery facility from other governmental units or private businesses by city crews in accordance with regulations promulgated by the director. Records are to be maintained identifying the quantity, classification, supplier and source of any material received. 
(d)  Rates for items received at the material recovery facility. 
(1)  Separated materials: No charge. 
(2)  Clean commingled fibers: 80% of current landfill tonnage rate. 
(3)  Clean commingled containers: 85% of current landfill tonnage rate. 
(4)  Mixed materials: 100% of current landfill tonnage rate. 
(5)  Unacceptable materials: 110% of current landfill tonnage rate. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9110; Ord. No. 11621, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 13055, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13057, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 13437, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 14213, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 15641, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 16370, § 1, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 17836, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 19699, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 21075, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21542, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22574, § 1, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22786, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 22926 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23303 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23637 , § 1, 9-17-18) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-164. - City responsibility for items collected as refuse. 
The city shall not be responsible for damage, replacement, return or reimbursement of any items picked up as refuse which have been placed in refuse bags or placed at the normal location of refuse pickup. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9120; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-165. - Unauthorized hauling of garbage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an agent of the city, to haul, convey, carry or transport any garbage from any location within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), any generator of garbage that had been hauling its own garbage with the written permission of the director before April 7, 2003, shall be allowed to continue hauling its own garbage from its point of origin to a properly licensed disposal site. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9130; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 17636, § 1, 4-7-03) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Sec. 22-166. - Delivery of refuse to authorized areas. 
All refuse transported through any street or alley of the city shall be delivered to a disposal facility approved by the state. When delivered to a city disposal area it shall be dumped in a manner and in a place directed by the director or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1964, § 10.9140; Ord. No. 12820, § 1, 12-10-90) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 12820, adopted Dec. 12, 1990, deleted former §§ 22-166 and 22-167, which pertained to depositing refuse or rubber in streams, lots, streets, using incinerators, and using bags or containers of another, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 10.9150, 10.9160. 
Section 1 of Ord. No. 12820 also renumbered § 22-165 as § 22-166. See the editor's note following § 22-158.  
Secs. 22-167—22-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT SOLID WASTE DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21430, § 1, adopted September 17, 2012, amended division 2 to read as herein set out. Former division 2, pertained to special business district solid waste district. 
 
Sec. 22-170. - District boundaries; provision of service within district; character of the service. 
(a)  The Downtown Community Improvement District Solid Waste District (the "district") is established consisting of all property within the boundaries of the Downtown Community Improvement District. 
(b)  The city shall provide solid waste services within the district. 
(c)  Solid waste services within the district shall be based upon the common use of trash containers, trash compactors, recycling facilities and other solid waste management programs rather than individual customer service. Individual customer service in addition to the common solid waste services may be provided within the district when the director determines such service is necessary, appropriate and in the best interest of the city. 
(d)  Customer responsibility. District customers shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Construction or remodeling waste shall not be placed in the dumpsters and compactors intended for regular daily refuse or recyclable items. 
(2)  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises shall place the daily accumulation of refuse in a trash compactor or dumpster. 
(3)  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises shall place the daily accumulation of recycling in a recycling container. 
(4)  Every person placing garbage in any such compactor, dumpster or recycling container shall eliminate, as far as possible, all water and liquid from the garbage, and shall place garbage in a plastic bag before placing it in the compactor, dumpster or recycling container. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow refuse and/or recycling to be deposited anywhere except within a compactor, dumpster or recycling container or to allow the compactor, dumpster or recycling container to become overly-filled to the extent that all material cannot be confined to the compactor, dumpster or recycling container. 
(Ord. No. 17498, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 21430, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22435, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 23683 , § 2, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 22-171. - Establishment of container/compactor sites. 
(a)  The director shall inspect the territory within the district and identify suitable locations for placement of refuse and recycling containers and compactors. Whenever feasible, containers and compactors shall be located in places convenient to the greatest number of customers. The director shall review the placement of containers and compactors periodically for the purpose of improving service and reducing costs to the city and customers. 
(b)  When locating containers and compactors and establishing, changing or enhancing solid waste services within the district, the director shall meet with duly designated representatives of the Downtown Community Improvement District and any interested individual district customers in order to obtain their input and assistance in establishing economical, efficient and convenient refuse and recycling service within the district. 
(c)  For multi-family residential, mixed-use residential, multi-story office or commercial developments as described in Table 22-171(c), refuse and recycling containers and compactors may be required to be located within the footprint of the development. The director shall be provided a copy of all development plans within the district and shall approve container and compactor types together with the access required for refuse and recycling collection, based on the guidelines set forth in Table 22-171(c). No building constructed prior to March 20, 2017 shall be required to modify its footprint to comply with the requirements of this subsection. Exceptions or waivers from these guidelines must be approved by the city council. 
Table 22-171(c) 
Number of Bedrooms and/or Mixed Use Space 	Collection Container Type Required for Refuse and Recycling 
< 25 bedrooms, or 
< 25 bedrooms + Mixed Use 	Existing service available in public right-of-way or easement area is sufficient, or 
Rear-load container, front-load container or mini compactor capacity to be determined by director on a case-by-case basis for refuse and recycling. 
Quantity of on-site rear-load and front-load containers and frequency of service per site are determined by 4:1 cubic yard conversion for each bedroom per week; containers and service in accordance with section 22-160(c)—(f). 
26—200 bedrooms, or 
26—200 bedrooms + Mixed Use; Multi-story Office/Commercial 	Existing service available in public right-of-way or easement area is sufficient, or 
Rear-load container, front-load container or mini compactor capacity to be determined by director on a case-by-case basis for refuse and recycling. 
Quantity of on-site rear- and front-loading containers and frequency of service per site are determined by 4:1 cubic yard conversion for each bedroom per week; containers and service in accordance with section 22-160(c)—(f). 
200-349 bedrooms with or without Mixed Use 	Mini compactor with internal access or parking lot access; or two (2), two-yard containers for fiber and container recycling. 
350 or more bedrooms with or without Mixed Use 	Full-sized compactor requiring external storage and approach access; or two (2) two-yard containers for fiber and container recycling. 
 
(d)  Excess refuse generated during high volume tenant move-in or move-out periods shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. The property owner shall maintain such excess within the footprint of the development or make suitable alternative arrangements to contain excess refuse. The property owner shall be required to pay any additional customer service disposal fees and expenses that are above and beyond the regular monthly service fees required for removal of excess refuse. 
(Ord. No. 17498, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 21430, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22435, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 23088 , § 1, 2-20-17)  
Sec. 22-172. - Establishment of rates. 
(a)  Refuse and recycling collection rates shall be based upon the total cost of providing solid waste services in the Downtown Community Improvement District and shall be proportioned among customers based on specific customer categories and the relative size of operation of the customer with respect to other customers within that category. 
(b)  The following customer categories are established: 
(1)  Restaurant —Businesses that serve food or drinks as the primary function of the establishment and generate a combination of food waste, beverage container waste and product packaging waste. 
(2)  Retail —Businesses that sell products or services to the general public and generate product packaging and office waste materials and small quantities of food product waste from break rooms or employee consumption of food on-site. 
(3)  Office —Businesses that provide professional services or products not associated with retail sales and primarily generate paper or mixed fiber waste and small quantities of food product waste from break rooms or employee consumption of food on-site. 
(4)  Bank —Financial institutions recognized and regulated by state and federal law, operated for the purpose of providing checking, savings, lending and other financial management services and generate primarily paper fiber waste and small quantities of food product waste from break rooms or employee consumption of food on-site. 
(5)  Church —Places of worship that primarily generate mixed waste from office areas, congregational gatherings and occasional large quantities of food product waste from special events. 
(6)  Production/industrial/processing —Businesses that create, manufacture or process a product or service on a bulk quantity basis and generate primarily paper, cardboard and mixed fiber waste, shipping containers, production supply and material waste and small quantities of food product waste from break rooms or employee consumption of food on-site. 
(7)  Lodging —Businesses that provide temporary lodging for guests and generate a mixed waste of paper, cardboard and packaging materials, plastic, metal and glass containers, cloth materials, and variable quantities of food product waste consumed by guests in rooms or as part of a food service provided by the establishment. 
(8)  Residential —Living quarters for family units that generate mixed solid waste typical of residential units outside the Downtown Community Improvement District. 
(9)  Printing/production/silk screening —Businesses that create, manufacture or process a product or service involving printing of paper or cloth materials, not in bulk quantity and primarily generating cardboard or mixed fiber waste, shipping containers, product supply waste and small quantities of food product from breakrooms or employee consumption. 
(c)  Each customer category shall contain the following three customer classifications: 
(1)  Class I —A customer generating quantities of solid waste estimated to be equal to or greater than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of the quantity of solid waste generated by the largest solid waste generator in the same category as determined by the director. 
(2)  Class II —A customer generating quantities of solid waste estimated to be equal to thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) percent but less than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of the quantity of solid waste generated by the largest solid waste generator in the same category as determined by the director. 
(3)  Class III —A customer generating quantities of solid waste estimated to be less than thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) percent of the quantity of solid waste generated by the largest solid waste generator in the same category as determined by the director. 
(d)  The director shall identify and assign all businesses, residences and other permanent establishments which can reasonably be expected to generate solid waste in the district to one of the established customer categories. The director shall review such assignments periodically or upon receipt of a request from a customer. When assigning and reviewing customer assignments, the director shall consult with duly designated representatives of the Downtown Community Improvement District. The director shall consider the costs of providing service and the amount and type of refuse and recycling generated when making category assignments. The director shall annually review the cost of providing solid waste service in the district. If the director determines that it is necessary to increase the fees set forth in subsection (e) in order to fully recover the costs of providing solid waste service in the district, the director shall submit the proposed fee increases to the Downtown Community Improvement District board of directors for review and comment before submitting proposed amendments to the rates in subsection (e) to the city council. 
(e)  The following monthly rates shall apply to the categories and classifications as established by this article and shall be billed and collected as provided for by the procedures of Chapter 27, Article II: 
Combined—Solid Waste Management Monthly Rate 
Category 	Classification 
	I 	II 	III 
Restaurant 	$371.45 	$183.56 	$ 61.19 
Retail 	171.98 	85.99 	27.82 
Office 	141.84 	70.09 	23.36 
Church 	95.11 	46.73 	15.02 
Production/industrial 	969.52 	313.57 	161.59 
Bank 	150.18 	75.09 	25.03 
Lodging 	594.87 	294.80 	100.02 
Printing/production/silk/screening 	122.79 	102.67 	82.54 
Residential 	19.23 
 
(f)  The director shall establish fees for additional individual customer service which shall be billed and collected in addition to the category/classification monthly fee. 
(Ord. No. 17498, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 19011, § 1, 5-1-06; Ord. No. 21075, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21430, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22215, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22435, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 23637 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Secs. 22-173—22-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL UNIT CONSERVATION LAW 
 
Sec. 22-181. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Rental Unit Conservation Law of the City of Columbia, Missouri." 
(Code 1964, § 11.1100)  
Sec. 22-182. - Article provisions deemed supplemental. 
The requirements of this article shall be in addition to the requirements of all other applicable ordinances, including chapter 13, article II, known as the general licensing ordinance of the city, and the penalties imposed by this article for violations shall be in addition to those imposed for violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 and 29 of this Code and all other applicable ordinance provisions. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1130; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-183. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Agent of the owner. A person who is authorized to act on behalf of the owner, as herein defined, with regard to repairs and maintenance of a dwelling or rooming unit. 
Apartment house. Any dwelling or combination of related dwellings having the same owner, located in a contiguous area, and operated as a single business entity, in which the operator provides for lease three (3) or more dwelling units. 
Census tracts. Those areas established as census tracts for the 1970 Census of Population and Housing in the City of Columbia by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 
Contiguous area. Any lots, plots or parcels of land which actually touch each other or which are a part of the same city block and abut upon a common public street or alleyway. 
Director. The director of the department of community development of the city, or the director's authorized representative. 
Dwelling. Any building, mobile home, or other structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for residential occupancy, but this word shall not include temporary housing. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. 
Existing apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit. A dwelling or dwellings operated as an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
New apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit. A dwelling constructed or operated as an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit after the effective date of this ordinance which was not operated as an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Occupant. Any person over one year of age (including owner or operator) living in a dwelling or rooming unit or having actual possession of such dwelling or rooming unit. 
Office of the manager. An office located on the premises for which a certificate of compliance is issued or sought, where an agent of the owner may be contacted on a regular basis. 
Operate, operating and operation. Owning or acting as lessor or manager of any apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit which is leased or rented in the city. Proof of any of the following acts shall be prima facie evidence of "operation": 
(1)  Being owner of an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit leased or rented for residential purposes; or 
(2)  Acting as agent for the owner of an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit as herein defined; or 
(3)  Making application for a business license or certificate of compliance under the provisions of this article for an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit; or 
(4)  Signing of a lease or document to lease a dwelling or rooming unit in an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit on behalf of or as lessor or landlord, provided that the act of subleasing of a dwelling or rooming unit shall not constitute operation, absent proof of other acts constituting operating within the meaning of this article; 
except on a showing by the person with respect to subparagraphs (2), (3) or (4): 
a.  That he is not authorized to act on behalf of the owner with regard to repairs and maintenance of a dwelling or rooming unit; and 
b.  Of the identity or name of the person who is authorized to act on behalf of the owner with regard to repairs and maintenance of a dwelling or rooming unit. 
Operate, operating and operation also includes rent to own, lease purchase and contract for deed arrangements. 
Operator. The owner and any person operating an apartment, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit in the city. 
Owner. The owner or owners or the mortgagee in possession of the apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit, as the case may be. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Rooming house. A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more rooming units leased separately, none of which include cooking facilities, but which may include a common kitchen to be shared by three (3) or more occupants. This definition shall also include the housing provided by fraternities and sororities organized for students of any college or university; however, a hotel, motor hotel or motel licensed under Missouri statute shall not, be deemed a rooming house for purposes of this article. 
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Single rental unit. Any dwelling unit existing in a dwelling in which the operator thereof provides, for lease, up to but not to exceed one dwelling unit. 
Temporary housing. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Two-family dwelling. Any dwelling or combination of related dwellings having the same owner, located in a contiguous area, and operated as a single business entity, in which the operator provides for lease two (2) dwelling units. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1110; Ord. No. 12032, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 21095, § 7, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-184. - Certificate of compliance and notice of occupancy limitations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate within the city any apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit without a current certificate of compliance. The certificate of compliance shall be displayed in the office of the manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lease or sublease any apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit without first providing to the lessee or sublessee written notice of the zoning district in which the property is located and the applicable occupancy limitations under chapter 29. The notice shall be signed by the lessor and each lessee and shall either be contained in the written lease or shall be on a zoning occupancy disclosure form provided by the director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, agent or property manager of a rental unit to fail to immediately, upon request by a police officer or city inspector investigating a violation of this article, provide the certificate of compliance and notice of occupancy limitations signed by all lessees or sublessees pertaining to the unit. No person shall be found guilty of violating this subsection if the person demonstrates to the city that the person met the disclosure requirements of this section at the time of the alleged violation by producing the properly executed documentation within ten (10) business days of the date of the request. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1120(G); Ord. No. 11416, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21558, § 2, 1-7-13; Ord. No. 21854, § 3, 10-21-13)  
Sec. 22-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21425, § 1, adopted September 17, 2012, repealed § 22-185, which pertained to classes of certificates and derived from § 11.1140 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 22-186. - Application for certificate. 
(a)  Formal application required. Every operator shall submit an application for a certificate of compliance to the director. If the certificate of compliance has been revoked pursuant to section 22-193 of this article or if the owner, operator or tenant has been convicted of a violation of chapter 29 of this Code, the operator is ineligible for a certificate of compliance for that dwelling for a period of three (3) years. 
(b)  Content and form. The application for such certificate of compliance shall be a written statement. One application may be submitted for all property in common ownership and under a common operator. The application for the certificate of compliance shall be on forms provided by the director and shall include: 
(1)  The street address and a general description of the premises for which the certificate is sought. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the agent of the owner (operator). 
(c)  Consent to inspection. The application may be accompanied by a written consent on forms provided by the director authorizing the director to enter upon and inspect the premises for which the certificate is sought at any reasonable time for the purpose of determining whether or not the premises are in compliance with chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 and 29 of this Code. 
(d)  Inspection fees. The application shall be accompanied by the full payment of the inspection fees. 
(e)  Heating and ventilation systems certificates of inspection and approval. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of inspection and approval signed by a journeyman or master mechanical heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic licensed by the city. The certificate shall state that all fuel fired appliances in the premises for which a certificate is sought were personally inspected by the mechanic and were functioning properly and safely. The certificate shall also state the date on which the inspection was made. For renewal certificates, the inspection must have been made within ninety (90) days before the current certificate of compliance expires. For original certificates, the inspection must have been made within ninety (90) days before the application is filed. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1150; Ord. No. 13407, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 20848, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-187. - Procedure for issuance of certificate. 
(a)  Inspection prerequisite. The director shall make an inspection of the dwelling or dwellings for which a satisfactorily completed and executed application for a certificate of compliance is filed. Such inspection shall be made pursuant to consent or a search warrant issued under the provisions of section 22-189 of this article. No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this article prior to inspection of the dwelling or dwellings for which an application for a certificate of compliance has been filed, provided that such application is satisfactorily completed and executed and is filed prior to the date when the applicant must obtain or renew the certificate of compliance. 
(b)  Inspection of each unit. An inspection shall be required for each dwelling or rooming unit sought to be licensed, provided that the director, upon written request by the applicant, may determine by random sampling of at least thirty (30) percent of the dwelling or rooming units, whether an apartment house or rooming house containing more than thirty (30) dwelling or rooming units complies with the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 and 29 of this Code, provided that those units inspected must be representative of the various types and location of units in the dwelling and further that all units for which a violation complaint has been received shall be inspected. 
(c)  Issuance. If, as a result of the inspection, the director determines that the dwelling is in compliance with the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 and 29 of this Code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance to the operator. 
(d)  Violations. If, as a result of the inspection, the director shall determine that the dwelling is in violation of any of the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 of this Code, the director shall notify the operator of the violations and proceed to correct such violations under the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, or 25 of this Code, whichever is applicable. 
The operator of an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit where any such violation is found to exist shall have all rights and remedies and shall be subject to the procedures established by chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, or 25 of this Code, whichever is applicable. 
(e)  Certificate of use conditioned on compliance: 
(1)  Pending appeal. The operator of a dwelling where violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code are found to exist may apply to the director for a certificate of use conditioned on compliance to allow the operator to appeal from a notice of violation under the applicable procedures. Such certificate shall be issued only if: 
a.  An appeal under the applicable ordinance has been filed; and 
b.  Only for such time as is actually necessary to complete said appeal. 
A certificate of use conditioned on compliance issued hereunder shall expire upon completion of the appeals process unless extended under the provisions of subsection (e)(2) herein. 
(2)  Period of compliance. A certificate of use conditioned on compliance may be issued by the director, on application, to make available a reasonable time for existing apartment houses, rooming houses, two-family dwellings, or single rental units to come into compliance with the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code. Such certificate shall be issued only: 
a.  On signing of a notarized agreement by the operator admitting such violations and agreeing to remove such violations within a reasonable time period agreed to by the director, or established by an appeals board on appeal under subsection (e)(1); and 
b.  Only for the period as determined by the director or established by an appeals board on appeal under subsection (e)(1), which is reasonably required to remove such violations, which period, if established by the director, shall in no event exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. A certificate of use conditioned on compliance shall be revoked if it appears that the operator is not correcting the violations in accordance with the established compliance schedule. 
A certificate of use conditioned on compliance may not be issued for a new dwelling, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit, and may not be issued for any dwelling or rooming unit which the director has declared to be an unsafe building or a structure unfit for human occupancy under the building code of the city. 
(f)  Provisional certificate of compliance. If the owner, operator or tenant of a dwelling has been convicted of a violation of chapter 29 of this Code, or the director has revoked the certificate of compliance for the dwelling, the owner of the dwelling may apply to the director for a provisional certificate of compliance. In addition to the requirements contained in section 22-186 of this article, the owner must also provide the director with information on the owner's compliance efforts or procedural changes which will ensure compliance with city codes. A provisional certificate of compliance shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. The director shall only issue a provisional certificate of compliance when the owner satisfies the director that the structure and the use of the structure is in compliance with city code. The director shall impose conditions upon which the provisional certificate of compliance is granted. At a minimum, these conditions shall include the following requirements: 
(1)  Owner must consent to inspection by inspectors at all reasonable times upon request by a city inspector. 
(2)  Immediate revocation of the provisional certificate of compliance if the code inspector finds a violation of city codes. 
If there are no violations of chapter 29 of this Code, the owner may apply to the director for an extension of the provisional certificate of compliance for an additional one-year term. The director may grant no more than two (2) extensions of the provisional certificate of compliance. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1160; Ord. No. 20848, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-188. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  In order to defray the costs incident to the administration of this article, the following fees shall be required to be paid for the inspection and shall be nonrefundable: 
(1)  There shall be an application fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) per building for each application for a certificate of compliance. 
(2)  There shall, in addition, be an inspection fee of twenty-six dollars ($26.00) per dwelling unit or rooming unit, as the case may be, covered by each certificate of compliance. 
(3)  There shall, in addition, be a reinspection fee of forty-three dollars ($43.00) per unit. 
(4)  There shall, in addition, be a fee of thirty-four dollars ($34.00) to be assessed when owner or owner's representative fails to meet with inspector at scheduled appointment time. 
(b)  In addition to inspection upon application or complaint, units may be inspected at the request of the owner for which an inspection service charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged. The inspector shall provide the owner with a written summary of the findings of his inspection, provided that such an inspection shall extend only to matters regulated under the provisions of these ordinances and shall not extend to the condition of items of personal property or to fixtures, the condition of which is not addressed by city codes. 
(c)  In the event that a unit for which an unexpired certificate of compliance has been issued is inspected pursuant to a complaint, the person making the complaint shall pay a fifteen dollar ($15.00) inspection service charge if the unit is not found to be in violation of any ordinance. 
(d)  In the event fees due and payable under this section remain outstanding for a period of sixty (60) days, the account may be submitted to a collection agency for collection. All such collection costs, including but not limited to court costs and attorney fees, shall be paid by the debtor. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1190; Ord. No. 11622, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 13438, § 3, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 16594, § 2, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22214, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 22-189. - Search warrant. 
When application is made pursuant to this article for a certificate of compliance with respect to any house, dwelling or unit, the municipal judge of the county circuit court shall have authority to issue search warrants for searches or inspections of such house, dwelling or unit to determine the existence of violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code. Warrants and searches or inspections made pursuant thereto shall conform to and be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  The city manager may make application for the issuance of a search warrant. 
(2)  The application shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  State the time and date of the making of the application; 
c.  Identify the property or places to be searched in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
d.  State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant to search for violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code; 
e.  Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and 
f.  Be filed in the municipal division of the county circuit court. 
(3)  The application shall be supplemented by written affidavits verified by oath or affirmation. Such affidavits shall be considered in determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description of the property or places to be searched. Oral testimony shall not be considered. 
(4)  The judge shall hold a nonadversary hearing to determine whether sufficient facts have been stated to justify the issuance of a search warrant. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavits that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code, a search warrant shall immediately be issued to search for such violations. The warrant shall be issued in the form of an original and two (2) copies. 
(5)  The application and any supporting affidavits and a copy of the warrant shall be retained in the records of the municipal judge. 
(6)  Search warrants issued under this section shall: 
a.  Be in writing and in the name of the issuing authority; 
b.  Be directed to any police officer or deputy in the city; 
c.  State the time and date the warrant is issued; 
d.  Identify the property or places to be searched in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
e.  Be limited to a search or inspection for violations of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code; 
f.  Command that the described property or places be searched and that any photographs of violations found thereof or therein be brought, within ten (10) days after filing of the application, to the judge who issued the warrant, to be dealt with according to law; and 
g.  Be signed by the municipal judge, with his title of office indicated. 
(7)  A search warrant issued under this section may be executed only by a police officer or deputy of the city. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search commanded. 
(8)  A search warrant shall be executed as soon as practicable and shall expire if it is not executed and the return made within ten (10) days after the date of the making of the application. 
(9)  After execution of the search warrant, the warrant with a return thereon, signed by the officer making the search, shall be delivered to the judge who issued the warrant. The return shall show the date and manner of execution and the name of the possessor and of the owner of the property or places searched, when he is not the same person, if known. 
(10)  A search warrant shall be deemed invalid: 
a.  If it was not issued by a judge of the municipal division of the Boone County, Missouri, Circuit Court; 
b.  If it was issued without a written application having been filed and verified; 
c.  If it was issued without probable cause; 
d.  If it was not issued with respect to property or places within the city; 
e.  If it does not describe the property or places to be searched with sufficient certainty; 
f.  If it is not signed by the judge who issued it; or 
g.  If it was not executed within the time prescribed by subsection (8) of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1165; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-190. - Unlawful to refuse entry. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry or access to any unit, dwelling or structure to any person to whom a search warrant has been issued authorizing inspection of said unit, dwelling or structure pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1120(H))  
Sec. 22-191. - Duration of certificates; renewal. 
(a)  A certificate of compliance issued pursuant to this article, except for a certificate of use conditioned on compliance or a provisional certificate of compliance, shall be effective for three (3) years from the expiration date of the current certificate at time of application or, if no certificate existed at time of application, from its date of issue, unless sooner revoked, or unless extended by the director under the procedures established in paragraph (b) herein, or unless title or ownership of the property or any portion of the dwelling changes. Such certificate of compliance shall be renewable triennially upon forms supplied by the director in accordance with the procedures for obtaining a certificate of compliance set forth herein. Initial certificates shall be issued for new structures in conjunction with issuance of occupancy permits; inspection for the purposes of determining compliance with the building code shall satisfy the inspection provisions of this article. 
(b)  The director may, on written application of the operator and payment of a forty-three dollars ($43.00) fee per building, extend a current certificate of compliance for a period not to exceed three (3) years without further inspection, if the apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling or single rental unit for which the certificate of compliance is issued had no violations for the past three (3) years. 
(c)  A provisional certificate of compliance shall be effective for one (1) year from the date of issue unless sooner revoked, or unless title or ownership of the property or any portion of the dwelling changes. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1170; Ord. No. 13438, § 3, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 15898, § 1, 2-15-99; Ord. No. 20848, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 22214, § 1, 9-15-14 )  
Sec. 22-192. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  Upon the transfer of record, legal title of any dwelling or portion thereof which has a certificate of compliance or a provisional certificate of compliance, the transferee shall either: 
(1)  Apply for a certificate of compliance or a provisional certificate of compliance pursuant to section 22-186 and pay all fees pursuant to section 22-188; or 
(2)  Apply to transfer an existing certificate by complying with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If the transfer of title occurs within eighteen (18) months of the last satisfactory city rental inspection, and if there have been no complaints regarding the property, the transferee may cause an existing certificate to be transferred for the unexpired portion of the term for which it was issued upon making written application to the community development department, on forms to be supplied by the community development department, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the transfer of title and upon payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) transfer fee per building. The application for transfer shall contain the same information and be in the same form as required by section 22-186(b). A transferred certificate of compliance shall not be extended beyond the original expiration date without further inspection. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall affect the validity of any sale, transfer or disposition of any interest in real property. 
(Ord. No. 20949, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-193. - Noncompliance; revocation of certificate. 
Whenever the director shall determine that any unit in an apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit for which a certificate of compliance has been issued under this article is in violation of the provisions of chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code, or whenever the director shall determine that the conditions of a certificate of use conditioned on compliance are not being satisfied because violations are not being corrected in accordance with the terms and time limits set forth in the certificate of use conditioned on compliance, the director shall notify the operator of same in accordance with the notice provisions set forth in chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code, as applicable. Before revoking a certificate of compliance for such violations, a hearing shall be held in accordance with the hearing procedures set forth in chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code. The operator of the apartment house, rooming house, two-family dwelling, or single rental unit to which the certificate of occupancy issued shall have all rights and remedies and shall be subject to the procedures established by chapters 6, 9 (article II), 20, 23, 24, 25 or 29 of this Code, whichever is applicable with regard to such violations. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1200; Ord. No. 21425, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 22-194. - False complaints. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false complaint against the owner of any structure or relating to any structure subject to the inspection provisions of this article. 
(b)  A false complaint shall be presumed to be knowingly made where such complaint is the third or more complaint made with respect to any structure or any owner by such person, in any twelve-month period, where inspections pursuant to such complaints fail to reveal any violation of the provisions of city ordinance upon inspection by housing inspectors of the city. This presumption shall be rebuttable. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined an amount of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for not exceeding three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each false complaint shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In addition to the criminal remedies herein provided for, the city counselor is hereby authorized to pursue any person who knowingly makes a false complaint, who shall be liable for the city's actual costs of inspection resulting from such complaint. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1210)  
Sec. 22-195. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. In addition thereto, the city may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Provided, that it shall be a defense to a prosecution under this article that a person charged requested and used reasonable efforts to obtain access to a dwelling unit or rooming unit under lease to another and was refused access by the lessee or person in possession of such unit. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1120(I))  
Secs. 22-196—22-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Sanitary facilities in regard to minimum properties standards, § 6-144; required connection to water and sewer system under minimum properties standards code, § 6-145; sewage disposal in food service establishments, § 11-156(b); utilities generally, Ch. 27. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-210. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms as used in this article shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise: 
Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 22-217 of this chapter, or pollutants that may bypass or pass through the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or have an adverse effect upon the wastewater treatment process or the receiving stream. Best management practices may include a physical, chemical, structural, or managerial practice or device that can help achieve compliance with article VI of this chapter. 
Bi-Monthly. Once every other month. 
Bi-Weekly. Once every other week. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three (3) feet outside the exterior face of the building wall. 
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Bypass. Means the diversion of wastewater from any portion of a wastewater treatment facility or sewer system to waters of the state. 
C.A. Control Authority, City of Columbia. 
Capital charge. That portion of the total charges for sewage service which are levied for local capital costs, local investment in plant facilities and other local costs excluding operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
Categorical pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 which applies to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City. The City of Columbia, Missouri. 
City council. The duly elected Mayor and Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri, or their duly authorized representatives. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand). A quantitative measure of the amount of oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) material in wastewater using inorganic dichromate or permanganate salts as oxidants in a two-hour test, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Combined sewer. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. 
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing representative samples irrespective of flow; or a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. 
Contributor. Any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the city sanitary sewer system. 
Cooling water. 
(1)  Uncontaminated: Water used for cooling purposes only which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate, or final product and which does not contain a level of contaminants detectably higher than that of the intake water. 
(2)  Contaminated: Water used for cooling purposes only which may become contaminated either through the use of water treatment chemicals used for corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with process materials and/or wastewater. 
Daily Maximum. The maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Director. The director of utilities or the director's designee. 
Domestic wastewater. Wastewater discharging from dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water and industrial wastewater. 
Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. 
Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Grab sample. An individual sample collected in less than fifteen (15) minutes, without regard for flow or time. 
Industrial wastewater. The water-carried wastes or liquid wastes from industrial or commercial processes as distinguished from domestic wastewater. 
Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the City of Columbia's wastewater system or operations or its processing, use or disposal of sludge, by a user's discharge which alone or in conjunction with other discharges, causes, or contributes to the inhibition or disruption and which: (a) causes a violation of any requirement of the City of Columbia's NPDES Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation); or (b) prevents the use or disposal of sludge by the City of Columbia in compliance with the following statutes and regulations: Section 503 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act; including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; or any more stringent state or local regulations. A user contributes interference when the user: 
(1)  Discharges a pollutant concentration or a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by City of Columbia Ordinance or permit or by federal, state or local law; 
(2)  Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and constituents from the user's normal average discharge; 
(3)  Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other users, would result in interference; or 
(4)  Knows or has reason to know that the City of Columbia is, for any reason, violating its NPDES Permit and that the user's discharge either alone or in conjunction with discharges from other users, increases the magnitude or duration of the City of Columbia's violations. 
mg/l. Milligrams per liter. 
Monthly average. The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected during a calendar month or specified 30-day period (as opposed to a rolling 30-day window). 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317 which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this section has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
Normal wastewater. Wastewater which contains not over two hundred forty (240) mg/l of total suspended solids and not over two hundred (200) mg/l of BOD, and which does not contain any of the materials or substances listed in sections 22-215 and 22-215.1 in excess of allowable amounts specified in those sections. 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The standard used by federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the United States business economy. 
NPDES Permit. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., for a discharge into waters of the state. 
Pass through. A discharge of a pollutant from the City of Columbia's POTW into waters of the State of Missouri when such discharge causes a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, or a violation of a state or federal water quality standard or increases the magnitude or duration of any violation and which is the result of a user's discharge of the pollutant either alone or in conjunction with other users' discharges of the pollutant in the City of Columbia's POTW. A user contributes to pass through when the user: 
(1)  Discharges a pollutant concentration of a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by City of Columbia ordinance or permit or by federal, state or local law; 
(2)  Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and constituents from the user's normal average discharge; 
(3)  Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other users, would result in pass through; or 
(4)  Knows or has reason to know that the City of Columbia is, for any reason, violating its final effluent limitations in its NPDES permit and that the user's discharge either alone or in conjunction with discharge from other users, increases the magnitude or duration of the City of Columbia's violations. 
Person. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH. The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter of solution. 
(POTW) Publicly Owned Treatment Works. A treatment works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292 which is owned by the City of Columbia. This definition includes any devices or systems used in collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater or industrial wastes of liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from users outside the city limits of the City of Columbia who are by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City of Columbia POTW, even though the sewers may not have been constructed by or may not be maintained by the City of Columbia. 
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
Roof drain. A conduit for conveying the stormwater or rainwater from a roof. 
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries domestic, industrial or normal wastewater and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not admitted. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying domestic, industrial or normal wastewater and other waste liquids or stormwater. 
Significant industrial user (SIU). 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this section the term significant industrial user means: 
(i)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards as listed in 10 CSR 20-6.100(2) and (3); and 
(ii)  Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  The control authority may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The industrial user, prior to the control authority's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(ii)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(iii)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(3)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (1)(ii) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance (SNC). Industrial user violations which meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge limits. 
a.  Chronic violations. Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six (6) month period. 
b.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three (33) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period. 
There are two (2) groups of TRCs: 
Group I for conventional pollutants 
(BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease) 	TRC = 1.4 
Group II for all other pollutants 	TRC = 1.2 
 
c.  Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.q., slug loads) or pass-through, or endangered the health of the POTW personnel or the public. 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(2)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date. 
(3)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from the due date. 
(4)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(5)  Any other violation or group of violations which the City of Columbia determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause interference as defined herein. 
Standard industrial classification. A classification pursuant to the latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes; it may, however, carry acceptable cooling water and unpolluted water. 
Stormwater. That portion of the rainfall or other precipitation which runs off over the surface during a storm and for a period of time following a storm during which the flow exceeds the normal runoff. 
Surface water. That portion of a rainfall or other precipitation which runs off over the surface of the ground. 
TSS (total suspended solids). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Upset. Means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof. 
User. The owner or occupant of property or premises that is connected directly or indirectly or has available to the property or premises the facilities of the POTW of the City of Columbia. 
User charge. That portion of the total charges for POTW service which are levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment system. 
Wastewater or sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
Wastewater system. All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant. The structures, equipment and processes used for treating wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment works (or sewerage system). All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Weekly average. The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected over a period of seven consecutive days. 
(Code 1964, § 14.645; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 10857, § 1, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 15324, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-210.01. - Missouri General Pretreatment Regulation. 
The Environmental Protection Agency federal regulation, 40 CFR Parts 403 through 471, inclusive, have been incorporated by reference with substitutions and modifications as defined by and set forth into Missouri state regulation 10 CSR 20-6.100. 
Any federal regulation 40 CFR Parts 403 through 471, inclusive, referenced in this chapter and article of the City of Columbia, Missouri Code of Ordinances shall be interpreted with all substitutions and modifications as set forth in 10 CSR 20-6.100. 
( Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-211. - Classes of sewers; location and connections. 
The general sewer system shall be composed of four (4) classes of sewers, to wit: public, district, joint district, and private sewers. The determination as to the class to which any sewer belongs shall be made without regard to the area drained, the size, character or purpose thereof. All public, district and joint district sewers shall be constructed along streets, alleys and other public ways wherever practicable; and no such sewer shall be built or acquired by the city, unless it is on a public way or right-of-way owned by the city. Such sewers may be connected with any other sewer of any class or with a natural course of drainage. 
(Code 1964, § 14.640) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 81.  
Sec. 22-212. - Property subject to special assessments. 
All property located within any benefit district established by the council, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be liable for special assessments made or special tax bills issued against such property. Any such assessment or tax bill shall constitute a personal obligation of the owner of such property as well as a lien against the property and may be collected by suit or other proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction, and such assessment, tax bill or judgment thereon against public property shall be paid out of the general treasury of the public body, agency, corporation or authority owning such property. 
(Code 1964, § 14.730) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 88.  
Sec. 22-213. - Liability of city for district and joint district sewers. 
The city shall incur no liability for building district sewers or joint sewers other than in the manner provided in section 22-243 or section 22-253 hereof, except when the city is the owner of a plot of ground within the district or joint sewer district, and in that case the city shall be liable for the cost of such sewer in the same manner as other property owners within the district. If any district or joint sewer shall drain territory lying outside the city limits and not included in the district or joint district, the city shall pay that part of the cost of such sewer as would have been assessed against such territory if it were included in the district or joint district. 
(Code 1964, § 14.740; Ord. No. 12208, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 22-214. - Payment of maintenance costs for district and joint district sewers. 
The repairs, cleaning and other incidental expenses of district or joint district sewers shall be paid out of a general appropriation for that purpose. 
(Code 1964, § 14.750; Ord. No. 10857, § 1, 1-6-86)  
Sec. 22-215. - Unlawful discharges. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer any of the following described substances, materials, water or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any pollutants with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any water or wastes containing more than two hundred (200) mg/l of fat, oil or grease. 
(5)  Any water or wastes that contain grease or oil or other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(6)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or comminuted to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions of the sewer with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(7)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint residues, unapproved cannery waste, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(8)  Any water or wastes having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to pipe, structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater treatment plant or collection system. Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized within a permissible range of pH between 5.5 and 9.5. The director may grant variances for higher pH than 9.5, but in no event lower than 5.5. 
(9)  Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance, that result in toxic gases, fumes, or vapors, or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any POTW process, constitute a hazard to worker health and safety, or to other humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters or the effluent of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which contain more than ten (10) mg/l by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide. 
(11)  Any water or wastes containing the discharge of acid pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not, which are capable of causing any obstruction, damage or corrosion in the sewers or the wastewater treatment plant. 
(12)  Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual provision, attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(13)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(14)  Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(15)  Any water or wastes which do not comply with applicable state and federal pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(16)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(17)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 22-215.01. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Every food establishment, restaurant or facility which has the potential to discharge waste water containing animal or vegetable fats, oils, grease or solids shall have installed the appropriate grease trap or interceptor device to prevent the discharge or concentration of such substances into the sewers. All such grease traps or interceptor devices shall be installed as set out in the Plumbing Code of Columbia, Missouri adopted in section 6-51 and any applicable amendments in section 6-52 of this Code. 
(b)  Every food service establishment, restaurant or facility required to have a grease trap or interceptor device shall develop a cleaning schedule and shall have such devices serviced, maintained, inspected and cleaned, at the establishment's expense, as frequently as required to prevent discharge of grease into the sanitary sewers. The establishment shall maintain detailed records of such inspection and maintenance in a manner acceptable to the director. Records will remain on file for at least five (5) years. 
(c)  Records required to be kept by this section shall be provided to health inspectors and sewer pretreatment inspectors during their periodic inspections and during the normal business hours of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 18492, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 19649, § 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-215.05. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  Categorical pretreatment standards: Any industrial user having process waste streams which are subject to any federal categorical pretreatment standards either currently in effect or promulgated or modified after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements of such standards. Categorical pretreatment standards as listed in 10 CSR 20-6.100(2) and (3) are hereby incorporated by reference and are fully enforceable under this ordinance the same as if fully set out herein. Limitations established in such standards shall apply to the treated effluents from the processes regulated by the standard, unless otherwise specified by the standard. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are production based, the director may convert the limits to equivalent mass or concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual users. Where regulated process effluents can not be sampled prior to mixing with other wastestreams, alternative limits for the mixed effluent may be established by the director using the combined wastestream formula subject to the provisions of 40 CFR 403.6(e). All users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are also obligated under federal law to comply with the City of Columbia's discharge limitations specified in sections 22-215 and 22-215.05 of this ordinance. When a pollutant in a user's discharge is subject to both a limit from a categorical pretreatment standard and a City of Columbia limit at the same sampling point, the most strict limit shall apply. 
(b)  Local limits: No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater to the POTW containing concentrations in excess of the limits listed for the substances below: 
POLLUTANT 	DAILY 
MAXIMUM 
(mg/l) 
Total Arsenic (As) 	0.383 
Total Cadmium (Cd) 	0.025 
Total Chromium (Cr) 	7.280 
Total Copper (Cu) 	3.497 
Total Lead (Pb) 	0.633 
Total Mercury (Hg) 	0.018 
Total Nickel (Ni) 	2.293 
Total Silver (Ag) 	0.984 
Total Zinc (Zn) 	21.485 
Total Cyanide (CN) 	0.199 
Total Molybdenum (Mo) 	0.376 
Total Selenium (Se) 	0.476 
 
(Code 1964, § 14.786; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 10857, § 1, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 21269, § 1, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-215.1. - Sanitary sewer discharge prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage including interior and exterior foundation drains, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 14.782; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84)  
Sec. 22-215.2. - Discharge into storm sewers. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Acceptable industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval by the director to a storm sewer or to a natural outlet. An NPDES permit may be required. 
(Code 1964, § 14.784; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-215.3. - Dilution prohibited. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 14.808; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-215.4. - Combined sewers. 
Combined sewers shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 14.645(8); Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84)  
Sec. 22-216. - Unusual waste subject to review, regulation and approval. 
(a)  Wastes which are unusual in composition, i.e., contain an extremely large amount of total suspended solids or BOD; are high in dissolved solids such as sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or sodium sulfate; or are in any other way unusual, shall be reviewed by the director, who will determine whether such wastes shall be prohibited from or may be admitted to the city sewers or shall be modified or treated before being admitted. Wastes which, in the opinion of the director, are unusual or highly variable in volume shall be subject to flow equalization or other forms of regulation. 
(b)  Any water or waste which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, releases obnoxious gases or develops color of undesirable intensity, or forms suspended solids in objectionable concentration, or creates any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes, shall be subject to control of the director. 
(c)  The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste (1) having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred (200) mg/l; or (2) containing more than two hundred forty (240) mg/l of total suspended solids; or (3) having a COD greater than four hundred (400) mg/l; or (4) having an average daily flow or a maximum peak flow greater than allotted percentages of the total average wastewater flow or maximum peak flow in a sewer or to a treatment facility as allocated by the director; or (5) containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 22-215 or section 22-215.05, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. Where necessary in the opinion of the director, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to less than two hundred (200) mg/l, the total suspended solids to less than two hundred forty (240) mg/l and the COD to less than four hundred (400) mg/l; or (2) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes; or (3) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 22-215 or section 22-215.05, or meet applicable state or federal pretreatment standards. Plans, specifications, compliance schedules and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. 
(d)  Any decision of the director concerning this section and/or pretreatment standards may be appealed to the city council by filing a statement with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the director's decision. Such statement shall include: 
(1)  Name and address of party; 
(2)  Name and address of business; 
(3)  Original request to the director; 
(4)  Director's decision; 
(5)  Additional supporting documentation; 
(6)  Suggested reasoning for upholding or denial of appeal. 
The city council will decide the appeal within a reasonable time and notify the parties of its decision. 
(Code 1964, § 14.790; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 10857, § 1, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 19649, § 1, 9-4-07)  
Sec. 22-216.1. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To place or deposit or cause to be deposited or placed into any sewer any domestic wastewater, industrial waste or other polluted water except in accordance with the provisions of this article and the plumbing code adopted by the city. 
(2)  To adjust, obstruct, damage, break or remove any portion of any manhole, cleanout, catch basin, inlet, outlet, or any part of the sanitary or storm sewer system, or throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in any sewer opening or receptacle connecting with the sanitary or storm sewer system, any matter or thing whatsoever, except in accordance with the provisions of this article or to obstruct in any way or uncover the public sewers for any purpose, or to make connection therewith, or uncover the public connection branches thereof, unless and except with the consent and under the supervision of the director. 
(3)  To make or cause to be made any such connections, except as herein provided, and by a competent and skillful mechanic, duly licensed by the council to do such work, or to make such connections in any manner other than provided for by regulations adopted by the city. 
(4)  To allow the entry of ground water or stormwater to the sanitary sewer system through: a faulty sewer service line or connection point with the public sanitary sewer, surface water area drain, subsurface cleanout, roof drain, or by pumping any unpolluted water except in accordance with the provisions of this article and the plumbing code adopted by the city. 
(5)  To utilize a sanitary sewer service connection point that is structurally poor and deteriorated, protruding into the public sanitary sewer, causing infiltration or inflow of subsurface water, or permitting the growth of tree roots into the public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 14.814; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-216.2. - Treatment or flow control may be required. 
In cases where the director determines that wastes may be deleterious to the POTW or have an adverse effect upon the wastewater treatment process or the receiving stream, or body of water, the director may require treatment to reduce the total suspended solids, BOD or other constituents to levels more closely approaching those of normal wastewater before discharging such wastes into the city sewers. The director may also require any contributor to control its discharge to the public sewers so that it will not exceed a maximum percentage of the total flow in a sewer or to a treatment facility. 
(Code 1964, § 14.804; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-216.3. - Discharge permits. 
The director is authorized to establish local pretreatment standards and conditions for all wastewater discharged into city sewer systems. In order to enforce local, state and federal pretreatment standards, the director is authorized to require discharge permits of any person prior to that person discharging wastewater into any city sewer. 
(1)  As a condition of issuing a discharge permit, the director may require any permit applicant to sample the discharge, analyze the sample and record and report the results at frequencies and with methods determined by the director. 
(2)  As a condition of issuing a discharge permit, the director or his designees shall have the right to enter the premises of the facility generating the wastewater to inspect the facility, sample the wastewater and inspect and copy any records required to be kept relating to the wastewater or to enter any other premises where records are kept relating to the wastewater to inspect those records. 
(3)  The director is authorized after investigation to grant or deny the permit, or after the permit is issued to revoke the permit, upon discovery of a violation of the permit restrictions or to reconsider the permit if changes in local, state or federal pretreatment standards so require. 
(4)  Permits shall not be issued for a period longer than five (5) years. 
(5)  The permittee must submit an application for a new permit at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the permit if the permittee wishes to continue an activity regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit. 
(6)  An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
a.  The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit. 
b.  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the permittee. 
(7)  Permits shall not be transferable without a minimum thirty (30) day notification to the director and a copy of the permit provided to the new owner or operator. The new owner or operator within thirty (30) days of transfer of ownership or operation shall submit to the director an industrial user permit application for modification of the permit indicating changes to the company name, signatory authority, designated facility contact, and any changes in industrial operations. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-217. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  If any person is found to be violating any provision of this article, the director may, at his discretion, pursue any combination of the following remedies: 
(1)  Injunctive or other appropriate relief in circuit court restraining the violation, requiring compliance with this article and recovering the city's cost in remediating any damage caused by the violation. 
(2)  Prosecution in municipal court. 
(3)  Notice of violation to the persons responsible for the violation. 
(b)  Any person who commits an unlawful act under this article or who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record plan or other document filed or required to be maintained or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required hereunder shall upon conviction thereof be punished in the same manner as if convicted of a class A misdemeanor under chapter 16 of this Code. Each day the unlawful act occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  If any person shall fail to remedy a violation after notice of the violation from the director and any hearing required under this article, the director is authorized to do any combination of the following: revoke any discharge permit previously granted; discontinue sewer service to that person; use city or contract forces to remedy the violation and charge the costs of the remedy to the sewer utility account of that person. 
(d)  If any discharge which appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the director shall have the authority to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants. 
(e)  A list of contributors who were in significant noncompliance with the provisions of this article during the twelve (12) previous months shall be annually published by the director in a local newspaper. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement action taken against the contributors during the same twelve (12) months. For the purposes of this provision, significant noncompliance are violations which meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge limits. 
a.  Chronic violations. Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six (6) month period. 
b.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three (33) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period. 
There are two (2) groups of TRCs: 
Group I for conventional pollutants 
(BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease) 	TRC = 1.4 
Group II for all other pollutants 	TRC = 1.2 
 
c.  Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through, or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or the public. 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(2)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date. 
(3)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from the due date. 
(4)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(5)  Any other violation or group of violations which the City of Columbia determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1964, § 14.895; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-217.1. - Notice of violation and hearings. 
(a)  A notice of violation may be served by registered mail to any person identified as a responsible party, by personal delivery to a responsible adult at any facility in violation, or by physically posting the notice of violation on the property where the violation is occurring. 
(b)  A notice of violation shall set out the facts constituting the violation in detail and give the responsible party thirty (30) days to present the director a plan for the correction of the violation. If the nature of the violation requires, the director may determine and notify the violator that the plan is required in less than thirty (30) days. Persons who have received a violation notice under any provision of this article may make a written request to participate in the abatement financial assistance program as set out in section 22-217.2. 
(c)  If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, or a satisfactory correction plan submitted within the specified time limit, the director may order any responsible party to show cause before the director why enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the party specifying the time and place of a hearing, the reason why the action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action. The director may propose any enforcement action reasonably necessary to abate the violation, including termination of wastewater service or revocation of any discharge permit. 
(1)  At the hearing, testimony shall be given under oath and a record made. Each party, including the city, may be represented by counsel and may call and cross-examine witnesses. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(2)  Upon the request of any party, subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum shall be issued, served and enforced in the same manner as subpoenas issued under chapter 536, RSMo by agencies created by the constitution or state statute. 
(d)  After hearing and consideration of the evidence, the director shall render a decision and order in writing. The decision and order shall be supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall be final, binding and not subject to further administrative appeal. 
(e)  Any person who shall continue any violation that was the subject of a hearing and a decision and order of the director beyond the time limit set by the decision and order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be punished in the same manner as if convicted of a class A misdemeanor under chapter 16 of this Code. Each day the person shall continue in violation of the order shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 20895, § 1, 3-7-11)  
Sec. 22-217.2. - Abatement financial assistance program. 
(a)  The abatement financial assistance program is hereby established. Under the program, the city will enter into financial assistance agreements with responsible parties that have been served with notices of violation under this article. Under these agreements, the city will abate the violations and the responsible parties will reimburse the city for the cost of abatement plus interest at four (4) percent per annum. 
(b)  A financial assistance agreement may provide that less than the total amount of the city's cost of abatement be reimbursed. The reduced amount of reimbursement may be a set percentage of the total abatement cost or a set amount. 
(c)  A financial assistance agreement shall provide that monthly reimbursement amounts shall be charged to the utility account of the responsible party. If the responsible party does not have a utility account with the city, an alternate payment plan may be arranged. 
(d)  The director may set priorities for the program by type of abatement. 
(e)  The abatement financial assistance program shall be limited to projects costing ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less. 
(f)  The city manager is authorized to establish rules and regulations for the program that are consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Subject to the availability of appropriated funds, the city manager is authorized to execute, on behalf of the city, financial assistance agreements and agreements with third parties to abate violations. 
(Ord. No. 20895, § 1, 3-7-11)  
Sec. 22-217.3. - Private source inflow and infiltration reduction program. 
In order to reduce instances of surcharged sanitary sewers due to inflow and infiltration, which are inimical to public health and welfare, and reduce the frequency of sanitary sewer backups and sanitary sewer overflows to the environment, a cost reimbursement program for the removal of inflow and infiltration sources on private properties, is hereby established and authorized in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Subject to funds available in the annual budget, the city may reimburse a property owner up to the maximum city reimbursement listed on the following Table 1 or one hundred (100) percent of the cost, whichever is less, for the removal of improper inflow and infiltration sources on the property per program requirements. Improper inflow and infiltration means the entry of any unauthorized groundwater, stormwater or unpolluted water into the sanitary sewer system. All installations must meet current building codes as set out in chapter 6 of this Code. 
TABLE 1 
Private Inflow and Infiltration Source 	Maximum City Reimbursement 	Maximum Unit Price Reimbursement 
Sump pump (disconnect existing pump from sewer and permanently discharge outside of residence) 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
Downspout disconnection from sewer (up to 4)* 	$500.00 	$125.00 
Service lateral* 	$2,500.00 	$30.00 per foot 
Sewer service connection 	$1,900.00 	N/A 
Pavement restoration in street rights-of-way* 	$4,500.00 	$115.00 per square yard 
Area drain disconnection (greater than 75 square feet of drainage area) 	$1,500.00 	N/A 
Minor site grading and/or concrete work to divert runoff from a sanitary sewer inflow source 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
 
*For these items, the rate of reimbursement will be per unit and cannot exceed the unit price given and the total cannot exceed the maximum listed. 
(2)  The cost reimbursement program set forth in this section applies to all owner-occupied residences having three (3) units or less with the sewer lateral connected directly to the city's public sewer main, inside or outside of the corporate limits of the City of Columbia, and constructed prior to 1996. Buildings connected to sewer mains owned by the Boone County Regional Sewer District or any customer of the Boone County Regional Sewer District connected directly to the city's public sewer main are not eligible for reimbursement through this program. The director of utilities may deny any application where it is determined that improper inflow and infiltration are likely not occurring or there is minimal impact on the public sewer system. 
(3)  This program shall apply only to applications after December 4, 2017, and where approved for reimbursement through this program prior to the work being completed. The city shall, in its sole discretion, determine the eligibility for participation in this program. 
(4)  Financial participation of the city in this cost reimbursement program is limited to funds budgeted for the program. Funding levels may be changed or eliminated based on the city's annual review of the program. 
(5)  The cost reimbursement program is limited to the actual cost of the installation of such items, subject to the funding limitations described herein, but does not include incidental or ancillary costs such as, but not limited to, landscape restoration, painting, tile, carpeting, etc. 
(6)  The property owner must allow the city to inspect the property owner's building prior to the city's determination of eligibility for this program. All sources and potential sources of infiltration and inflow, deemed significant by the director, must be eliminated as part of this program. The property owner must allow the city to inspect the building following participation in the program and completion of the installation to ensure that all infiltration and inflow into the city's sanitary sewer system has been eliminated. All costs and expenses submitted for reimbursement are subject to review and audit by the city. 
(7)  The director of utilities is authorized to develop program requirements, application forms, participation agreements and such other documents necessary to implement this cost reimbursement program. 
(8)  The director of utilities shall review all applications for participation, including the proposals for installation, and may require revisions thereon to comply with applicable ordinances and requirements. 
(9)  The city shall have the sole authority to determine eligibility for participation, prioritization of requests and compliance with all ordinances. 
(10)  This cost reimbursement program will be evaluated from time to time, at the city's discretion, and the city may change or eliminate the program. 
(11)  The city manager is authorized to execute agreements for participation in this cost reimbursement program. 
(Ord. No. 23399 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 23920 , § 1, 7-1-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23399 , § 1, adopted December 4, 2017, repealed the former § 22-217.3, and enacted a new § 22-217.3 as set out herein. The former § 22-217.3 pertained to inflow and infiltration reduction program. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 22-218. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The director is duly authorized to: 
(1)  Inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer system; 
(2)  Inspect the maintenance and lawful compliance of all sewers, pipes and plumbing that connect or discharge into the public sewer system; 
(3)  Inspect such wastewater as may be discharged therefrom; and 
(4)  Repair or abate or otherwise enforce this chapter. 
(b)  If an enforcement officer, in connection with the enforcement of this article, is denied entry to the building, sewer, pipe, facility or property, the officer or a city prosecutor may apply to the municipal court for a warrant under the provisions of chapter 15 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 14.794; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 20895, § 1, 3-7-11)  
Sec. 22-218.1. - Notice required prior to excavation. 
Any person desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam, or other purposes, in any street or alley upon which sewers are to be laid, shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the director before opening the street, and the manner of excavating and backfilling over such pipe shall be subject to the approval of the director. All such work shall be planned and executed so that no injury shall occur to any public sewer or drain or to any house sewer or drain connected therewith. 
(Code 1964, § 14.780; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-219. - Testing, reporting and recordkeeping. 
(a)  Any person discharging other than domestic wastewater to the city sewers shall submit to the director at such intervals as he may prescribe a report accurately describing the character and quantity of all such wastes discharged in the city sewers during the period covered by the report. In order to ensure compliance with these provisions, the director may at any time take such measurements, collect such samples, and run such laboratory analyses at the contributor's expense on representative samples of any waste as may be deemed necessary. All tests performed by the city or by the owner for submittal to the city shall be in accordance with standard laboratory methods as set forth in section 22-219.2. 
(b)  All records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling, chemical analysis, and documentation associated with best management practices shall be kept for not less than five (5) years. 
(c)  Records of sampling, analyses, and documentation associated with best management practices shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The date, exact place, time, and methods of sampling or measurements, and sample preservation techniques or procedures; 
(2)  Who performed the sampling or measurements; 
(3)  The date(s) analyses were performed; 
(4)  Who performed the analyses; 
(5)  The analytical techniques or methods used; and 
(6)  The results of such analyses. 
(Code 1964, § 14.802; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-219.1. - Confidentiality of permit information. 
(a)  Information and data required by federal, state or local rule to be reported on the pretreatment applications may be claimed as confidential pursuant to federal rule 40 CFR 403.14 by the submitter. The burden of providing confidentiality pursuant to federal rules shall remain with the submitter. 
(b)  Information not claimed to be confidential and information obtained from monitoring programs and inspections which is effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1964, § 14.812; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-219.2. - Reporting guidelines. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 22.219.3 of this ordinance. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 22.219.3 of this ordinance. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
b.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
c.  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
d.  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-220 of this ordinance. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 22-219.2(b)(4-6) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to a categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-220 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with best management practices, the user shall submit documentation required by the control authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-220 of this ordinance. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 22-2.19.3 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 14914, adopted Aug. 5, 1996, added, in part, §§ 22-219.2 and 22-220. Section 1 also renumbered former §§ 22-219.2 and 22-220 as §§ 22-219.3 and 22-219.4, respectively.  
Sec. 22-219.3. - Test guidelines. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes shall be determined using analytical procedures approved in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Except as indicated in paragraph (c) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(c)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Code 1964, § 14.798; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96) 
Note— See editor's note following § 22-219.2.  
Sec. 22-219.4. - Collection points for samples. 
Any contributor shall, upon request by the director, provide a central collection point to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of the waters or wastes. Such collection points shall be accessible at any time to authorized city personnel and easily located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The collection point shall be installed and maintained by the owner at his expense. In the event no collection point is established or required, the nearest downstream manhole shall be considered as a collection point for the property which is being served. 
(Code 1964, § 14.800; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96) 
Note— See editor's note following § 22-219.2.  
Sec. 22-219.5. - Automatic resampling. 
If the results of the permit holders wastewater analysis indicates a violation has occurred, the permit holder must: 
(1)  Inform the City of Columbia of the violation within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation; and 
(2)  Repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and submit, in writing, the results of this second analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the first violation. 
(Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 22-219.6. - Representative sampling and flow measurements. 
(a)  Samples and measurements taken as required herein shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored discharge. All samples shall be taken at the monitoring point(s) specified in the applicable permit and, unless otherwise specified, before the effluent joins or is diluted by any other waste stream, body of water or substance. All equipment used for sampling and analysis must be routinely calibrated, inspected and maintained to ensure their accuracy. Monitoring points shall not be changed without notification to and the approval of the City of Columbia. 
(b)  If flow measurement is required by this permit, the appropriate flow measurement devices and methods consistent with approved scientific practices shall be selected and used to ensure the accuracy and reliability of measurements of the volume of monitored discharges. The devices shall be installed, calibrated, and maintained to ensure that the accuracy of the measurements are consistent with the accepted capability of that type of device. Devices selected shall be capable of measuring flows with a maximum deviation of less than ten (10) percent from true discharge rates throughout the range of expected discharge volumes. 
(Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 19649, § 1, 9-4-07)  
Sec. 22-219.7. - Notification of hazardous waste. 
Any industrial user who discharges a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR part 261, shall immediately notify the director and within five (5) days following such discharge submit a written notice. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, the chemical abstracts number (CAS), the concentration of the hazardous waste, the volume discharged, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). The director shall determine whether such hazardous waste shall be prohibited from or may be admitted to the city sewers or shall be modified or treated before being admitted. 
( Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-220. - Certification statement. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(b)  Non-significant categorical industrial user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from _______, _______ to _______, ________ [month, day, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as _______ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as described in section 22-210 SIU(2); 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; 
(c)  The facility never discharged more than one hundred (100) gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based upon the following information: _______." 
(c)  The certification statement shall be signed as required in (1), (2), or (3) below: 
(1)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1) of this section if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (1); 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
(3)  If an authorization under subsection (2) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection (2) of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-221. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be owned and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1964, § 14.792; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-222. - Accidental discharges/slug control plans. 
(a)  At least once every permit cycle, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 22-222.1 of this ordinance; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  Significant industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Code 1964, § 14.810; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-222.1. - Reporting accidental or slug discharges. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited, to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  A documented and verified operating upset, as defined in section 22-210, shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought against the user for violations attributable to the upset event. 
(Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 22-222.2. - Bypass of treatment facilities. 
(a)  Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage or no feasible alternatives exist. 
(b)  The permittee may allow bypass to occur which does not cause effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. 
(c)  Notification of bypass: 
(1)  Anticipated bypass. If the permittee knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, to: Director, P.O. Box 6015 Columbia, MO 65205-6015 
(2)  Unanticipated bypass. The permittee shall immediately notify the City of Columbia, as listed in section 22-222.1(a), and submit a written notice to the director within five (5) days. This report shall specify: 
a.  A description of the bypass, and its cause, including its duration; 
b.  Whether the bypass has been corrected; and 
c.  The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(Ord. No. 16734, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-223. - Establishment of stricter limitations; conflicting provisions. 
The city council reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. In the event of conflict between local, state or federal regulations, the most stringent regulation shall apply as recommended by the director and determined by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 14.788; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-224. - Special agreements. 
Special agreements, arrangements or contracts may be entered into between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to the rate and cost as established by the city council. This section does not pertain to significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards as defined in section 22-210. 
(Code 1964, § 14.796; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 22617, § 1, 10-19-15 )  
Sec. 22-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 22-226. - Establishment. 
Public sewers shall be established along the principal courses of drainage, at such points, to such extent, of such dimensions and under such regulations as may be provided by ordinance, and these may be extensions or branches of sewers already constructed or entirely new throughout, as may be deemed expedient. 
(Code 1964, § 14-350; Ord. No. 19841, § 1, 3-17-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-227. - Special tax. 
The council may levy a tax on all property made taxable for state purposes over the whole city, to pay for the constructing, reconstructing and repairing of such work, which tax shall be called "special public sewer tax," and shall be such amount as may be required for the sewer provided by ordinance to be built; and the fund arising from such tax shall be appropriated wholly to the constructing, reconstructing and repairing of such sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 14.650) 
Charter reference— similar provisions, § 81. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 22-228. - Sewer extension; city payment of differential cost. 
The city council may, by ordinance, authorize agreements allowing property owners to extend city sewers to serve their property. The sewer pipe used in any such extension must be sized properly to serve the property but must be at least eight (8) inches in diameter. If the city requires a larger size pipe to serve other property, the city may pay the extra cost of extending the larger pipe. 
(Ord. No. 19841, § 1, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 22-229. - Sewer extension; reimbursement of property owners from project connection fees. 
(a)  The city council may, by ordinance, authorize agreements allowing property owners to extend city sewers to serve their property in situations where the city would normally extend the sewers but lacks the funding to do so. Such agreements must provide that the sewer will be built in accordance with city plans and specifications. The city may agree to partially reimburse the person or persons extending a sewer from project connection fees charged to other property owners in the project drainage area. 
(b)  The reimbursement shall be computed by subtracting the total pro rata contribution of all persons paying or agreeing to pay for the sewer, before construction began, from the total cost of the project. The total cost of the project shall be determined by the city based on documentation provided by the person constructing the project. The total area within the drainage basin served by the project will be calculated in square feet and identified as the project recovery area. The pro rata contribution shall be computed by multiplying the cost per square foot of the project times the number of square feet owned by the persons who have paid or agreed to pay at least their proportionate share of the project cost. 
(c)  The city may agree to reimburse the person constructing the sanitary sewer when the city is paid a project connection fee, separate from and in addition to any other fees normally collected by the city, by a person in the project recovery area who has not paid a connection fee before construction of the sanitary sewer began. Whenever a project connection fee is paid to the city, the city shall pay the person constructing the sewer a sum of money equivalent to the project connection fee, plus whatever penalties are charged by the city, less the cost of collection as determined by the director of finance. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed, however, to create any liability on behalf of the city; nor shall the city contract with the person building the sewer to create any liability for its failure to collect such connection fees. 
(d)  Agreements made under this section shall be for a period not to exceed twenty (20) years. If the person constructing the sewer is no longer in existence or cannot be located by the city, the city shall cause the reimbursement to be made available to those persons who have contributed their proportionate share of the cost of the sewers before construction began, provided such persons must file claims and prove their claims to the director within twenty (20) years from the date of the contract. If no such claims are filed, or if the city cannot locate the person constructing the sewers within twenty (20) years after the date of the contract, all such refunds shall forever be barred, and such money shall revert to the city's sewer fund. 
(Ord. No. 19841, § 1, 3-17-08; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT SEWERS 
 
Sec. 22-231. - Definition; establishment. 
District sewers are those which have been or may be constructed or acquired, under authority of ordinance, within the limits of an established sewer district, and paid for in whole or in part by special tax bills evidencing special assessments upon the property in the district. District sewers shall be established within the limits of the districts prescribed by ordinance, and shall connect with public sewers or other district sewers and may be constructed with the main branch or discharge pipe wholly within or beyond the boundary of the district, as the council shall determine. Such district may be subdivided, enlarged or changed by ordinance at any time previous to the construction of the sewers therein; and more than one district sewer may be laid in a sewer district if deemed necessary by the council for sanitary or other purposes. The council shall cause sewers to be constructed in each district whenever a majority of the resident property owners therein shall petition therefor or whenever the council shall deem such sewers necessary for sanitary or other purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 14.660; Ord. No. 12208, § 1, 4-3-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 81.  
Sec. 22-232. - Costs; special tax. 
All or a part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing or acquiring district sewers shall be charged against the lots, tracts or parcels of ground in the district, exclusive of the improvements, in proportion to the area of the whole district exclusive of public highways. A special tax for district sewers shall be levied and assessed in the name of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 14.680; Ord. No. 12208, § 1, 4-3-89) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 22-233. - Construction. 
District sewers shall be of such dimensions and materials as may be prescribed by ordinance, and may be changed, enlarged or extended, and shall have all necessary laterals, inlets, catch basins, manholes and other appurtenances. 
(Code 1964, § 14.670)  
Secs. 22-234—22-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - JOINT DISTRICT SEWERS 
 
Sec. 22-241. - Definition; purpose; funding. 
Joint district sewers are those which have been or may be constructed or acquired under the authority of ordinances uniting one or more districts and unorganized territory, or uniting districts or unorganized territory into a joint sewer district, for the purpose of providing main, outlet or intercepting sewers, for the benefit of such joint sewer district, and paid for in whole or in part by special assessment upon the property in such joint sewer district. 
(Code 1964, § 14.690; Ord. No. 23304 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 81.  
Sec. 22-242. - Cost; special tax. 
The cost of constructing joint district sewers, except the sum, if any, specified in the ordinance to be paid by the city, shall be assessed and paid in special tax bills against the property included in the joint sewer district, the same as is provided in the case of district sewers. The action of the council creating the joint sewer district shall be conclusive as to the necessity therefor, and no special tax bills shall be held invalid or be affected on account of the included drainage area thereof, or the size, character or purpose of such sewer; provided, it shall not include any district not contained in its natural drainage area or watercourse. 
(Code 1964, § 14.720) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 22-243. - When constructed. 
Joint district sewers may be constructed by the city whenever the city may deem it necessary that a sewer should be constructed uniting one or more districts and unorganized territory, or uniting districts or unorganized territory. In such case it may, by ordinance, unite such districts as aforesaid into a joint sewer district and cause a sewer to be constructed therein in like manner and in all respects as is provided in the case of district sewers; except in cases of joint district sewers, the city may, if deemed proper, provide in the ordinance creating such joint district sewer that the city shall pay a certain sum, to be specified in such ordinance, toward the payment of such joint district sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 14.700)  
Sec. 22-244. - Construction by sections. 
Ordinances creating joint sewer districts may provide for the construction of the sewers therein in one or more sections and for the levy and assessment of the cost of any section upon the completion thereof as a special assessment in the manner herein provided. 
(Code 1964, § 14.710)  
Secs. 22-245—22-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE SEWERS 
 
Sec. 22-251. - Definition; construction; cost to city. 
Private sewers are those paid for by private parties constructing the same. Private sewers connected with the public, district or joint district sewers may be constructed under such restrictions and regulations as the council may prescribe by general ordinance; but the city shall bear no expense for the construction, repairing or cleaning of same, except as provided in section 22-254. 
(Code 1964, § 14.760; Ord. No. 23244 , § 1, 7-17-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 81,  
Sec. 22-252. - Acquisition by gift, condemnation, or purchase. 
The city may acquire any private sewer by gift, condemnation or purchase and provide for reimbursement by special assessment, in the manner hereinbefore provided, to be levied against the property in the district or joint district for which such private sewer is acquired; and an ordinance making a private sewer a part of a proposed district or joint district sewer, may provide that the contractor shall pay for such private sewer at the price fixed in such ordinance, and the cost thereof shall be included in the total cost of constructing such district or joint district sewer. 
(Code 1964, § 14.770; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 83.  
Sec. 22-253. - Private common collector sewers. 
(a)  A private common collector sewer is a sewer line which is not owned and maintained by a public entity and which serves two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land or two (2) or more structures under separate ownership. 
(b)  The city may acquire, by gift, purchase or condemnation, any private common collector sewer. 
(c)  Prior to acquiring, except by gift, a private common collector sewer, the city shall establish a sewer district which encompasses the private common collector sewer to be acquired. 
(d)  After acquiring a private common collector sewer, the city may repair or reconstruct the sewer line to bring the line into compliance with city sewer standards and specifications. 
(e)  Special assessments shall not be levied for sewer district projects that involve the elimination of private common collector sewers. 
(Ord. No. 12208, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 19842, § 1, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 22-254. - Cost reimbursement program for the installation of pressure sewers and backflow prevention devices or the removal of plumbing fixtures. 
In order to alleviate the public health hazards caused by sewer backups onto private property, a cost reimbursement program for the installation of pressure sewers and backflow prevention devices or the removal of plumbing fixtures is hereby established and authorized in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Subject to funds available in the annual budget, the city may reimburse a property owner up to four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) or fifty (50) percent of the cost, whichever is less, for installing a pressure sewer system (overhead basement sewer); or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fifty (50) percent of the cost, whichever is less, for the installation of a backflow prevention device or the removal of plumbing fixtures located below grade. When a sump pump is required to be installed as part of this program, the city shall reimburse a property owner one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fifty (50) percent of the cost, whichever is less. All installations must meet current building codes as set out in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(2)  The cost reimbursement program set forth in this section applies to all existing buildings where the sewer lateral is connected directly to the city's public sewer main, inside or outside of the corporate limits of the City of Columbia, but shall under no circumstances apply to newly constructed buildings. Buildings connected to private common collector sewer systems, as defined in section 22-253 of this Code, or connected to sewer mains owned by the Boone County Regional Sewer District, are not eligible for reimbursement through this program. The director of utilities may deny any application where the director determines there is no risk of sewer backup related to the connection of the lateral to the public sewer main. 
(3)  This cost reimbursement program shall apply only to installations of pressure sewer systems (overhead basement sewer), backflow prevention devices or the removal of plumbing fixtures made on or after July 17, 2017 and where approved for reimbursement through this program prior to the installation. The city shall, in its sole discretion, determine the eligibility of installations for participation in this program. 
(4)  Financial participation of the city in this cost reimbursement program is limited to funds budgeted for the program. Funding levels may be changed or eliminated based on the city's annual review of the program. 
(5)  The cost reimbursement program is limited to the actual cost of the overhead sewer or backflow prevention device and installation of such device, subject to the funding limitations described herein, but does not include incidental or ancillary costs such as landscape restoration, painting, tile, carpeting, etc. 
(6)  The property owner must allow the city to inspect the property owner's building prior to the city's determination of eligibility for this program. All sources and potential sources of infiltration and inflow must be eliminated, at the owner's expense, as part of this program. The property owner must allow the city to inspect the building following participation in the program and completion of the installation to ensure that all infiltration and inflow into the city's sanitary sewer system has been eliminated. All costs and expenses submitted for reimbursement are subject to review and audit by the city. 
(7)  The director of utilities is authorized to develop program requirements, application forms, participation agreements, and such other documents necessary to implement this cost reimbursement program. 
(8)  The director of utilities shall review all applications for participation, including the proposals for installation, and may require revisions thereon to comply with applicable ordinances and requirements. 
(9)  The city shall have the sole authority to determine eligibility for participation, prioritization of requests and compliance with all ordinances. 
(10)  This cost reimbursement program will be evaluated from time to time, at the city's discretion, and the city may change or eliminate the program. 
(11)  The city manager is authorized to execute agreements for participation in this cost reimbursement program. 
(Ord. No. 23244 , § 1, 7-17-17)  
Secs. 22-255—22-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RATES AND CHARGES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 22-261. - Generally. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from contributors to the city's sanitary sewer system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees, to be prepared by the director and approved by the city council. The city council shall adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(2)  Fees for permit applications; 
(3)  Appeal fees; 
(4)  Other fees or surcharges as the director may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  Surcharges shall be shown on the utility bill as a separate item which shall show the amount of the surcharge and shall be payable to the city at the same time as the utility bill and normal sewer service charge. 
(Code 1964, § 14.816; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-262. - Classification of users. 
(a)  All users of the wastewater treatment system are hereby classified in the following manner: 
(1)  Residential. A residential user is a user of a dwelling unit that is connected to the city's sanitary sewer system and served by one (1) water meter. 
(2)  Nonresidential. Nonresidential users are all users of the city's sanitary sewer system that are not residential users. 
(3)  Excepted. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no user shall receive sewage service charges if the director has evidence that: 
a.  Water usage to the user's premises is metered and diverted from entering the wastewater system; 
b.  Water service to the user's premises is shut off; or 
c.  The user's premises is otherwise shown not to be contributing wastewater to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Revenue received from sewage service charges shall be accounted for according to the above customer classifications. 
(Code 1964, § 14.820; Ord. No. 10059, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 22-263. - Charges for sewage service. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on each wastewater system user having any sewer connection with the wastewater system of the city or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial waste, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the city's wastewater system, a sewage service charge. The sewage service charge shall have the following components: 
(1)  Volume charge: Subject to the exceptions provided in this article, a volume charge shall be based upon the volume of water used in or on the premises as measured by a water or sewer meter approved by the city; provided, however, that if actual sewer service cannot reasonably be determined from the water or sewage so metered, whether due to defect, tampering or causes unknown, the amount of sewage, waste or waters discharged into such system shall be estimated and billed as provided for in section 27-19. 
(2)  Base charge: A base charge will be charged for each user as follows: 
a.  One base charge shall be charged per residential user. 
b.  One base charge shall be charged per non-residential user for each meter. The nonresidential base charge shall be determined by the size of the water meter(s), starting with a base charge equal to a residential base charge for meters five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inches and shall scale upwards based on the size of the meter. 
(3)  Additional charges: Additional charges for extra strength sewage, toxic pollutants, and wastewater monitoring will be levied where applicable. 
(b)  The monthly volume charges for residential classification shall be based on the average monthly billing of water usage during the calendar months of November, December, January, February and March dropping out the highest and lowest usage months and rounded to two decimals. If the calculated average usage results in an average of less than one (1) CCF, the average will be recalculated using the water usage for the previous twelve (12) month billing periods, April through March, rounded to two decimals. If the residential user does not have the appropriate number of billing periods necessary for calculating a winter-quarter average, a minimum volume usage will be billed until a winter-quarter average can be established. The minimum volume usage charge will be calculated by using the average water usage for all residential city metered water customers, for the most recent months of November through March, removing the highest and lowest usage months and rounded to the nearest whole number. Winter-quarter average shall transfer to any residential customer who moves to a new residential address. The monthly volume charges for all other customers shall be based on one hundred (100) percent of the monthly metered water used, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(1)  Sewage service charge rates. Each user of the wastewater system of the city shall pay a base charge and a volume charge for the use of such system monthly. Sewage service charges shall be based on the following rates: 
Residential base charge ..... $12.37 
Non-residential Base Charge: 
Water Meter Size 	Meter Capacity (gpm) 	Capacity Difference 	Base Charge by Meter Capacity 
?-inch 	20 	1 	$   12.37 
¾-inch 	30 	1.5 	$   18.57 
1-inch 	50 	2.5 	$   30.95 
1½-inch 	100 	5 	$   61.88 
2-inch 	160 	8 	$   99.01 
3-inch 	320 	16 	$  198.03 
4-inch 	500 	25 	$  309.41 
6-inch 	1,000 	50 	$  618.84 
8-inch 	1,600 	80 	$  990.13 
10-inch 	2,300 	115 	$1,423.31 
12-inch 	4,300 	215 	$2,660.99 
 
Volume Charge: 
Volume charge, per Ccf: $2.55 
Ccf = 100 cubic feet 
(2)  Extra strength charge. Wastewater discharged to the wastewater system from commercial or industrial users shall be subject to an extra strength charge when the BOD or total suspended solids concentration exceeds three hundred (300) milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight. All analyses shall be performed on composite samples collected at no less than hourly intervals over a twenty-four-hour period. 
Extra strength charges shall be calculated based on one hundred (100) percent of metered water use, except as otherwise provided in section 22-269 of this Code, in accordance with the following formula: 
S = Vs × 0.00624 × [$0.324 (BOD - 300) + $0.222 (SS - 300)] 
Where: 
S 	= 	Surcharge in dollars monthly. 
Vs 	= 	Sewage volume in 100 cubic feet per month. 
0.00624 	= 	Conversion factor for hundred cubic feet to million pounds. 
$0.324 	= 	Unit charge for BOD in dollars per pound; of which $0.216 represents the user charge portion and $0.108 represents capital charges. 
BOD 	= 	BOD strength index in mg/l by weight. 
300 	= 	Allowed BOD and suspended solids strengths in mg/l by weight. 
$0.222 	= 	Unit charge for suspended solids in dollars per pound; of which $0.1491 represents the user charge portion and $0.0734 represents capital charges. 
SS 	= 	Suspended solids strength index in mg/l by weight. 
 
(3)  Monitoring charge. When regulations as set forth by the federal government, state and city require monitoring of the waste from a commercial or industrial user, whether for strength calculations or for NPDES compliance, that user shall pay a monitoring charge. 
The monitoring charge shall consist of all costs for personnel, material and equipment used to collect and analyze samples from the user's wastewater. 
The exact charge shall be based on actual costs and shall be determined by the director. 
(4)  Toxic pollutant charge. Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the city's treatment system shall pay for such increased costs. 
(c)  For City of Columbia residential sewer customers who receive water service from a public water district, the billing will be based on the winter-quarter average as described in subsection (b) using the water district's available water usage information. 
(Code 1964, § 14.830; Ord. No. 10275, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 12022, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 12711, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 13413, § 1, 8-17-92; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 15620, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15926, § 2, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 16890, § 2, 5-7-01; Ord. No. 17837, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18215, § 2, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18685, § 2, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19231, § 2, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 19656, § 2, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20046, § 2, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20413, § 2, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20740, § 2, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 20936, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 21074, § 2, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21161, § 2, 12-5-11, eff. 11-8-11; Ord. No. 21364, § 1, 7-16-12, eff. 10-1-12; Ord. No. 21429, § 2, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22209, § 2, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22575, § 1, 9-21-15, eff. 10-1-15 ; Ord. No. 22925 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23304 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23638 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 22-264. - Connection fees. 
(a)  The following definitions apply to this section: 
Modified user of the wastewater system means the owner or occupant of property that is currently connected to the wastewater system who is increasing the size or number of water meters serving the property or adding dwelling units. 
New user of the wastewater system means the owner or occupant of property that is being connected to the wastewater system for the first time. 
(b)  Each new user of the wastewater system shall pay a wastewater system connection fee. The fee shall be two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per dwelling unit. If there are uses on the property other than dwelling units, the new user of the wastewater system shall pay a wastewater system connection fee based on the size of the water meter that would be required to serve the additional use in accordance with the following table: 
Size of Water Meter 
   Inches      Connection Fee 
? ..... $2,400.00 
¾ ..... 3,600.00 
1 ..... 6,000.00 
1½ ..... 12,000.00 
2 ..... 19,200.00 
3 ..... 38,400.00 
4 ..... 60,000.00 
6 ..... 120,000.00 
8 ..... 192,000.00 
10 ..... 276,000.00 
12 ..... 516,000.00 
(c)  Each modified user of the wastewater system who is increasing the size of a water meter shall pay a connection fee equal to the difference between the connection fee shown in subsection (b) for the size water meter which was in place prior to the expansion and the connection fee shown in subsection (b) for the size of the water meter to be installed. Each modified user of the wastewater system who is increasing the number of water meters serving the property shall pay a connection fee for each additional water meter in accordance with the table in subsection (b). Each modified user that is adding one (1) or more dwelling units shall pay the per dwelling unit connection fee in subsection (b). There shall be no refund for a decrease in the size of the water meter installed on the property. 
(d)  The director may reduce the amount of the connection fee when the new or modified user of the wastewater system clearly establishes that a substantial portion of the water to be metered will not be discharged into the wastewater system. The amount of the reduced connection fee shall be based on the size of the water meter that would have been required to provide that portion of the water to be metered which is discharged into the wastewater system. The director shall not apply the connection fee when metering changes do not change the volume of discharge to the sewer system. In the event the director determines the user is discharging a higher volume of wastewater into the system than allotted by the reduced connection fee, the director may require the user to increase the size of water meter assigned for the purpose of establishing the connection fee in this subsection and the user shall pay an additional connection fee equal to the difference. Each modified user that is adding one (1) or more dwelling units shall pay the per dwelling unit connection fee in subsection (b). There shall be no refund for a decrease in the size of the water meter installed on the property. 
(e)  The wastewater system connection fees imposed by this section are in addition to plumbing permit fees and all other fees and charges imposed by the city. 
(f)  A plumbing permit to connect to the wastewater system shall not be issued unless the connection fee has been paid. A plumbing permit to increase the size of a water meter serving property that is connected to the wastewater system shall not be issued unless the connection fee has been paid. A plumbing permit to increase the number of water meters serving property that is connected to the wastewater system shall not be issued unless the connection fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 15324, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 17837, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 19231, § 2, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 19656, § 2, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 19696, § 1, 10-1-07; Ord. No. 20050, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20415, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20936, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 22209, § 2, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22575, § 1, 9-21-15, eff. 10-1-15 ; Ord. No. 22925 , § 1, 9-19-16, eff. 10-1-16; Ord. No. 22968 , § 1, 10-17-16; Ord. No. 23304 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17)  
Sec. 22-265. - Review of user charge rate structure. 
The user charge rate schedule shall be reviewed and adjusted annually to: 
(1)  Maintain the proportional distribution of operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) costs among user classes. 
(2)  Provide adequate revenues to cover OM&R and capital costs. 
(3)  Apply any excess or shortage of revenue collected from a class of users to the costs of OM&R attributable to that class to the following year(s) and adjust the sewage service rates accordingly. 
(Code 1964, § 14.860; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 22-266. - Computation of sewer charges and fees to users outside city. 
Each user of the wastewater system of the city whose property or premises may be located outside the corporate limits of such city and within any unincorporated area, shall pay as a sewage service charge a sum equal to the charge computed under the provisions of section 22-263 of this Code plus fifty (50) percent. Each user of the wastewater system of the city whose property or premises may be located outside the corporate limits of the city and within the corporate limits of any other municipality, or each user in an area whose inhabitants have instituted proceedings for incorporation as another municipality, shall pay as a sewage service charge a sum equal to the charge computed under the provisions of section 22-263 of this Code plus one hundred (100) percent. Persons owing a connection fee for property located outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay as a connection fee a sum equal to the connection fee computed under the provisions of section 22-264 of this Code plus fifty (50) percent. The amounts computed in accordance with this section shall be considered as additional capital charges. 
(Code 1964, § 14.870; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 15324, § 1, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 22-267. - Billing; payment; deposits and service charges; discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
The service fees provided for by this article shall be billed and collected by the city in accordance with the provisions of section 27-16 along with all other charges and deposits provided for by the provisions of section 27-16 et seq. The patron's sewage charges shall be billed and collected as provided for by the standard utility and billing procedures of section 27-16 et seq. All service fees shall be credited upon collection to the accounts of the sewer utility. Delinquency and shut off shall be handled in accordance with the standard provisions of section 27-16 et seq. 
(Code 1964, § 14.880; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-268. - Notification. 
All users of the system shall be notified at least annually in conjunction with a regular billing for sewage service as to: 
(1)  The rate schedule in effect. 
(2)  That part of user charges attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Code 1964, § 14.890; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 22-269. - Determination of amount of use. 
(a)  The amount of sewage discharged to the wastewater system of the city shall be determined by the quantity of water metered to the user; provided, however, that if actual sewer service cannot reasonably be determined from the water or sewage so metered, whether due to defect, tampering or causes unknown, the amount of sewage, waste or waters discharged into such system shall be estimated and billed as provided for in section 22-263 of this Code. 
(b)  Each person from whose property or premises sewage in any quantity is discharged into the wastewater system of the city, but who is not a water customer of such city, is hereby required to meter, at its source, the quantity of water used, with an appropriate meter to be approved by such city, and to pay a monthly sewer service charge based upon the amount of water thus metered, to be computed in like manner as provided in section 22-263 of this Code. 
(c)  Each user of the wastewater system of the city who is a water customer of such city, but who also obtains water from any source other than from such city, is hereby required to meter, at such other source, the quantity of water used, with an appropriate meter to be approved by said city, and to pay a monthly sewage service charge, based upon the amount of water thus metered, to be computed in like manner as is provided in section 22-263 of this Code. 
(d)  If any user desires to establish eligibility for a sewage service volume base of less than one hundred (100) percent of water used the user may, at the user's sole expense: 
(1)  Install a sewage meter acceptable to the director to measure the volume of liquid actually discharged into the wastewater system from his premises. Such meter shall be maintained and calibrated by the customer and the readings from the meter shall be taken at least twice weekly and shall be provided to the city on a monthly basis. In the event a sewage meter is installed the rate schedule as set forth in section 22-263 of this Code shall be applied to: 
a.  The volume of sewage entering the sanitary sewer as measured by the meter each month; or 
b.  A calculated volume based on the percentage of metered water usage discharged to the wastewater system as determined by the historical comparison of water usage and metered sewage. 
(2)  In lieu of a sewage meter, the user may install auxiliary water meter(s) to measure that portion of water usage which is diverted from entering the wastewater system. In the event an auxiliary water meter is installed, the volume of water metered by such meter(s) shall be deducted from the total volume of water usage before the sewage service rate schedule is applied. No refunds, allowances or reductions from the one hundred (100) percent water use base will be granted for any time period prior to approval of a wastewater metering or diverted water metering system. 
(e)  If, through no fault of the customer, a residential customer has been under-billed because of a malfunctioning water meter or inaccurate meter readings, the residential customer shall not be billed an additional amount for any sewer service received more than six (6) months before the current billing cycle. 
(Code 1964, § 14.840; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 19550, § 1, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 22-270. - Determination of extra strength. 
(a)  The city will perform analyses at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months to determine the strength of sewage discharged by any users who discharge an annual average volume of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more of sewage per average work day and whose wastes are subject to extra strength charges. Any users who discharge an average of less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day and whose wastes are subject to extra strength charges shall have their wastes analyzed as often as deemed necessary by the director to obtain representative samples. 
(b)  If any user chooses not to accept the analytical determination made by the city, they may, at their sole expense, employ an independent laboratory, acceptable to the director, to conduct sampling and analysis of their sewage. The time period and location for the collection of the samples shall be designated by the city. The city and the independent laboratory shall both preside over the collection of the samples and shall equally divide the final composite so that a duplicate analysis may be made. 
(c)  If results of the analysis of the sewage sample by both the city and the independent laboratory are not comparable, the director may appoint a second independent laboratory to analyze the sewage. The sampling procedures used will be the same as those outlined above. The results of these analyses, together with the previous results, shall be used to determine the actual extra strength charges. The fee for the second independent laboratory analysis, shall be shared equally between the city and the user. 
(d)  If any user improves the quality of their discharged sewage, the city will reevaluate the strength of the sewage if requested to do so by the user. The user will pay an additional monitoring charge for the necessary sampling and analysis. 
(e)  The director shall have the right to enter upon all premises served by the wastewater system of the city, for the purpose of inspecting, reading or otherwise examining all meters and appurtenances involved in the recording of water received on the premises or sewage discharged therefrom, or to collect samples for analysis of sewage discharged therefrom. 
(Code 1964, § 14.850; Ord. No. 14914, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 20922, § 1, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 22-271. - Sewer extension permit requirements. 
(a)  A construction permit is required for all sanitary sewer extensions. All applications for sewer extension permits shall be submitted on forms issued by the director and shall contain all information required by the director. 
(b)  Applications for sanitary sewer extension permits shall be accompanied by detailed construction drawings. Construction drawings for sewer extensions shall be prepared by a qualified, registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri and shall be prepared in accordance with City of Columbia Sanitary Sewer Specifications and Standards, Sanitary Sewer Pump Station Design Requirements and Standard Specifications, Street and Storm Sewer Specifications and Standards, Storm Drainage Design Manual and all other applicable state and federal regulations including those of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. All construction drawings for sewer extensions shall be reviewed and approved by the director prior to construction. Easements shall be provided for all sewer extensions. 
(c)  An application for a sanitary sewer extension permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 20653, § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 22578, § 4, 9-21-15 )  
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; civil defense, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; franchise entity regulation of video service providers, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; sound amplifying equipment on trucks, § 16-281 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 17; public works and improvements, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 27; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28; Unified Development Code, Ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Demonstrations, exhibitions, etc. 
Any person, other than one holding a parade permit under article VI of this chapter, who shall conduct on any street, alley or sidewalk any exhibition or demonstration of any article or thing or process or so use any street, alley or sidewalk for private purposes as to block or obstruct the same or impede or interfere with travel and traffic thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.030)  
Sec. 24-2. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks; sidewalk cafes. 
Any person who shall deposit, place, paint, write, erect or maintain any structure, material, article, substance, decoration or thing on, in or above any street, curb, gutter, park, parkway, sidewalk or public place of the city, except as specifically authorized by the city council by resolution, or as otherwise provided for by ordinance or this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however: 
(a)  Sidewalk cafe. That a person owning or operating a restaurant, coffee shop or other business serving food and beverages may provide tables, chairs, plants or seating accommodations for its customers on the sidewalks adjacent to the business subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Plan required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe without first filing a plan with the director of public works. 
(2)  Plan contents. An applicant for a sidewalk cafe permit shall submit a plan therefor to the city and shall furnish such information and make such affidavits as the director shall require. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following: 
a.  Name of business; 
b.  Business address; 
c.  Name of all individuals with an ownership interest in the business; 
d.  Name of current business manager; 
e.  Name of the property owner upon whose property the business is located; 
f.  A diagram, drawn to scale, that delineates the space to be occupied by tables, chairs and barrier or delineator. Such diagram shall include any existing light poles, sidewalk grates, parking meters, or other facilities located in the right-of-way, including temporary signage intended to be utilized by the applicant, between the street curb and the building; 
g.  A statement affirming that any tables, chairs and barriers or delineators will be stored when not in use; 
h.  A statement that the sidewalk cafe operator acknowledges and will comply with the duties of the operator as stated in this section; 
i.  Signature of the authorized business owner; and 
j.  Contact information for the business owner and, if applicable, authorized agent of the business owner. 
(3)  Plan revisions. The operator of a sidewalk cafe shall submit a revised plan to the director of public works in the event any changes are made to the sidewalk cafe layout or location. The revised plan shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the director. 
(4)  Duties of operator. Every sidewalk cafe operator under this section shall: 
a.  Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of the business by the director of public works, or the director's designee; 
b.  Accessibility. Ensure an unobstructed pathway in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act at least sixty (60) inches wide be maintained on the sidewalk along the entire length of the sidewalk used by the business, which pathway shall be plainly visible from one end to the other and shall not require sharp turning movements to maneuver; 
c.  Portable facilities. That any tables, chairs, posts, cordons or other furniture be portable and not fastened or affixed to or over the public sidewalk unless the owner has obtained right-of-use approval from the city council; 
d.  Advertising materials. That no advertising material other than simple identification of the business establishment or "sandwich sign" otherwise permitted by this code shall be included within the public sidewalk including the sidewalk cafe; 
e.  Alcoholic beverages. That alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed only in an area enclosed by a decorative barrier and in compliance with all other city code requirements related to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages. In the event the business serves alcoholic beverages, a barrier shall be placed which consists of either bollards connected by chains or ornamental picket-style fencing. Bollards, including the base, must be made of black, powder coated steel or similar material and neutral color. The chains must be made of black metal or similar material and neutral color. Fencing, including the base, must be made of black, powder coated steel or similar material and neutral color. Spacing between pickets must be no wider than four (4) inches. Barriers must be no less than thirty-six (36) inches nor more than forty-three (43) inches high and shall not be anchored in the sidewalk. When barriers are placed for businesses not serving alcoholic beverages they must comply with these standards. A permittee shall not keep barriers on the sidewalk during any time of the year when the permittee does not serve food or alcoholic beverages outdoors; 
f.  Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such permitted business; and 
g.  Operate properly. Avoid fraud, misrepresentation and false statements made in the course of carrying on the business; avoid conducting the business in an unlawful manner; avoid conducting the business in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(5)  Enforcement. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the operator of a sidewalk cafe may be cited for code violations if the sidewalk cafe operator violates any law or ordinance affecting the conduct of a sidewalk cafe within the city. 
(6)  Right of use permit required for attachment of any fixtures or structures. A sidewalk cafe which seeks to utilize any barriers or equipment which is not portable or which is attached in any way to any portion of the sidewalk must obtain a right of use permit from the city council prior to the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit by the director. In such event, the contents of any such right of use permit shall supersede the provisions of this section in the event of a conflict. A right of use permit for a sidewalk cafe installation shall require an accurate site plan, elevation, rendering, or such graphic representations as the city council may require to become exhibits to the permit. The director shall ensure the conditions set forth in the right of use permit issued by the city council are complied with by the applicant. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city council from revoking any right of use permit issued for operation of a sidewalk cafe when the council determines in its sole discretion that the continued grant of the right of use permit is not in the best interest of the public. 
(b)  Package delivery. That nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any merchant or tradesman from placing any packages of merchandise, which the merchant or tradesman may be receiving or sending away, upon any sidewalk if the packages do not occupy more than one-fourth (¼) of the width of the sidewalk, or remain on the sidewalk for more than two (2) hours; and 
(c)  Balconies. That a building permit for the construction of a balcony extending over the public right-of-way in zoning district C-2 or M-DT shall be issued only if the city council has granted a right of use permit for the balcony and the proposed construction complies with section 29-4.2(d)(8) of this Code and with the "encroachments into the public right-of-way" provisions of the Building Code of Columbia, Missouri, adopted in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 14.010; Ord. No. 18063, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 20284, § 2, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 23117 , § 6, 3-20-17; Ord. No. 23770 , § 2, 2-4-19; Ord. No. 24094 , § 2, 11-18-19)  
Sec. 24-3. - Disposition of articles placed in any street or sidewalk. 
Any article placed in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, thoroughfare or other public place within the city contrary to ordinance, or any such article lost or abandoned in such place, shall be taken up and delivered into the custody of the chief of police, who shall notify the owner thereof, if known, that the same may be redeemed within five (5) days of such notice by paying to the chief of police the actual charges incurred in the storage of such articles, but not less than fifty cents ($0.50) for each day of such storage. If the owner fails to redeem such article within the time specified, or if such owner is unknown or cannot be found, then, and in that event, the chief of police shall post notices in five (5) places in the city describing the article as accurately and briefly as possible, and notifying the public that on a certain day and hour named therein, which shall be at least ten (10) days subsequent to such notice, that he will sell the articles described at public auction to the highest bidder for cash at a public place. In case no bidders appear at such sale, the chief of police may sell such articles at private sale, securing the best possible price. From the proceeds of any such sale held hereunder, the chief of police shall first deduct his expenses and pay the balance into the city treasury; and such sum shall become a part of the general revenue fund. If, within six (6) months after the sale of such article, as above provided, the owner of any such article so sold shall exhibit to the city council satisfactory proof of his ownership, the proceeds coming into the city treasury from such sale shall be refunded to him. 
(Code 1964, § 14.020)  
Sec. 24-4. - Conducting business in streets, sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  Whoever shall, upon any street, public place or sidewalk, expose or offer any merchandise or other property for show or sale, by auction or otherwise, except newspapers and pamphlets other than magazines, or conduct any business whatsoever, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless those persons are conducting business on public sidewalks in the central business district and have complied with the business licensing and health ordinances and regulations, where applicable. 
(b)  "Central business district" shall mean that area set out in section 24-86 of this Code. 
(c)  These provisions shall not be construed to affect or abrogate section 24-2, prohibiting the erection of structures in city rights-of-way. 
(Code 1964, § 14.060; Ord. No. 23117 , § 6, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 24-5. - Suspending merchandise over sidewalks. 
Whoever shall suspend merchandise or other articles in front of any store or other building which shall extend over the sidewalk, at any height above the sidewalk, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.070)  
Sec. 24-6. - Overhanging branches, limbs, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying, in charge or control of or owning any real estate in the city to permit the trees on such property to hang over the sidewalks, streets and alleys so that the lower limbs thereof shall be closer than fourteen (14) feet to the vehicular traveled portion of any street or alley. The owner, occupant, tenant or person in control of any real estate shall keep the trees thereon so trimmed that the limbs thereof shall not hang closer to any sidewalk, street or alley than is herein prescribed. 
(Code 1964, § 14.040)  
Sec. 24-7. - Water from downspouts, gutters, drains. 
Any person owning or occupying any building in the city who shall cause the downspout, gutter or drain conducting water from such building to be so constructed as to spread water over the adjacent sidewalks or streets or permit them to remain in a condition so as to spread water over the adjacent sidewalks or streets shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.050)  
Sec. 24-8. - Obstructing gutters, etc. 
Any person who shall destroy, tear up or otherwise damage any gutter, trench or channel, dug, made or used for the purpose of carrying off water or draining any street, thoroughfare or other public place within the city, or who shall fill up or otherwise obstruct the free passage of water through any such gutter, trench or channel, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.190)  
Sec. 24-9. - Depositing dirt, debris, etc., on city thoroughfares. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump or to cause or allow the placing, depositing or dumping, washing or eroding of any earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale, building material, debris or rubbish from property or vehicles owned or controlled by them, onto any street, sidewalk or thoroughfare within the city or upon the property of any other person without that person's permission. 
(b)  If the placing, depositing, dumping, washing or eroding of earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale or any other material upon streets, sidewalks or thoroughfares within the city creates conditions that, in the opinion of the director of public works, are unsafe or pose a hazard to the public, the city shall immediately notify the person responsible for such condition or who owns or controls the land from which such materials came to abate the unsafe or hazardous conditions. If the placing, depositing, dumping, washing or eroding of earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale, or any other material upon streets, sidewalks or thoroughfares within the city is the result of earth moving, construction of buildings or other activities being performed under permits issued by the city, the director may issue stop work orders and suspend any permits until the unsafe or hazardous conditions are abated and adequate provisions are in place to prevent reoccurrence. 
(c)  If the city is unable to immediately locate or notify any responsible person pursuant to subsection (b) above, or if upon notification such person is unable or unwilling to abate the hazardous or unsafe conditions, or if such person agrees to abate the conditions but fails to do so, the city may proceed to abate such conditions. 
(d)  The city shall keep a record of the cost of each unsafe or hazardous condition abated under this section. The city may recover the cost of such abatement by issuing tax bills against the property from which the materials constituting the unsafe or hazardous condition came. Before such tax bills are issued, the director of public works shall give notice to the property owner of any property from which the materials came that the director intends to recommend that the city council taxbill the property for the cost of abatement. The notice shall state that the property owner may, within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice, request a hearing before the director of public works to contest the appropriateness of taxbilling the cost of abatement. 
(e)  Any hearing requested under this section shall be held as soon as possible after the request for a hearing has been made but not later than fifteen (15) days after the request. All interested parties may appear at such hearing either in person or by attorney and present evidence concerning the matters at issue. If after hearing the director finds that the landowner or one acting for his benefit is responsible for the conditions abated, he shall recommend to the city council that the costs of the abatement be taxbilled to the land contributing to the conditions abated. The council, after reviewing the record of the hearing, may taxbill the cost of abatement. 
(Code 1964, § 14.080; Ord. No. 13022, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 17649, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 24-10. - Damaging bridges, sidewalks, culverts, etc. 
Any person who shall remove, tear up or otherwise destroy or damage any bridge, culvert, sidewalk, pavement, crosswalk or stepping stones in or upon any street, thoroughfare or alley of the city, without having lawful authority to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.090)  
Sec. 24-11. - Stealing, damaging, etc., street signs. 
Every person within the city who shall steal, take and carry away or deface or damage any signboard or signpost or any part thereof bearing the name of any street within the city, or who shall place on such signboard or signpost any advertising matter of any nature or description whatsoever, except for banners allowed under section 29-4.8(e) of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.150; Ord. No. 11448, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 23117 , § 6, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 24-12. - Cleaning sidewalks. 
All persons are hereby required to keep the sidewalks in front of, or adjacent to, the property or premises owned or occupied by them or under their control, within the city, clear and free from rubbish, filth, refuse, fat, oil, grease, dirt, snow, ice and from any and all obstructions and dangerous agencies of every kind and description whatsoever; and any person failing to observe the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.260; Ord. No. 23683 , § 3, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 24-13. - Traveling on streets closed to travel; removing barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, travel or drive upon, with vehicles or horse, any street within the city in the course of construction or improvement, while the same is closed to public travel. It shall be notice to all that a street is closed to public travel when the same has rope barriers or railings constructed, erected or placed at the end of such street, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cut any rope or to remove any railing, barrier or construction of any kind when placed across any street, when the same is placed there for the purpose of showing that the street is closed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.170)  
Sec. 24-14. - Obstructing street lamps and electric lights. 
Whoever shall erect or maintain any awning, signboard or other obstruction on any sidewalk or street in such a manner as to obstruct or obscure the light of any street lamp or electric light within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.180)  
Sec. 24-15. - Changing names of streets; procedure. 
(a)  The city council may change a street name by ordinance without a public hearing if the owners of record of all property abutting the street have signed a petition requesting that the street be renamed. Street name change petitions shall be filed with the director of community development. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the following street name change procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  All property owners of record, abutting the street to be renamed shall be notified by certified mail of the city's intent to change the street name, and the date of a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the street name change and make a recommendation to the city council after the hearing. A notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  The council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, shall hold a public hearing to consider the name change. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once in a local newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Following the public hearing, the council may, by ordinance, change the name of the street. 
(c)  The city clerk shall have a certified copy of each ordinance changing a street name recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds. 
(Code 1964, § 14.200; Ord. No. 10006, § 1, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 16395, § 1, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 21095, § 9, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 24-16. - Numbering of houses, buildings, mobile homes. 
(a)  The director of community development shall establish the street numbers of all houses and buildings in the city. It is hereby made the duty of the owner of each house or building fronting on a public street to keep and maintain the number so established on such house or building in numerals at least two (2) inches high at a place where it shall be clearly visible from such street. In addition, it is hereby made the duty of the owner of each house or building in the central business district, as defined in section 14-1 of this Code, which abuts an alley to keep and maintain the number so established on such house or building in numerals at least two (2) inches high at a place where it shall be clearly visible from such alley. 
(b)  The owner or manager of a mobile home park shall establish a map of the layout of the mobile home park, showing the location of individual mobile home spaces by number, and shall keep or maintain the number so established on such individual mobile home space lot or on the mobile home at a place where it shall be clearly visible from the street, drive or roadway on which it fronts. 
(c)  Any person violating this section who fails to abate or correct such violation within fifteen (15) days of receiving notice of such violation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.210; Ord. No. 12789, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 21095, § 9, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 24-17. - Driveway improvements. 
Whenever any premises or any structure on any premises is constructed, reconstructed, redeveloped, improved or altered: 
(1)  Generally. All existing driveways on such premises which are not abandoned shall be improved to conform with the design standards included in the city's standard plans and specifications referred to in section 24-31 of this chapter. Exceptions: This provision shall apply to existing residential structures only when enclosed additions are attached to the main structure or when the existing driveway is enlarged in size. This provision shall not apply to any driveway that connects to a gravel road; provided that the driveway conforms with design standards included in the city's standard plans and specifications to ensure that proper drainage is maintained along the road. 
(2)  Abandoned driveways. All abandoned driveways on such premises shall be eliminated and new curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with design standards included in the city's standard plans and specifications referred to in section 24-31 of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 14.287; Ord. No. 13075, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 20776, § 1, 10-4-10)  
Sec. 24-18. - U.S. Postal Service mail drop boxes. 
(a)  As used in this section "Columbia Post Office mail drop box island" refers to the raised concrete island located on the east side of Fifth Street between Walnut and Ash streets near the United States Post Office. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any item other than a United States Postal Service mail drop box on the Columbia Post Office mail drop box island. 
(c)  The director of public works is authorized to remove any item unlawfully placed on the Columbia Post Office mail drop box island. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the Columbia Post Office mail drop box island for the purpose of soliciting contributions or business from an occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 14939, § 2, 8-19-96)  
Sec. 24-19. - Curbside mailbox placement; parking prohibitions. 
(a)  Where on-street parking interferes with curbside mail delivery, the property owner shall either request that the traffic engineer prohibit parking near the mailbox or move the mailbox so that mail carriers may deliver mail without leaving their vehicles. 
(b)  Upon request of a property owner, the traffic engineer is authorized to prohibit parking near mailboxes by either placing an official sign prohibiting parking or marking the curb with official yellow paint. 
(Ord. No. 20965, § 1, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 24-20. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 14.140; Ord. No. 14939, § 2, 8-19-96) 
Note— Formerly, § 24-19.  
Secs. 24-21—24-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Work to be done in accordance with standard plans and specifications. 
Any person who shall do any work for which a permit is required hereunder shall conduct such work in accordance with standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the director of public works, which shall be marked "Official Copy of Plans and Specifications for Improvements Under Division 2, Article II, Chapter 24 of the Code of Ordinances of Columbia, Missouri." 
(Code 1964, § 14.240; Ord. No. 21579, § 2, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 24-32. - Operations under supervision of director of public works. 
All operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to this article shall be under the direction and supervision of the director of public works. 
(Code 1964, § 14.270)  
Sec. 24-33. - Authority of director of public works. 
Whenever the use, convenience or necessity of the public shall require it, the director of public works shall have the authority to order the owners or agents in charge of property adjacent to which curb cuts, sidewalks, curbs, or driveways are maintained upon the public streets or rights-of-way, to alter such improvement in such manner as he shall find reasonably necessary under the circumstances, if such improvement fails to conform to the aforesaid standard plans and specifications. The director shall allow a reasonable period of time for such alteration to be made. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain such nonconforming curb cut, sidewalk, curb or driveway after the expiration of such time. 
(Code 1964, § 14.280)  
Sec. 24-34. - Handicapped ramps required. 
Whenever a permit is issued to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any sidewalk curb, curb cut, driveway or street, handicapped ramps shall be required to be installed in accordance with design standards included in the city's standard plan and specifications at all curb and driveway crossings to be constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered; provided, that the director of public works may waive said requirement if he determines that requirement of handicapped ramps is impractical under all the circumstances. 
(Code 1964, § 14.285)  
Sec. 24-35. - Sidewalks required. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of a new building on property located on an arterial or collector street and zoned for a commercial, office or multi-family use unless a sidewalk exists adjacent to the property along the arterial or collector street or unless the plans for the building provide for the construction of such a sidewalk. The requirements of this section shall not apply to construction of accessory buildings. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building described in subsection (a) if the building plans provide for construction of a sidewalk along an arterial or collector street unless the sidewalk has been constructed or the property owner has provided a bond, letter of credit or other instrument acceptable to the director of public works guaranteeing construction of the sidewalk within six (6) months of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Upon application of the property owner, the city council shall waive the requirement of this section to provide plans for and construct a sidewalk if the council determines that the sidewalk is not needed or that the impact of the proposed development does not justify the requirement that the sidewalk be constructed or that there is a reasonable likelihood that the sidewalk would have to be removed and reconstructed in the near future. The granting of a waiver shall not affect the power of the city council to later install sidewalks adjacent to the property and levy special assessments against the property for construction of the sidewalks. 
(d)  In determining the need for the sidewalk and whether the impact of the proposed development justifies the requirement that the sidewalk be built, the city council shall consider all relevant factors such as: 
(1)  Pedestrian traffic generators such as parks and schools in the area; 
(2)  The existence of a sidewalk network in the area; 
(3)  The density of current and future development in the area; 
(4)  The amount of pedestrian traffic likely to be generated by the proposed development; 
(5)  The cost of constructing the sidewalk; 
(6)  Whether the terrain is such that a sidewalk is physically feasible; and 
(7)  The extent to which trees, ground cover and natural areas would be impacted by the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 17007, § 1, 9-4-01)  
Secs. 24-36—24-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RIGHT-OF-WAY CLOSURE PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, adopted December 5, 2016, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 24-41—24-44, pertained to permit. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway or street on the public streets or rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works. 
(b)  No person shall close a public street, sidewalk, parking lane, traffic lane or alley in connection with a construction project without first obtaining a permit under this division. If the closure is for thirty (30) days or less the permit may be issued by the director of public works as set forth in this division. If the closure is for more than thirty (30) days, the permit must be authorized by the city council as set forth in section 22-45 prior to issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-42. - Application. 
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the director of public works an application showing: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the property abutting the proposed area to be closed. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the party in charge of performing the work for which the closure is requested. 
(3)  The location of the closure area. 
(4)  The type of closure requested (i.e., full street, partial street, sidewalk, etc.). 
(5)  The exact purpose for the right-of-way closure. 
(6)  The duration and dates of the closure or restriction (include days and hours per day) and designation of alternate streets or sidewalks for traffic flow. 
(7)  Such other information as the director of public works or city council shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-43. - Fee. 
(a)  Application fee. An application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  Public inconvenience fee. For public street, sidewalk or alley closures exceeding seven (7) calendar days, the following additional fees will be required: 
Sidewalk/curb\or alley usage 	$0.20 per linear foot per day (unless the walkway is covered and remains open to public use) 
Parking lane usage 	$0.30 per linear foot per day (in addition to lost revenue for daily parking fee due and owing to the parking utility) 
Traffic lane usage 	$0.35 per linear foot per day per each lane of traffic 
 
An estimate of the public inconvenience fee due shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit and any additional amounts due and owing in excess of the estimate shall be paid before a certificate of occupancy is issued. The applicant shall be entitled to a refund of any excess fees paid if the closure is less than the estimate paid at the time of permit issuance. 
Seven (7) day closures for the same, or substantially similar, project area are allowed only once every six (6) months to prevent multiple week-long closure requests without payment of a public inconvenience fee. 
Public utilities and governmental entities are exempt from payment of the public inconvenience fee. Public utilities and governmental entities shall include, but not be limited to: any state or local government, school district, department, agency, special purpose district or other instrumentality of a federal, state or local government, any public utility regulated by the public service commission, or any cable television, broadband or telecommunications company with other authority to occupy and/or install facilities in the public right-of-way. Public infrastructure constructed, relocated or upgraded by a private contractor at the request of or on behalf of a governmental entity shall be exempt from the payment of the public infrastructure fee for any closure solely required for construction activities associated with the construction of such public infrastructure. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-44. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The director of public works shall issue a permit hereunder when the director has determined: 
(1)  That a sufficient application has been made, accompanied by payment of the filing fee. 
(2)  That the work will be done according to the standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the director of public works. 
(3)  That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with the vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking space, and the means of egress to and from the property involved and adjacent properties. 
(4)  That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(5)  That evidence has been presented showing that all business owners along the sidewalk frontage of the impacted block have been given, in writing and by posting at the site of the closure, at least three (3) days notice of the use for any closure seven (7) days or less, or at least fourteen (14) days notice for any closure between eight (8) to thirty (30) days, containing the dates and times of such use, and their right to protest by written notice given to the director of public works; or in the event of a closure greater than thirty (30) days the city council has otherwise authorized issuance of the permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 24-45. 
(6)  That the applicant agrees to follow all rules and regulations for sidewalk, street and alley closures issued by the director of public works and/or the city council. 
(7)  That the public inconvenience fee, if any, has been estimated and paid prior to issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Permits issued for less than thirty (30) days may be renewed once by the director of public works; provided that the time granted in the original permit plus the time granted in the renewal permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Additional renewals will require the applicant to obtain city council authorization as set forth in section 24-45. 
(c)  Indemnity; hold harmless and insurance. It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any such permit that the applicant shall assume all civil liability for applicant's acts of omission or commission from all claims, suits or actions of any kind whatsoever arising out of or resulting from the closure, the issuance of the permit or the operations or activities of the permittee and shall further hold the city, its officials and employees harmless for any injuries or damages arising or resulting from the permitted work including any injuries or damages resulting from alleged negligent acts or omissions on the part of the city. The applicant shall insure adequate safety precautions are in effect at all times during the term of the permit. 
(d)  Insurance. Prior to the issuance of any such permit pursuant to section 24-41(b), the applicant(s) shall submit to the city a certificate binder or policy of liability insurance in an amount not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence, three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) aggregate and any endorsements thereto, which shall include the city as an additional insured, or equivalent in self-insurance guarantee or umbrella policy approved by the city's risk manager. The certificate must also include coverage for all owned, hired and non-owned vehicles with a combined single limit of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) (or equivalent in self-insurance guarantee or umbrella policy) also making the city as an additional insured and must also contain coverage for worker's compensation and employer's liability coverage as required by statute and which shall provide that said insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the entire term of the permit. All such permits shall be subject to annual review by the city's risk management division and the applicant shall be required to update as necessary to protect the city with any and all types and amounts of such insurance coverage deemed reasonable by the risk management division. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-45. - Authorization for issuance of permit for greater than thirty (30) days. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall desire to temporarily close a public street, sidewalk, parking lane, traffic lane or alley for more than thirty (30) days, such person shall make application to the city council not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the next city council meeting preceding the date the person desires to close such street or sidewalk. The city council may authorize the director of public works to issue a permit, with or without conditions, to such person to use a portion of such street or sidewalk to such extent and for such time as the city council shall find to be reasonably necessary, provided that the city council shall find that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  No safety hazard will be created as determined by the director of public works or the director's designate, and 
(2)  No obstruction will be created that would unreasonably interfere with police, fire or health protection of the city, and 
(3)  No unreasonable interference with the normal uses of the abutting property will be created. 
(b)  The person making an application to the city council shall, as a part of the application, present evidence that all owners and occupants of property abutting the area to be used and also all owners and occupants abutting the sidewalk along both sides of the entire block where any closure will occur have been notified of the closure request, in writing and posted at the site of the closure, including the dates, time and scope of such intended closure, the council meeting date at which such request may be heard, and the right of any individual to appear before the city council or submit comments in writing to the city council on such closure prior to authorization of issuance of a permit. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-46. - Fees deposited into special account. 
Any fees collected pursuant to section 24-43 shall be deposited into a public inconvenience fee fund to be used for construction and maintenance of sidewalks, streets and parking areas on the basis for which the fee was collected (i.e., fees paid for sidewalk closures shall be used for sidewalk construction and maintenance, fees paid for street closures shall be used for street construction and maintenance, etc.). Such fees shall be in addition to existing budget allocations and shall not supplant existing funds currently allocated for such purposes. 
( Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Secs. 24-47—24-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 24-56. - Protection around excavations. 
Any person, officer or contractor making an excavation in any street, alley or public place, or on any premises adjacent to any alley, street or public place and not separated by a fence or structure, shall guard and protect the same by barriers, and at night shall outline the same with red lights. 
(Code 1964, § 7.1155)  
Sec. 24-57. - Removal of excavated materials. 
Any person who shall excavate in the paved portion of any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk pursuant to a permit obtained from the director of public works, as provided for in this chapter, shall remove all materials excavated and shall dispose of the same prior to placing any backfill material into such excavations. 
(Code 1964, § 14.100)  
Sec. 24-58. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Paved streets. Any person who shall excavate in the paved portion of any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk shall backfill such excavation with a fine stone aggregate material conforming to the following gradation: not more than fifteen (15) percent of the aggregate shall be of organic material; not more than ten (10) percent of the aggregate shall be retained on a one-inch square mesh screen, and not less than twenty (20) percent of the aggregate shall pass a fourteen-mesh screen. 
(b)  Unpaved streets. Any person who shall excavate in any unpaved portion of any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk shall backfill such excavations as is provided for backfilling excavations in paved public streets, alleys and sidewalks or, upon the approval of the director of public works, the material removed from such excavation may be used for backfill, provided such material is placed in the excavation in lifts not exceeding six (6) inches and each lift being mechanically compacted to a relative density of ninety-five (95) percent; such backfill shall be inspected by the director of public works to determine whether the requirements of this section have been fulfilled. 
(Code 1964, §§ 14.110, 14.120)  
Sec. 24-59. - Resurfacing paved streets. 
Any person who shall excavate in the paved portion of any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk, shall obtain the approval of the director of public works that the backfill meets the requirements of this article, and shall then resurface such excavation in a manner and with material similar to that which was removed. Such resurfacing shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the director of public works. Such resurfacing may be performed by the excavator or his contractor or, at the request of such excavator, such resurfacing may be performed by the department of public works at the cost of such excavator. 
(Code 1964, § 14.130)  
Secs. 24-60—24-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, adopted December 5, 2016, amended article IV title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to use permit. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 24-71. - Required; application; conditions for issuance. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall desire to temporarily block a portion of any public street or sidewalk for a special temporary event that is not described in section 24-73, such person shall make application on a form to be supplied by the city to the city manager not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date the person shall desire to use such street or sidewalk. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee will be required with the application. The city manager may issue a permit with conditions to such person to use a portion of such street or sidewalk to such extent and for such time as the city manager shall find to be reasonably necessary, provided that the city manager shall find that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  No safety hazard will be created as determined by the director of public works or his designate, and 
(2)  No obstruction will be created that would unreasonably interfere with police, fire or health protection of the city, and 
(3)  No unreasonable interference with the normal uses of the abutting property will be created. 
(b)  The person making an application to the city manager shall, as a part of the application, present evidence that all users or owners or occupants of property abutting the area to be closed have been notified of the use, the dates and time of such use and their right to submit a written objection to the city manager's office. 
(Code 1964, § 14.010(B); Ord. No. 9995, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 10140, § 1, 4-2-84; Ord. No. 20654, § 6-21-10; Ord. No. 21051, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21948, § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-72. - Appeals; hearings before council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a denial of a permit by the city manager may file an appeal within five (5) days following such denial with the city council to be acted upon at the next regular council meeting after said appeal is filed. The city council shall use the standards set out in section 24-71 in making its determination whether to uphold or reverse the city manager's denial of the permit. 
(b)  Any user, occupant or owner of property within the same general area of, or abutting the portion of the street or sidewalk to be used may either file a written protest or appeal before the city council to register such a protest, and the city council shall also consider such protest in making its determination whether to uphold or reverse the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 14.010(c); Ord. No. 9995, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 21051, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 23013 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 24-73. - Special event permits. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate a city event committee to assist with the issuance of special event permits. The city event committee is authorized to close any public street, sidewalk or public place as follows: 
(1)  Any event in the downtown area; 
(2)  For any event that is ticketed, has entry fees, for-profit or otherwise excludes the general public; 
(3)  For any event at a city park if submitted by the director of the parks and recreation department; and 
(4)  For any event in other public places if submitted by the city manager. 
For purposes of this article, "downtown area" means the area bound on the north by Park Avenue, on the east by College Avenue, on the south by Elm Street and on the west by Providence Road. Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate or require the city to provide services, equipment or personnel in support of an event. The city manager may cancel or postpone a special event permit if the manager thinks that any denial condition listed in this section exists, or is likely to exist, or to otherwise protect people and property in the city. The city event committee may promulgate forms and regulations to assist applicants that are not inconsistent with this section. The city event committee may request detailed plans, evidence, maps or other documentation to evaluate the application. 
(b)  The city event committee shall not approve closing any area as set out in subsection (a) above for any of the following: 
(1)  The day before, or the day of, any scheduled University of Missouri home football game; and 
(2)  Any event that requires city services, equipment or support that is outside the ordinary course of business of the city. 
Any closures of this kind shall require an agreement negotiated by the city manager with the event organizer and the agreement must be approved by the city council. 
(c)  Applications for a special event permit shall be considered in the order that the application is received. Multiple applications shall be given an order of priority by the applicant if submitted by one applicant, or shall be selected at random if it cannot determine the order in which applications have been received. Applications for special event permits shall be submitted ninety (90) days prior to the first day of the event. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) processing fee will be required with the application. As part of the application, the applicant shall present evidence that all owners or occupants of property abutting the street to be closed have been notified of the proposed street closure and over fifty (50) percent must give consent for an application to be considered. Upon request by the city event committee, applicants shall submit detailed plans, evidence or maps to be used to evaluate the application and to address any denial condition concerns. The city event committee shall approve or deny the application as soon as possible but no later than forty-five (45) days before the first day of the event. Any person aggrieved by a denial of a permit by the city event committee may file an appeal within five (5) days following such denial with the city council to be acted upon at the next regular council meeting after said appeal is filed. 
(d)  The city event committee shall grant a special event permit unless it is determined that one or more of the denial conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) or (d)(2) below requires denial. The city event committee shall accept timely written comments from the downtown community improvement district board as to any of the denial conditions listed below if the event is in the community improvement district area. 
(1)  The city event committee shall deny a special event permit to an applicant who fails to: 
a.  Provide a completed and signed application; or 
b.  Meets the requirements for submitting an application for a special event permit; or 
c.  Provide a sufficient traffic control plan; or 
d.  Provide a plan or evidence of sufficient monitors, event staff, volunteers or security for crowd control and safety; or 
e.  Provide a plan or evidence of sufficient sanitation or portable sanitation equipment, services or facilities that are reasonably necessary to ensure that the event will be conducted with due regard for safety, health and the public welfare; or 
f.  Provide a plan or evidence of sufficient waste management services; or 
g.  Provide sufficient off-site parking or shuttle service, or both, when required to minimize any substantial adverse impacts on general parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the event as determined by the city event committee; or 
h.  Obtain the written approval of any other public agency within whose jurisdiction the special event or portion of the special event will occur; or 
i.  Provide a sufficient public safety plan based on event risk factors including but not limited to, on-site medical personnel, emergency preparedness for adverse weather conditions, temperature, fire, or other potential health and public safety concerns; or 
j.  Obtain all other required city permits; or 
k.  Provide insurance to protect the city against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the special event that impacts or occurs on city property. The amount, if the insurance is required, shall be determined by the city and the insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and must be maintained for the duration of the special event. The city manager may waive or require a substitute to the insurance requirement only if the event organizer demonstrates that it is impossible or impractical to obtain insurance coverage. 
(2)  The city event committee shall deny a special event permit if it determines that: 
a.  The event will violate any local, state or federal law or regulation; or 
b.  The resources required to ensure public safety within the special event venue or district will prevent the police, fire or emergency medical service departments from providing reasonable protections to the remainder of the city; or 
c.  The concentrations of persons, animals, or vehicles within the special event venue or district will unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles; or 
d.  The event will substantially interfere with any other special event for which a permit has been granted, or the combination of events, although they do not interfere, diminishes public safety resources to unacceptable levels in the determination of the city; or 
e.  The event will interfere with scheduled and unscheduled government functions, including, but not limited to, construction of buildings (public and private), road and utility work, street closures, or any other reason to protect safety, health and the public welfare in the city; or 
f.  The event organizer demonstrates an inability or an unwillingness to conduct an event in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or to comply with a condition to a permit issued under this chapter; or 
g.  The event organizer conducted a prior special event in a manner that failed to substantially comply with city code requirements. 
(e)  The city council shall not close a street or sidewalk and issue a special use permit when an applicant appeals the denial of a permit or in approving an agreement unless it determines that: 
(1)  No safety hazard will be created, and 
(2)  No obstruction will be created that would unreasonably interfere with police, fire or health protection of the city, and 
(3)  No unreasonable interference with the normal uses of the abutting property will be created. 
(f)  The following restrictions and obligations apply after a street or sidewalk closure has been granted as part of a special use permit: 
(1)  No vendors may operate within the closed street without the permission of the special event permit holder. This subsection shall not prevent the owners of businesses adjacent to the closed street from selling items on the sidewalk as otherwise permitted by law. 
(2)  No peddler shall conduct peddling within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a street closed under this section without the written permission of the city manager. The manager shall not give such written permission without first consulting with the special event permit holder to determine whether such peddling will interfere with the special event to be held on the closed street. 
(3)  No unreasonable interference with the normal uses of the abutting property will be created. Access to businesses that abut the street closure shall be maintained during the normal business hours of the affected business. No entry fee shall be charged to a person who resides or operates a business in the closed street area or to a customer of or person making delivery to a business or residence in the closed street area. 
(Ord. No. 21051, § 9, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 21948, § 1, 1-6-14)  
Secs. 24-74—24-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPE PLANTING IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13969, § 1, adopted February 21, 1994, repealed art. V and enacted a new art. V. Former art. V derived from Code 1964, § 14.010. 
 
Sec. 24-86. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth herein: 
Central business district. All streets and portions of streets within the area described as: being bounded on the north by Park Avenue; on the south by Elm Street; on the west by Garth Avenue; and on the east by College Avenue. 
Landscape material. All trees, woody and flowering shrubs, perennials, and annuals. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-87. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to plant landscape material on public street right-of-way except in conformance with a permit issued by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-88. - Application for permit to landscape on public street right-of-way. 
(a)  No permit to install landscape material on public street right-of-way shall be issued unless an application for such permit has been filed with the director which sets forth the following information: 
(1)  The location of the proposed landscape site and the street address of the property. 
(2)  The name and address of the legal owner of the property. 
(3)  A sketch of the proposed landscape site showing: 
a.  The location of the street, street curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, street light, utility poles, underground utilities, utility or cable television yard boxes, mailboxes, intersecting side streets, and any other pertinent information. 
b.  The location and dimensions of the proposed landscape material with a legend showing the specific plant materials being used. 
(4)  A brief narrative outlining the proposed landscape plan and a proposed maintenance plan. 
(5)  Applications shall be circulated to appropriate utilities for review. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-89. - Revocation of permits. 
The director of public works may revoke a permit to plant landscape material on public street right-of-way if the permit application contains any false statement or misrepresentation of fact. The director may revoke such a permit if the permit holder fails to comply with the permit or with any provision of this Article. Permits revoked under this section shall not be reinstated until the cause for revocation has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-90. - Stop work orders. 
The director of public works is authorized to issue a stop work order whenever he believes a violation of this Article is occurring. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved or to the owner's agent or to the person engaged in the activity suspected of violating this Article. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity in violation of a stop work order. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-91. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director of public works in the administration or enforcement of this Article may appeal such decision to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-92. - Standards and guidelines. 
(a)  No landscape material shall be planted on public street right-of-way unless it is listed on the "schedule of approved landscape material for street right-of-way planting" dated September 30, 1993, on file in the office of the director of public works, or unless it has been approved for planting by the director of public works. The director of public works shall approve landscape material for planting on public street right-of-way only if it is either native to or adaptable to this region. 
(b)  No tree shall be placed within four (4) feet, measured horizontally, of any underground utility. 
(c)  Root barriers in accordance with city standards must be approved for any tree planting between the sidewalk and curb where the overall distance between the sidewalk and curb is four (4) feet or less, except for those indicated on the schedule of approved landscape materials as not requiring root barriers. In spaces greater than four (4) feet, the requirement of root barriers shall be determined based upon actual clearance and species of trees planted. 
(d)  Landscape materials over thirty (30) inches in height measured from the top of curb shall be located so as not to cause sight distance obstructions from intersecting streets or private driveways. Hedges shall not be planted or maintained between the sidewalk and curb. General sight distance guidelines are on file in the public works department but shall be subject to local topographic conditions and traffic volumes. 
(e)  No tree shall be planted under a utility line unless it is of a species which at maturity will provide a minimum of five (5) feet clearance between the apex of the tree and the lowest utility line. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-93. - Authorization when in central business district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any landscape material on any unimproved portion of public street right-of-way or to place any decoration, furniture or receptacle in any improved portion of public street right-of-way within the central business district unless all such landscaping, decorations, furnishing or receptacles conform to guidelines and specifications adopted by the city council, or unless the city council has, by resolution, specifically authorized such planting or placement. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-94. - Existing trees located on public street right-of-way. 
Any tree located on public street right-of-way on February 21, 1994 shall be allowed to remain in place unless the director of public works determines that it presently does, or at maturity will, obstruct required sight distance, interfere with utilities or street lights, or otherwise endanger the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Sec. 24-95. - Maintenances duties and obligations. 
(a)  The property owner shall maintain landscape material planted on public street right-of-way in such a manner as not to obstruct or interfere with the public use of streets and sidewalks. 
(b)  Maintaining landscape material shall include removal of dead plant material and trimming trees and bushes to provide horizontal and vertical clearances specified by city standards. 
(c)  The director of public works may remove landscape material on public street right-of-way that is not properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 13969, § 1, 2-21-94)  
Secs. 24-96—24-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 24-101. - When permits required. 
No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and other regulations herein which may apply. 
(Code 1964, § 12.345) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 24-102. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by the denial of a parade permit shall have the right to appeal the denial in the following manner: 
(1)  Within five (5) days of the denial of the request, the appeal shall be taken to the city manager, who will hear the appeal within three (3) days of the request. 
(2)  If the city manager upholds the denial of the parade permit, the appealing party may, within three (3) days of the denial, appeal to a subcommittee of the city council appointed by the mayor at the time of the appeal. The subcommittee shall hear the appeal within five (5) days of the time the notice has been taken. 
(3)  If the permit is still denied, the appealing party may, by filing notice within five (5) days of the above finding, bring his appeal before the entire city council at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1964, § 12.346)  
Sec. 24-103. - Standards for upholding permit denial. 
No denial of issuance of a parade permit shall be upheld unless the person or body hearing the appeal finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will require such diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the area contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The parade is not scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; or 
(7)  The parade is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1964, § 12.347)  
Secs. 24-104—24-117. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TREES 
 
Sec. 24-118. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of planting, maintenance and removal of trees and other woody vegetation located on all property owned or maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-119. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Responsibility for management of trees on property owned or maintained by the city shall be vested with the public works department, the water and light department and the parks and recreation department as set forth in this article and other sections of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of each of the above departments, when requested by the city manager, to consider, investigate, research, report and recommend upon any special tree-related matter or question coming within the scope of its authority. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the parks and recreation department to investigate, advise, report and recommend to the city manager any action, plan or program which the parks and recreation department determines to be necessary or advisable for the care, selection, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and other woody vegetation located in public parks and on other landscaped grounds as assigned by the city manager. The parks and recreation department shall develop a management plan for the planting, care, cultivation, pruning and removal of trees, shrubs and plants located on city property assigned to its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-120. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and other woody vegetation on all property owned or maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-121. - Tree topping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to top any tree on public property. Topping is defined as the systematic cutting back of limbs from the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to trees which the city arborist or city forester has determined are severely damaged by storms, are located directly beneath utility lines or are in need of pruning and other pruning practices are impractical. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-122. - Interference with city employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with any employee or agent of the city while such employee or agent is engaged in the planting, cultivating, pruning, spraying or removal of any tree or other woody vegetation as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-123. - Damage. 
Any person who damages or kills any tree or vegetation in violation of this article shall pay the city the cost of repair or replacement of such tree or vegetation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the edition of "A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and Evergreens" published by the International Society of Arboriculture, current at the time such violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 24-124. - Review by city manager. 
The city manager shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of all city departments with respect to the management of the city's trees and other woody vegetation. Any person may appeal any such decision to the city manager, who shall make a final decision on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 15457, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Secs. 24-125—24-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DOWNTOWN SAFETY CAMERAS 
 
Sec. 24-130. - Definitions. 
Downtown safety cameras means any digital recording surveillance system installed in an open and obvious manner by the City of Columbia to film public streets, sidewalks or alleys within the boundaries of the central business district. It does not include surveillance cameras installed in municipal parking garages and it does not include surveillance cameras installed at street intersections for the purpose of monitoring vehicular traffic and it does not include surveillance cameras designed to record any regular operations of city departments. 
Exigent circumstances means unanticipated situations that threaten the immediate safety of individuals or property within the central business district. 
Public notice shall at a minimum include posting notice on a bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the public at the office building housing the city council chambers, together with notice published on the internet website for the City of Columbia. 
(Ord. No. 20499, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Sec. 24-131. - Authorization to deploy cameras. 
(a)  The chief of police for the City of Columbia is authorized to deploy or move downtown safety cameras for the purpose of enhancing public security. 
(b)  Before deploying or moving an existing downtown safety camera, the chief of police shall provide public notice of such deployment or proposed movement. The notice shall identify the public security concerns that have been considered in the decision to deploy or move the downtown safety camera as well as the general capabilities and viewing area of the downtown safety camera. The public shall have thirty (30) days to submit comments to the chief of police regarding a proposed deployment or movement, and the chief of police shall provide public notice of the chief's decision regarding deployment or movement in light of public comment. 
(c)  In exigent circumstances, the chief of police is authorized to deploy or move downtown safety cameras without the public notice or comment periods referred to in subsection (b), but only for so long as such exigent circumstances justify deployment or movement. 
(d)  Video recordings shall be indexed, stored and maintained for sixty (60) calendar days after which time they will be recorded over or destroyed. Recordings may be retained beyond sixty (60) calendar days upon written order from the chief of police and only because the recordings contain evidence of criminal activity, because the recordings capture an occurrence that may subject the Columbia Police Department to civil liability, or because the recordings will be used for training purposes. Recordings that contain evidence of criminal activity or recordings that capture an occurrence that may subject the Columbia Police Department to civil liability shall be maintained only for so long as the recordings have evidentiary value. Recordings that will be used for training purposes may be maintained only for so long as they are actively used for training purposes. 
(e)  The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with private contractors who supply and operate and maintain downtown safety cameras and related tapes and equipment and who agree to operate the downtown safety cameras pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20499, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Sec. 24-132. - Limitations on deployment and use of downtown safety cameras. 
(a)  Downtown safety cameras may only be deployed so as to be conspicuous and only within the boundaries of the central business district, and may be in fixed or mobile locations. 
(b)  Downtown safety cameras shall only record areas perceptible to the human eye from public streets and sidewalks and alleys within the central business district where there is no reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  Downtown safety cameras shall only capture video images and shall not capture audio recordings of any type without court authorization. 
(d)  Downtown safety cameras shall not target/observe individuals solely because of their race, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability or other classifications protected by law. 
(e)  Downtown safety cameras shall not be used to infringe upon First Amendment rights. 
(f)  Access to the recording equipment for downtown safety cameras or the images captured by downtown safety cameras shall be limited to any private contractor under agreement with the City of Columbia to operate or maintain downtown safety cameras, or to criminal justice agencies and their personnel, but only for official purposes. Other access shall be limited to individuals or agencies given a court order granting access. 
(Ord. No. 20499, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Sec. 24-133. - Savings clause. 
If any section, clause, sentence or part of this article be declared unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such section, clause, sentence or part of this article and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences or parts of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20499, § 1, 4-6-10)  
Secs. 24-134—24-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
 
Sec. 24-150. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Mobile food vending. The sale of individually portioned food from a mobile food vendor. 
Mobile food vending zone. Areas demarcated for mobile food vending as set out in section 14-315 of this Code. 
Mobile food vendor. A self-contained food service operation, located in a wheeled motor vehicle or trailer, used to store, prepare, display or serve food intended for individual portion service. 
Operation. The period of time, including setup and closing, in which a mobile food vendor is open and selling individually portioned food. 
Wabash Station. The spaces designated in writing by the director of public works in the Wabash Station parking lot. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 2, 4-21-14 )  
Sec. 24-151. - Mobile food vending allowed with certain restrictions, times and areas. 
(a)  All mobile food vending operations shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Operations, including customer queues, shall not impede or hinder vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
(2)  If directed by a police officer, or any other authorized public personnel, operations may be suspended and a mobile food vendor may be ordered to move, even if located in a mobile food vending zone, to avoid congestion or impeding traffic; and 
(3)  Soliciting occupants of vehicles or advertising in any way that impedes traffic is prohibited; and 
(4)  Mobile food vending shall only occur to the side facing the sidewalk and away from the street when in the public right-of-way; and 
(5)  A mobile vending food truck may not be left unattended in a public right-of-way, nor parked overnight in a public right-of-way; and 
(6)  No mobile food vendor shall have any exclusive or perpetual right to any location upon the streets, alleys or public lands of the city; and 
(7)  The size of a mobile food vending vehicle will in no way interfere with the city's or public's use of any public right-of-way; and 
(8)  The use of outdoor sound amplifying equipment, lights, or any other illuminated or noisemaking devices is prohibited, except for the lighting of a menu attached to the side of the mobile food vending truck providing only enough light for customers directly in front of or nearby the menu to read. 
(9)  The use of any equipment (chairs, tables, signs, etc.) outside of the truck, except for one refuse container, is prohibited; and 
(10)  A refuse container must be available for use by customers when mobile food vending occurs and the container shall be placed close to the truck and not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
(11)  A mobile food vendor shall contain all refuse generated from vendor's operation within the truck and the refuse container and the vendor shall dispose of grease and trash at sites selected by the city and at a cost following the category assignment of restaurants under section 22-172 of this Code; and 
(12)  Any power required for the mobile food vending truck located in public right-of-way shall be self-contained and will not draw its power from the public right-of-way. No power cable or equipment shall be extended at grade or overhead across any public street, alley or sidewalk; and 
(13)  Mobile food vendors must comply with all parking restrictions in chapter 14 of this Code. 
(b)  Times of mobile food vending operations in designated vending zones shall be limited to: 
(1)  In metered mobile food vending zones - between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m.; and 
(2)  Mobile food vending at the Wabash Station - between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 3:00 a.m.; and 
(3)  Mobile food vending in any other permitted area - between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(c)  Mobile food vending prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  On properly zoned property as permitted by law; and 
(2)  As set forth in this article. 
(d)  In the Central Business District, mobile food vending is prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  In metered mobile food vending zones as lawfully permitted in this Code - between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m.; and 
(2)  As permitted by the director of public works at the Wabash Station - between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. There is no fee for mobile food vending at the Wabash Station between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. The director may establish rules and regulations for the use of the Wabash Station or prohibit use for mobile food vending at any time. 
(e)  Outside of the Central Business District, and when not prohibited by this Code, mobile food vending is permitted on legal parking areas directly adjacent to and on the same side of the street of property zoned C-2, M-N, M-DT, M-C, PD and IG that allow restaurants, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 2, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 23117 , § 6, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 24-152. - Operation prohibited. 
(a)  Mobile food vending operations shall be prohibited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except, metered mobile food vending zones shall be prohibited between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and mobile vending operations at the Wabash Station shall be prohibited between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. 
(b)  Mobile food vendors must comply with all existing parking restrictions as set forth in chapter 14 of this Code. 
(c)  Mobile food vending operations shall be prohibited in an area or time when it would impede or hinder traffic both vehicular and pedestrian, including customer queues. 
(d)  Except at metered mobile food vending zones and at the Wabash Station, the following is prohibited: 
(1)  Mobile food vending operations are prohibited within one hundred (100) feet from the front door of a restaurant, unless the vendor is otherwise provided with written consent. 
(2)  Mobile food vending operations are prohibited within five hundred (500) feet of any concert, event, festival, or fair, unless the vendor is otherwise provided with written consent. 
(3)  Mobile food vending operations are prohibited in spaces adjacent to bus stops, disabled loading zones, or directly in front of a business entryway. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 2, 4-21-14 ; Ord. No. 23901 , § 2, 6-17-19)  
Sec. 24-153. - Compliance under the law. 
Every mobile food vendor under this division shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 22045, § 2, 4-21-14 )  
Secs. 24-154—24-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC UTILITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY USERS 
 
Sec. 24-166. - Policy and definitions. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city to authorize use of the rights-of-way by public utility rights-of-way users in a manner that minimizes interference to the public use and minimizes the burden on the rights-of-way physically and aesthetically to the fullest extent permitted by law. Any use of the rights-of-way by any person shall be subject to the terms and conditions hereof, in addition to all applicable federal, state or local requirements, and nothing herein shall be enforced or interpreted to contravene any superseding law, including but not limited to RSMo. § 67.1830, et seq., to the extent applicable to any given circumstance. 
The right granted to a public utility rights-of-way user to use the rights-of-way is limited to the use authorized in accordance with this article. These rights shall grant non-exclusive use only to that right-of-way user, except where otherwise provided herein or when expressly authorized by the city. 
(b)  The following definitions shall apply to this section, except that where the definitions set forth in RSMo. § 67.1830, as may be amended, are required by law to apply to specific uses of the rights-of-way, such definitions shall apply to such circumstances. 
City means the City of Columbia, Missouri, a municipal corporation and any duly authorized representative. 
Director means the director of public works of the City of Columbia, Missouri, or the director's authorized representative, who shall be the primary city official responsible for administration of this article. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
Excavation means any act by which earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock or any other material in or on the ground is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, or otherwise displaced, by means of any tools, equipment or explosives, except that the following shall not be deemed excavation: 
(1)  Any de minimis displacement or movement of ground caused by pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(2)  The replacement of utility poles and related equipment at the existing general location that does not involve either a street or sidewalk cut; or 
(3)  Any other activity which does not disturb or displace surface conditions of the earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock or any other material in or on the ground. 
Excavation permit means the authorization required to make excavations for the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of any type of facility within the rights-of-way. 
Facilities maintenance means construction, alteration, maintenance, installation, storage, or location of facilities installed below, on or aboveground in the public rights-of-way, other than excavation, that also: 
(1)  Causes or threatens to cause any obstruction or interference to any vehicular or pedestrian traffic or traffic lane in the rights-of-way. It shall exclude any minor obstruction or interference due to minimal operations that are less than two (2) hours in duration and during which the ROW User utilizes safety precautions required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD); 
(2)  Involves temporary or permanent storage of materials or equipment on rights-of-way; 
(3)  Causes or reasonably may cause damage or alteration to any public improvement or vegetation within the rights-of-way; or 
(4)  Involves removal, replacement or alteration to any safety feature or requirement within the rights-of-way, including but not limited to removal of manhole covers, altering lighting, traffic signage or signals, placement or removal of traffic barricades, etc. 
(5)  Facilities maintenance shall not include routine or other maintenance on poles, boxes, or other facilities that does not result in or qualify under one or more of the conditions described in subparagraphs (1) through (5) herein. 
Facilities maintenance permit means the authorization required to perform facilities maintenance within the rights-of-way other than excavations. 
Facility means all or any lines, pipes, wires, cables, conduit facilities, poles, towers, vaults, pedestals, boxes, or other equipment owned or controlled by an entity other than the city. 
PSC means the Missouri Public Service Commission. 
Pavement means the improved surface of the public way with concrete, asphalt, aggregate or other treated materials. 
Person means an individual, person or body natural or corporate. 
Public easement means any easement for utilities, access, or other use dedicated to the city or in the name of the city irrespective of whether the easement is held in trust by the city for private and public users, and regardless of whether private utilities or others in addition to or other than the city are actually using the easements. 
Public improvement means any public project undertaken by the city for the public good. 
Public utility means every cable television or video service provider, every pipeline corporation, gas corporation, electrical corporation, rural electric cooperative, telecommunications company, water corporation, heating or refrigerating corporation or sewer corporation under the jurisdiction of the public service commission; every cooperatively owned or operated utility pursuant to Chapter 394, RSMo.; every street light maintenance district; every privately owned utility; and every other entity, regardless of its form of organization or governance, whether for profit or not, which in providing a public utility type of service for members of the general public, utilizes pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information, substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses, in the collection, exchange or dissemination of its product or services through the public rights-of-way. 
Restoration means returning the right-of-way surface to its original condition, or better. 
Reseller service provider means a person providing service within the city that does not have its own facilities in the rights-of-way, but instead uses the rights-of-way by interconnecting with or using the network elements of another right-of-way user utilizing the rights-of-way, and/or by leasing excess capacity from a right-of-way user. 
Rights-of-way or ROW means the area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street or alleyway in which the city has an ownership interest, and including such adjacent areas of such public ways within such ownership interest as made available by the city for rights-of-way use herein, but not including: 
(1)  Easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts; 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way and ground utilized or acquired for railroad facilities; or 
(3)  Valves, meters, hydrants, poles, pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information, substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses utilized by a utility owned or operated by a governmental entity pursuant to Chapter 91, RSMo., or pursuant to a charter form of government. 
ROW authorization or authorization means an authorization to use the rights-of-way granted to a right-of-way user by the city as provided in subsection (a)(1)—(4) of section 24-167 of this article. 
Rights-of-way user or ROW-user means a public utility owning, controlling, maintaining, constructing, or installing facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, unless otherwise expressly exempted by law. The term also shall not include the city; provided that the city shall nevertheless comply with all such requirements applicable to ROW-users to the extent such compliance is otherwise required by applicable state or federal law. 
ROW work permit or permit means either an excavation permit, or a facilities maintenance permit, or both and shall constitute a "right-of-way permit." 
Service means that function provided to property adjoining the public rights-of-way from a service provider. 
Standard specifications means the City of Columbia Street, Storm Sewer, and Sanitary Specifications and Standards, as may be amended, or other successor documents, on file with the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-167. - Authorization to use rights-of-way required. 
(a)  Authorization required. Except when otherwise authorized by applicable law, no ROW-user may construct, maintain, own, control or use facilities in the rights-of-way without authorization of the city as provided herein, and the director shall not issue a ROW work permit to any ROW-user that has not obtained such authorization from the city. Authorization to use the rights-of-way shall be approved on a non-discriminatory basis, provided that the applicant is in compliance with all applicable requirements. Such authorization shall be deemed to incorporate the terms of this article and other applicable laws of the city, except as may be expressly stated in such authorization. Reseller service providers shall not be required to obtain a franchise or agreement, but shall be required to register with the city on forms provided by the city prior to providing service. Authorization for use of the right-of-way by a ROW-user may be provided by the city by the following means: 
(1)  Franchise. A franchise shall be required from the city in conformance with all applicable franchise procedures for any ROW-user seeking to use the rights-of-way for purposes of providing or distribution of electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting or sewer public utility service in the city, except where otherwise provided by law. Such franchise may be granted only after satisfaction of all applicable procedural or substantive requirements established by city code or other law. 
(2)  ROW agreement. A ROW agreement, including but not limited to territorial agreements, authorizing general use of all right-of-way within the city shall be required for all ROW-users not set forth in subsection (1), irrespective of any state licensing, franchise or certificate that may also be held by the ROW-user, except as otherwise required herein or by law. Such agreements shall conform to all applicable law, but shall not be subject to procedures applicable to franchises and the city may, if appropriate, approve form agreements that may be executed by the director after approval by the city council. 
(3)  Registration. Any ROW-user expressly exempt by law from being required to execute a franchise or ROW agreement shall register with the city on forms provided by the city, which shall require the ROW-user to specifically identify the law under which the ROW-user claims such exemption. Registrations under this article shall be valid for no more than five (5) years. 
(4)  Use permit. Use permits or use agreements authorizing use of specific portions of the public rights-of-way that were executed prior to enactment of this article may constitute authorization under this section, but such authorization shall be limited to the specific portion of rights-of-way set forth in the permit or agreement. 
(b)  Nonexclusive use of right-of-way. The authorization granted by the city under this article shall be for nonexclusive use of the rights-of-way. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional authorizations or other rights to use the rights-of-way for any purpose and to any other person, including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to all applicable law. The granting of an authorization to use the rights-of-way shall not be deemed to create any property interest of any kind in favor of the ROW-user. Any use of the rights-of-way by a ROW-user shall be deemed subordinate to the primary public use by the city. 
(c)  Lease required for public lands. Unless otherwise provided, use or installation of any facilities in, on or over public lands of the city not constituting rights-of-way shall be permitted only if a lease agreement or other separate written approval has been negotiated and approved by the city with such reasonable terms and conditions as the city may require. 
(d)  Transferability. Except as provided in this article or as otherwise required by law, no authorization or ROW work permit may be transferred without the written application to and consent of the city based on the requirements and policies of this article and only after satisfaction of all applicable procedural or substantive requirements established by charter or other law. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to transfer as provided herein, but any costs incurred shall be paid by the applicant. 
(e)  Application for authorization required. 
(1)  Application. An application for an authorization shall be presented to the director in writing on such forms provided by the city and shall include all such information as is required by this section. The ROW-user shall be responsible for accurately maintaining the information in the application during the term of any authorization and shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city due to the failure to provide or maintain as accurate any application information required herein. 
(2)  Application fee. An application fee for such authorization shall be submitted to the city in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or as otherwise established by the director, to recover any actual costs anticipated and incurred by the city in reviewing, documenting, or negotiating such agreement or franchise, including reasonable legal fees and costs to review compliance of the applicant and any initial proposed facilities and uses, provided that no costs, if any, shall be included if such inclusion is prohibited by law as to that applicant. If the actual costs are thereafter determined to be less than the application fee, such amount shall be returned to the applicant after written request therefrom; if the actual costs reasonably exceed the application fee, applicant shall, after written notice from the city, pay such additional amount prior to issuance by the city of any final approval. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city from also charging reasonable compensation for use of the public rights-of-way where such a fee is not contrary to applicable law. 
(3)  Approval Process. 
a.  Approval of franchise or ROW agreement. After submission by the ROW-user of a duly executed and completed application and application fee, and executed franchise or ROW agreement as may be provided by the director, or as modified by the director in review of the specific circumstances of the application, all in conformity with the requirements of this article and all applicable law, the director shall submit such franchise or agreement to the city council for approval. Upon determining compliance with this article, the city council shall authorize execution of the franchise or agreement (or a modified agreement otherwise acceptable to the city consistent with the purposes of this article), and such executed franchise or agreement shall constitute consent to use the public rights-of-way; provided that nothing herein shall preclude the rejection or modification of any executed franchise or agreement submitted to the city to the extent such applicable law does not prohibit such rejection or modification, including where necessary to reasonably and in a uniform or nondiscriminatory manner reflect the distinct engineering, construction, operation, maintenance, public works or safety requirements applicable to the applicant. 
b.  Approval of registration application. After submission by the ROW-user of a duly executed and completed registration application form and application fee, the director shall review the registration application form for eligibility and completeness. If the registration application form is complete and the ROW-user is eligible to utilize a registration under this section, the director shall approve such registration. 
(f)  No cause of action. A ROW-user shall have no damages remedy or monetary recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of any authorization, or from the use of the rights-of-way. Nothing herein shall preclude injunctive or declaratory judgment relief where such relief is otherwise entitled under law and the requirements therefor are otherwise satisfied; provided, however, that the validity of an executed franchise or agreement shall not be subject to challenge. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-168. - Right-of-way work permits. 
(a)  Excavation permit. No person shall make an excavation within the rights-of-way without first obtaining an excavation permit from the director. All excavation permits shall expire after thirty (30) days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise specified in the permit. 
(b)  Facilities maintenance permit; bulk or individual permits. No person shall perform facilities maintenance within the rights-of-way without first obtaining a facilities maintenance permit from the director, except where such facilities maintenance is expressly authorized by an existing valid excavation permit for the applicable maintenance location. In addition to the conditions set forth in section 24-169 of this article, conditions of a facilities maintenance permit shall be as established in the permit and shall include requirements of notice to the city whenever traffic lanes are to be obstructed, manhole covers or safety barriers removed or altered, temporary or other barricades installed, and other events set forth in the permit. All facilities maintenance permits shall expire after thirty (30) days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise specified in the permit. 
(1)  Bulk facilities maintenance permits. The director may issue bulk facilities maintenance permits covering multiple projects, types of actions or locations during a period of up to one (1) year that may be thereafter performed during that permit year. Where a bulk permit is proposed, the applicant shall provide sufficient information regarding the types of actions and locations to be approved so as to allow the director to condition and ensure compliance with safety and other regulations herein. When circumstances require, a bulk facilities maintenance permit may be issued by the director for a generally defined area or neighborhood. 
(2)  Work under bulk facilities maintenance permit. Prior to beginning any work under a bulk facilities maintenance permit, a ROW-user shall provide seventy-two (72) hours' notice to the director of such work, providing the location of the work, anticipated time and duration of the work, and a description of any traffic and pedestrian safety plans applicable to such work. When advance notice is not practicable under the circumstances, the ROW User may notify the director of such work within 48 hours after commencement of the work. 
(c)  Emergencies. In case of emergency requiring immediate attention to remedy defects, and in order to prevent loss or damage to persons or property, it shall be sufficient that the person making such excavation or performing such facilities maintenance obtain the necessary permit as soon as possible and may proceed without a permit when such permit cannot be obtained before starting such excavation or facilities maintenance. Notice to the city of the emergency shall be provided at the earliest possible time and a permit shall be obtained as soon as reasonably possible, or as otherwise directed by the city. 
(d)  Application for ROW work permit. Applications for ROW work permits shall be submitted to the director of public works on forms provided by the city for review for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations and such application shall include all such plans and drawings necessary to complete such review. Applications for ROW work permits shall be processed within thirty-one (31) days of submission of a completed application, including all necessary plans and drawings required by the director, unless such time is extended with written consent of the applicant. 
(e)  Applicable regulations. All ROW-users and persons obtaining an excavation permit or facilities maintenance permit shall be subject to the "permit conditions" in section 24-169 herein and all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the city in the reasonable exercise of its police power and are subject to all applicable laws, order, rules and regulations adopted by governmental entities now or hereafter having jurisdiction. In addition, the ROW-users shall be subject to all technical specifications, design criteria, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the city in the reasonable exercise of its police power relating to permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, surface restoration, and other requirements on the use of the rights-of-way. All persons obtaining a ROW work permit under this article shall provide the director certificates of insurance showing proof of liability coverage for personal injury and property damage, as required herein. 
(f)  Stop work orders. Any ROW-user found to be working without a permit, failing to provide for required safety and traffic control measures, or otherwise violating any requirements herein, may be directed to stop work until the necessary ROW work permit is obtained, the appropriate measures are implemented, or violations are discontinued or remedied in accordance with this article. Any person who shall continue to work within the rights-of-way after issuance of a stop work order shall be guilty of an offense subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-169. - Permit conditions. 
The following conditions shall apply to all ROW work permits issued under this article, unless specifically stated otherwise in the permit, and all work in the rights-of-way by an ROW-user: 
(1)  City specifications; applicable codes. All restoration of city ROW caused by excavations and facilities maintenance shall comply with the city standard specifications as may be amended from time to time by the authority of the director establishing such specifications and procedures consistent with the requirements and purposes of this chapter. A ROW-user shall perform all excavations or facilities maintenance in full compliance with all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved by the city and in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the PSC and any other local, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the parties. A ROW-user shall be responsible for all excavations or facilities maintenance done in the rights-of-way, regardless of by whom the excavation or facilities maintenance is performed. 
(2)  Permit-specific conditions. Each ROW work permit shall be deemed to incorporate the provisions of this article as permit conditions. The director may also impose additional reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a ROW work permit and the performance of the ROW-user in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. Such reasonable conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The amount of excavation or facilities maintenance which may occur at one time and the amount of rights-of-way which may be obstructed during construction; 
b.  The number or size of conduits or other facilities that may be installed by each ROW-user based on the reasonable needs to ensure that no one ROW-user may unreasonably consume a disproportionate amount of the available rights-of-way to deter competition or deprive the public or others of the reasonable use of the rights-of-way; 
c.  Posting of an additional or larger performance and maintenance bond for additional facilities, except as otherwise provided in section 24-174 hereof, when the established amount is reasonably determined to be insufficient; 
d.  The design, location, and nature of all facilities based on nondiscriminatory basis in ensuring the safe, efficient and appropriate use of the ROW consistent with this article and applicable law; 
e.  Reasonable conditions to effectively manage erosion and sediment control; and 
f.  Other reasonable conditions regarding the timing, safety precautions, or specific implementation of the specific work proposed. 
(3)  Responsible for costs. A ROW-user shall be responsible for all reasonable costs borne by the city that are directly associated with a ROW-user's ROW work permit or use of the rights-of-way thereunder. 
(4)  Stop work orders. Except in cases of an emergency or with approval of the director, no excavation or facilities maintenance may be done in violation of a stop work order issued by the director if, in the director's determination, conditions are unreasonable for such excavation or facilities maintenance based on standard engineering and construction practices. 
(5)  No Interference with right-of-way uses. A ROW-user shall not disrupt rights-of-way such that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways is interfered with. No person may park private vehicles within or next to the facilities maintenance or excavation area, except for such areas which may be designated and marked as safe areas for vehicle parking in accordance with an approved traffic control plan. 
(6)  Responsible for subcontractors. If excavation or facilities maintenance is being done for the ROW-user by another person, a subcontractor or otherwise, the ROW-user shall be responsible for ensuring that the excavation or facilities maintenance performed by said person is consistent with ROW-user's permit and applicable law and ROW-user shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by said person. 
(7)  Minimum impact required; no interference. The ROW-user shall, in the performance of any excavation or facilities maintenance required for the installation, repair, maintenance, relocation and/or removal of any of its facilities, limit all excavations or facilities maintenance to that necessary for efficient operation and so as not to interfere with other users of the rights-of-way. 
(8)  Open excavations; street-plate bridging. The ROW-user shall not permit an excavation to remain open or facilities maintenance actions to continue in the rights-of-way longer than is necessary to complete the repair or installation or action, and in no event may an excavation or facilities maintenance remain open or continue beyond the expiration of the ROW work permit or any approved extension. Any excavation left open overnight on any thoroughfare or collector type street shall be securely covered. Unless otherwise approved by the director in writing, all excavations shall be filled in or covered at the end of each working day. The ROW-user assumes the sole responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, plates, safety fencing and/or lights as required from the time of opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. Street plate bridging (SPB) to cover open excavations shall be authorized subject to requirements contained in the standard specifications. 
(9)  Barricades and safety devices. All excavations and facilities maintenance shall be barricaded in such a manner as to protect both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. Such excavations, facilities maintenance and barricades shall be lighted at night with danger signals in such a manner that all traffic may be warned of the existence and location of such excavations, facilities maintenance and barricades. All traffic control devices shall be in compliance with the current version of the Standard Specifications and the Manual of Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), unless otherwise agreed to by the city. All surplus excavation materials, tools or supplies at the site of the excavation or facilities maintenance shall be barricaded and lighted at night in the manner described in this section. No open excavation may be left in the pavement area without placing street plates over the opening. 
(10)  Traffic control. Whenever there is an excavation or facilities maintenance by the ROW-user, the ROW-user shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic control to the surrounding area as determined by the director. In the event the excavation or facilities maintenance is not completed in a reasonable period of time, the ROW-user may be liable for actual damages to the city for delay caused by the ROW-user pursuant to this article. 
(11)  Hours of activity. Non-emergency excavations or facilities maintenance on arterial and collector streets may not be performed during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow. The ROW-user shall perform non-emergency excavations or facilities maintenance on the rights-of-way at such times that will allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, and work shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays; no such work shall performed on Sundays unless approved by the director. 
(12)  Location of facilities; undergrounding. 
a.  All underground mains and service lines with ancillary appurtenances thereto shall, wherever available, be placed in utility easements adjacent to the rights-of-way. If a utility easement or space within a utility easement is not available, whenever practicable, underground mains and service lines with ancillary appurtenances thereto shall be placed between the curb or pavement edge and sidewalk line in the section of the street known as the parkway. Where the pavement and sidewalk occupy the entire street, the underground utilities shall be located under the sidewalk, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
b.  Except as provided herein, all facilities constructed after the date of this article shall be placed underground. Facilities may be located aboveground if approved by the director for good cause or as may otherwise be specifically authorized in a franchise or ROW agreement consistent with law. Aboveground facilities may be installed if approved by the director where alternative underground facilities are not technically or economically feasible, or where the imposition of such additional costs of undergrounding on the ROW-user are precluded by applicable law. 
(13)  Notice of completion. The ROW-user shall notify the office of the director upon completion of the excavation or facilities maintenance authorized by the permit. 
(14)  Guarantee of work. Every ROW-user to whom an excavation permit has been granted shall guarantee for a period of two (2) years the restoration of the rights-of-way in the area where such ROW-user conducted an excavation and performed the restoration. Such ROW-user shall guarantee and pay for the restoration of the rights-of-way against sagging, buckling, deterioration, and other premature failures of the restoration. 
(15)  Tree trimming. A ROW-user shall neither remove, cut, nor damage any trees, or their roots, in and along the rights-of-way of the city except as authorized by the city pursuant to an approved tree trimming plan authorized by an excavation or facilities maintenance permit or otherwise authorized under RSMo. § 537.340. The type and extent of trimming and pruning shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(16)  Inspection of permits. Permits issued shall be available by the ROW-user at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the director, other city employees and the public. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-170. - Inspection and acceptance of excavations. 
(a)  When an excavation has been made within the limits of any street, alley or sidewalk and after the same has been properly backfilled, the ROW-user making the excavation shall notify the director that the same is ready for final repair. The director, or the director's duly authorized agent, shall immediately inspect the same, and if it is found that such excavation has been properly backfilled, the permit holder shall complete the restoration of the surface of such street, alley or sidewalk, all in accordance with the city's standard specifications for street restoration. The judgment of the director, or the director's authorized agent, as to when an excavation has been properly backfilled to permit final repair shall be conclusive. 
(b)  After inspection and acceptance of excavation by the director, the permit holder shall be responsible for restoration of the excavation pursuant to the standard specifications, to be completed prior to expiration of the permit. 
(c)  If the excavation or other facilities maintenance is not properly completed and restored by the expiration of the permit, the city may, in addition to all other remedies, perform the restoration and completion and obtain reimbursement for such costs from the permit holder or surety, provided that if the city provides an invoice to the permit holder for such restoration, such invoice shall be paid in not more than thirty (30) days of such invoice. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-171. - Permit denial. 
The director may deny an application for a permit if: 
(1)  The ROW-user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW-user, fails to provide all the necessary information requested by the city for managing the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The ROW-user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW-user, including contractors or subcontractors, has a history of non-compliance or permitting non-compliance within the city. For purposes of this section, "history of noncompliance or permitting noncompliance within the city" shall include where the ROW-user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW-user, including contractors or subcontractors, has failed to return the public rights-of-way to its previous condition under a previous permit. 
(3)  The city has provided the ROW-user with a reasonable, competitively neutral, and nondiscriminatory justification for requiring an alternative method for performing the excavation or facilities maintenance identified in the permit application or a reasonable alternative route that will not result in additional installation expense of more than ten (10) percent to the ROW-user or a declination of service quality. 
(4)  The city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the public health and safety, provided that the authority of the city does not extend to those items under the jurisdiction of the PSC, such denial shall not interfere with a ROW-user's right of eminent domain of private property, and such denials shall only be imposed on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis. In determining whether denial of a permit application is necessary to protect the public health and safety, the director may consider one or more of the following factors: 
a.  The extent to which the rights-of-way space where the permit is sought is available, including the consideration of competing demands for the particular space in the rights-of-way, or other general conditions of the rights-of-way. 
b.  The applicability of any ordinance, code provision, or other regulations that affect the location of facilities in the rights-of-way. 
c.  The degree and nature of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from the use of that part of the rights-of-way, including whether the issuance of a permit for the particular dates and/or times requested would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. 
(5)  The area is environmentally sensitive as defined by state statute or federal law or is a historic district designated by city ordinance. 
(6)  The failure to comply with applicable city ordinances or any other violation, unsafe conditions, or damage or threatened harm to the rights-of-way or public, except where such circumstance would otherwise not constitute a lawful basis for revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-172. - Permit fees; supplemental deposit. 
(a)  Permit fee. Every applicant for a ROW work permit shall pay a fee to the city for such permit in accordance with the fee schedule listed in Chapter 24 of the City Code and on file with the director to reimburse the city for its actual costs incurred and anticipated from the permit, inspections and applicant's use of the rights-of-way, and including the city's rights-of-way management costs and as may otherwise be permitted by law. 
(b)  Supplemental review deposit. Where the ROW work permit application requires investigation, inspection, studies, review or other costs in excess of the permit fee to be incurred by the city to reasonably determine, enforce or condition compliance with the applicable requirements, the director may require, subject to other applicable requirements, that an estimated payment for such additional costs be submitted before the application is deemed complete. Any portion of such additional deposit above actual costs incurred by the city therein shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the application and project upon written request of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-173. - Map and location. 
Where an application is made for a permit by a ROW-user to install, move, or repair its facilities, the applicant shall submit a map or plat of where the excavation or facilities maintenance is to take place. Such plat or map shall be specific as to location and depth of the excavation or facilities maintenance, as to street address or other location. Such notice shall be provided to the city in writing or by any other means approved by director at least three (3) business days in advance of the work, and shall be subject to denial or modification by the director based on public safety or other the requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-174. - Liability insurance, performance and maintenance bond requirement. 
(a)  Insurance. Except as provided in this section, each ROW-user shall provide, at its sole expense, and maintain during the term of an agreement or franchise, commercial general liability insurance with a reputable, qualified, and financially sound company licensed to do business in the State of Missouri, and unless otherwise approved by the city, with a rating by Best of not less than "A," that shall protect the ROW-user, the city, and the city's officials, officers, and employees from claims which may arise from operations under an agreement or franchise, whether such operations are by the ROW-user, its officers, directors, employees and agents, or any subcontractors of the ROW-user. This liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property, resulting from all ROW-user operations, products, services or use of automobiles, or construction equipment. The amount of insurance for Single Limit Coverage applying to Bodily and Personal Injury and Property Damage shall be at least $3,000,000.00, but in no event less than the individual and combined sovereign immunity limits established by RSMo. § 537.610 for political subdivisions; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to waive the city's sovereign immunity. An endorsement shall be provided which states that the city is listed as an additional insured and stating that the policy shall not be cancelled or materially modified so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this section, or not renewed without thirty (30) days' advance written notice of such event being given to the director. If the person is self-insured, it shall provide the city proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts. The insurance requirements in this section or otherwise shall not apply to a ROW-user to the extent and for such period during an agreement or franchise as ROW-user is exempted from such requirements pursuant to RSMo. § 67.1830(6)(a) and has on file with the director an affidavit certifying that ROW-user has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so exempted unless otherwise provided by agreement or franchise. The city reserves the right to waive any and all requirements under this section when deemed to be in the public interest. 
(b)  Performance and maintenance bond. Except as otherwise may be required by law for ROW-users who have on file with the director an affidavit certifying that the ROW-user has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so exempted, the person shall at all times during the term of the permit, and for four (4) years thereafter, maintain a performance and maintenance bond in a form approved by the city counselor. The amount of the bond will be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or the value of the restoration as determined by the director, whichever is greater, for a term consistent with the term of the permit plus four (4) additional years, conditioned upon the person's faithful performance of the provisions, terms and conditions conferred by this chapter. Unless otherwise established in the permit, an annual bond in an amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) automatically renewed yearly during this period shall satisfy the requirement of this section. The city shall be entitled to recover under the terms of such bond the full amount of any loss and damage occasioned from violation of the permit or provisions of this article. 
(c)  Proof of compliance. Unless exempt, a copy of a ROW-user's Liability Insurance Certificate and Performance and Maintenance Bond must be on file with the director. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-175. - Facility relocation. 
(a)  A ROW-user shall promptly remove, relocate or adjust any facilities located in the rights-of-way or in public easements as directed by the director for a public improvement or as necessary to eliminate a threat to public health or safety. Such removal, relocation or adjustment shall be performed by the ROW-user at the ROW-user's sole expense without expense to the city, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules, regulations and schedules of the city pertaining to such. The ROW-user shall proceed with the removal, relocation, or adjustment of facilities with due diligence upon notice by the director to begin removal, relocation, or adjustment. Where the ROW-user's facilities are located in whole or in part in private easements, the ROW-user shall promptly relocate the facilities if the city has agreed to compensate the ROW-user, through the condemnation, purchase process, or other reasonable means for the cost of relocation of the ROW-user's facilities. 
(b)  The city shall provide the ROW-user with written notice of required relocations or adjustments, the anticipated bid letting date, if any, of the public improvement, and notice of the deadline for completion of the relocations or adjustments. The ROW-user shall respond within thirty (30) days with any conflicts and a proposed construction schedule for relocation to be completed in not more than sixty (60) days from date of the notice to ROW-user, unless such other schedule is requested and reasonably approved by the director. If facilities cannot be fully relocated within rights-of-way, the ROW-user shall be responsible at its own cost to obtain alternative locations to timely relocate its facilities. 
(c)  If any facilities are not relocated in accordance with this section, the city or its contractors may relocate the facilities after notice to the ROW-user. The ROW-user and its surety shall be liable to the city for any and all costs incurred by the city. In the event the ROW-user is required to move its facilities in accordance with this section, any ordinary permit fee shall be waived. Failure to comply with the relocation schedule set by the director shall be a separate violation for each day subject to penalties as provided for violation of this article. 
(d)  The city retains the right to vacate any rights-of-way within the city. The city may condition vacation of its rights-of-way on granting and recording of an acceptable easement authorizing the city to use the vacated area, or a portion thereof, for specific purposes as may be deemed appropriate in the public interest. The city may also condition such vacation on payment of any relocation costs that may result from such vacation. In the event that the vacation of rights-of-way requires relocation of facilities of a ROW-user, such user shall bear all costs of relocation or removal of its facilities unless otherwise provided by the party initiating the vacation. In no event shall the city be obligated to pay for relocation costs due to a vacation of rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-176. - Abandoned and unusable facilities. 
(a)  A ROW-user owning abandoned facilities in the rights-of-way must remove its facilities and replace or restore any damage or disturbance caused by the removal at its own expense. The director may allow underground facilities or portions thereof to remain in place if the director determines that it is in the best interest of public safety to do so. 
(b)  At such time, the city may take ownership and responsibility of such vacated facilities left in place; or the person shall provide information satisfactory to the city that such person's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized entity; or submit to the city a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If the person proceeds under this section, the city may, at its option, purchase the equipment, require the person, at its own expense, to remove it, or require the person to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonable anticipated costs to be incurred to remove the facilities. 
(c)  Facilities of a person who fails to comply with this section, and whose facilities remain unused for two (2) years, shall be deemed to be abandoned, after the city has made a good faith effort to contact the person, unless the city receives confirmation that the person intends to use the facilities. 
(d)  Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Abating the nuisance; 
(2)  Taking possession and ownership of the facility and restoring it to a useable function; or 
(3)  Requiring the removal of the facility by the person. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-177. - Revocation of permits. 
The city may, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure, revoke a permit granted to a ROW-user, without a fee refund, if one or more of the following occurs: 
(1)  A material violation of a provision of this article or a permit, including the violation of any provision of this article or of any additional provisions of a specific permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; 
(4)  A failure to complete excavation or facilities maintenance by the date specified in the permit, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete the excavation or facilities maintenance is due to reasons beyond the ROW-user's control; 
(5)  A failure to correct, within the time specified by the city, excavation or facilities maintenance that does not conform to applicable national safety codes, industry construction standards, or applicable city code provisions or safety codes that are no more stringent than national safety codes or provisions, upon inspection and notification by the city of the faulty condition. 
If a permit is revoked, the ROW-user shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including administrative costs, restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 24-178. - Violations; penalties. 
In addition to any other penalties and remedies for violations that may exist in law or equity, any person that violates any provision of this article shall be subject to such penalties as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code and including a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each and every day the violation exists or continues. 
(Ord. No. 23373 , § 1, 11-20-17)  
Secs. 24-179—24-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEPLOYMENT OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 24-200. - Applicability. 
To the extent permitted by law, this article shall apply to all utility providers desiring to construct, operate, or maintain small wireless facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-201. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural number include the singular number and vice versa, and masculine gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated or contrary to the context, terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in RSMo. §§ 67.5110—67.5121 and if not defined therein, this code, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. 
Antenna, communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to such codes enacted to prevent physical property damage or reasonably foreseeable injury to persons, including the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC). 
Applicable law. State and federal law and regulation applicable to the construction, installation, deployment or collocation of wireless facilities and utility poles, including those laws and regulations of general applicability that do not apply exclusively to wireless facilities or wireless providers such as local ordinances and state law relating to use of right-of-way. 
Applicant. Any person or company who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
Application. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, or to approve the installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole. 
City utility pole. Means a utility pole, as defined below, owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the city; except municipal electric utility distribution poles or facilities which are expressly excluded under state law. 
Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace small wireless facilities on or immediately adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole, provided that the small wireless facility antenna is located on the wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Decorative pole. A city utility pole that is specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes. 
Fee. A one-time, nonrecurring charge. 
Historic district. A group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C, or are otherwise located in a district made subject to special design standards adopted by this code or under state law as of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted for new developments, and including those areas specifically designated as an HP-O District on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Columbia, Missouri." 
Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height; and 
(2)  Any exterior antenna no longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Small wireless facility permit. A written authorization from a designated city official required by the city to collocate small wireless facilities in or outside the right-of-way, or to install, replace, maintain or operate a utility pole inside the right-of-way for any purpose. 
Rate. A recurring charge. 
Right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property used for public travel, but not including a federal interstate highway, railroad right-of-way, or private easement. 
Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and 
(2)  All other equipment associated with the wireless facility, whether ground or pole mounted, is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume, provided that no single piece of equipment on the utility pole shall exceed nine (9) cubic feet in volume; and no single piece of ground mounted equipment shall exceed fifteen (15) cubic feet in volume, exclusive of equipment required by an electric utility or municipal electric utility to power the small wireless facility. 
The following types of associated ancillary equipment shall not be included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs and related conduit for the connection of power and other services. 
Technically feasible. By virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design or site location can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the small wireless facility. 
Utility pole. A pole or similar structure that is or may be used in whole or in part by or for wireline communications, lighting, traffic control, signage, the collocation of small wireless facilities, or a similar function, or for electric utility distribution, excepting municipal electric utility distribution poles or facilities as expressly excluded under state law. 
Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including equipment associated with wireless communications and radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: 
(1)  The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; 
(2)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between wireless support structures or utility poles; 
(3)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable not directly associated with a particular small wireless facility; or 
(4)  A wireline backhaul facility. 
Wireless infrastructure provider. Any utility provider authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment or wireless facilities but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services. Any services using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider. A company who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure. An existing structure, such as a monopole or tower, whether guyed or self-supporting, designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities; an existing or proposed billboard; an existing or proposed building; or other existing or proposed structure capable of supporting wireless facilities, other than a structure designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole. 
Wireline backhaul facility. A physical transmission path, all or part of which is within the right-of-way, used for the transport of communication data by wire from a wireless facility to a network. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-202. - General standards. 
(a)  The city shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any company for use or management of the right-of-way for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation, operation, marketing, modification, maintenance, management, or replacement of city utility poles within the right-of-way, or for the right to attach to such city utility poles within the right-of-way. 
(b)  The city, in applying the provisions of this section, will act in a competitively neutral manner with regard to other users of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Nothing in this article limits the ability of the city to require an applicant to obtain one or more permits of general applicability that do not apply exclusively to wireless facilities in addition to the permit required by this code in order to collocate a small wireless facility or install a new, modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a small wireless facility. 
(d)  The city may require a permit under applicable codes, existing city ordinances, or this article, with reasonable conditions, for work in a right-of-way that will involve excavation, affect traffic patterns, obstruct traffic in the right-of-way, or materially impede the use of a sidewalk. 
(e)  A small wireless facility must comply with reasonable, objective, and cost-effective concealment or safety requirements determined by the city as well as city aesthetic standards, including using equipment as close in color to the pole as possible. 
(f)  Subject to section 24-203(h), and except for facilities excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(a)(4) of the Federal Communications Commission rules, the city may require reasonable, technically feasible, nondiscriminatory, and technologically neutral design or concealment measures for small wireless facilities or utility poles placed in a historic district or areas specifically designated as an HP-O District on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Columbia, Missouri." Any such design or concealment measures shall not have the effect of prohibiting any wireless provider's technology, nor shall any such measures be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions in the definition of small wireless facility. 
(g)  Right-of-way users, upon adequate notice and at the facility owner's own expense, shall relocate facilities as may be needed in the interest of public safety and convenience. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in this code and applicable law, in reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, wireless support structures and utility poles, the city will exercise zoning, land use, planning, and permitting authority within its territorial boundaries. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to impose any new requirements on cable providers for the provision of such service. 
(j)  Small wireless facilities or utility poles constructed or operational before August 28, 2018, which were approved by the city by permit or agreement may remain installed and be operated under the requirements of this article. 
(k)  Although municipal electric utility distribution poles or facilities are expressly excluded from RSMo. §§ 67.5110—67.5121, the city shall reserve the right and authority to contract for attachment to city-owned electric utility distribution poles and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-203. - Permitting provisions. 
(a)  Permit requirements—Inside the right-of-way. Any company desiring to collocate small wireless facilities, or to install, replace, maintain or operate a utility pole, inside the right-of-way must first apply for and obtain a permit, in addition to any other required permit, license, or authorization that is generally applicable and does not apply exclusively to wireless facilities. 
(1)  The collocation of small wireless facilities and the installation, maintenance, modification, operation, and replacement of utility poles along, across, upon, and under the right-of-way is not subject to zoning review or approval; except that the placement of new or modified utility poles in the right-of-way in areas zoned single-family residential or as historic as of August 28, 2018, remain subject to any applicable zoning requirements that are consistent with RSMo. §§ 67.5090 to 67.5103. 
(2)  Small wireless facilities and utility poles shall be installed and maintained so as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel, including pedestrian travel, or public safety on the right-of-way or obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the city or other authorized right-of-way users. 
(3)  A new, replacement, or modified utility pole installed in the right-of-way shall not be subject to zoning requirements so long as the utility pole does not exceed the greater of ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole in place as of January 1, 2019 located within five hundred (500) feet of the new utility pole in the same right-of-way, or fifty feet (50) above ground level. A new, modified, or replacement utility pole that exceeds these height limits shall be subject to applicable city zoning requirements that apply to other utility poles, and that are consistent with RSMo. §§ 67.5090 to 67.5103. 
(4)  New small wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above an existing utility pole in place as of August 28, 2018. 
(5)  Small wireless facilities on a new utility pole shall not extend above the height permitted for a new utility pole in subsection (3) above. 
(6)  A wireless provider shall be permitted to replace decorative poles when necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, but any replacement pole shall reasonably conform to the design aesthetics of the decorative pole or poles being replaced. The term "reasonably conform" as used herein, shall mean that the design aesthetics of the replacement pole shall be as nearly identical to the decorative pole replaced as is feasible. The director of public works or other designee is authorized to determine if the replacement pole reasonably conforms, based upon the reasonable objective design standards of the city. 
(7)  The city may require replacement of a city utility pole that is proposed to be used for a collocation on a nondiscriminatory basis for reasons of safety and reliability, including a demonstration that the collocation would make the city utility pole structurally unsound. 
(b)  Permit requirements—Outside the right-of-way. 
(1)  The collocation of small wireless facilities in or on property not zoned primarily for single-family residential use is not subject to zoning review or approval. 
(2)  The city will allow collocation of small wireless facilities on city wireless support structures and city utility poles that are located on city property outside the right-of-way to the same extent, if any, that it allows access to such structures for other commercial projects or uses. Any such collocations shall be subject to reasonable and nondiscriminatory rates, fees, and terms as provided in an agreement between the city and the wireless provider, and not otherwise governed by this code. 
(3)  The city shall not enter into an exclusive agreement with a wireless provider concerning city utility poles or city wireless support structures that are located on city property outside the right-of-way, including stadiums and enclosed arenas, unless the agreement meets the following requirements: 
a.  The wireless provider provides service using a shared network of wireless facilities that it makes available for access by other wireless providers on reasonable and nondiscriminatory rates and terms that shall include use of the entire shared network, as to itself, an affiliate, or any other entity; or 
b.  The wireless provider allows other wireless providers to collocate small wireless facilities on reasonable and nondiscriminatory rates and terms, as to itself, an affiliate, or any other entity. 
(c)  Permit process. The permit process for an applicant seeking to construct small wireless facilities in or outside the right-of-way, or to install, replace, maintain or operate a utility pole inside the right-of-way shall be as follows: 
(1)  An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities in or outside the right-of-way, or to install, replace, maintain or operate a utility pole inside the right-of-way, must first submit an application for a permit to the director of public works or the director's designee. The director of public works or the director's designee shall design and make available to applicants a standard application form, consistent with the provisions of this article which all applicants must use in order to accomplish the purposes of this article. Except for the requirements in subsection (2)b. below, an applicant shall not be required to provide more information to obtain a permit under this article than other communications service providers that are not wireless providers. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall include the following: 
a.  Construction and engineering drawings which demonstrate compliance with the criteria in section (4)f.; 
b.  An attestation that the small wireless facilities comply with the volumetric limitations in the definition of small wireless facility; 
c.  Information on the height of any new, replacement, or modified utility pole; 
d.  Applicable indemnity, insurance, performance bond information required in section 24-205; 
e.  An applicant that is not a wireless services provider must provide evidence of agreements or plans demonstrating that the small wireless facilities will be operational for use by a wireless services provider within one (1) year after the permit issuance date, unless the city and the applicant agree to extend this period or if the applicant notifies the city the delay is caused by lack of commercial power or communications transport facilities. An applicant that is a wireless services provider must provide this information by attestation; 
f.  Plans and detailed cost estimates for any make-ready work as needed; the applicant shall be solely responsible for the cost of any make-ready work; 
g.  Projected commencement and termination dates for the permit, or if such dates are unknown at the time the permit is issued, a provision requiring the permit holder to provide the director of public works or the director's designee with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are determined; and 
h.  An application for electric service, if required. 
(d)  Fees and rates. Each such application shall be accompanied by payment of fees as designated in this article. 
(1)  General. 
a.  The city may not require or accept in-kind services in lieu of any fee. 
b.  The rates to collocate on city utility poles shall be nondiscriminatory. 
(2)  Application fee. 
a.  The total fee for an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing city utility pole is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless facility. 
b.  An applicant filing a consolidated application shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless facility included in the consolidated application. 
c.  The total fee for an application for the installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole together with the collocation of an associated small wireless facility is five hundred dollars ($500.00) per utility pole. 
(3)  Collocation rate. 
a.  The rate for collocation of a small wireless facility to a city utility pole is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per city utility pole per year. 
(e)  Timing for processing of an application. 
(1)  Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application, the city shall determine and notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete. If an application is incomplete, the city shall specifically identify the missing information in writing. The processing deadline set out in subsection (e)(2) of this section is tolled from the time the city sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. That processing deadline may also be tolled by agreement of the applicant and the city. 
(2)  The city shall process and approve or deny an application for collocation of a small wireless facility within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. The application shall be deemed approved if not approved or denied within this forty-five (45) day period. 
(3)  The city shall process and approve or deny an application for installation of a new, modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a small wireless facility within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application. 
(4)  An applicant may file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of multiple small wireless facilities. 
a.  An application may include up to twenty (20) separate small wireless facilities; provided that the application is for the same or materially same design of small wireless facility being collocated on the same or materially the same type of utility pole or wireless support structure, and geographically proximate. The application shall provide information sufficient for the director of public works or the director's designee to determine whether the applicant has met the requirements of this subsection. The director of public works or the director's designee shall have discretion to determine whether the application meets the requirements of this subsection. 
b.  If the city receives individual applications for approval of more than fifty (50) small wireless facilities or consolidated applications for approval of more than seventy-five (75) small wireless facilities within a fourteen (14) day period, whether from a single applicant or multiple applicants, the city may, upon its own request, obtain an automatic thirty (30) day extension for any additional collocation or replacement or installation application submitted during that fourteen (14) day period or in the fourteen day period immediately following the prior fourteen (14) day period. The city will promptly communicate its request to each and any affected applicant. 
c.  The denial of one or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated application shall not delay processing or constitute a basis for denial of any other small wireless facilities in the same consolidated application or the consolidated application as a whole. 
(5)  The city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable a city utility pole to support the requested collocation by a wireless provider, including pole replacement if necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate and advance payment, if required, by the applicant. 
(6)  For any application denied: 
a.  The city shall document the complete basis for a denial in writing, and send the documentation to the applicant on the day the city denies the application. 
b.  The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. 
c.  The city shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
(7)  The city will not institute, either expressly or de facto, a moratorium on filing, receiving, or processing applications or issuing permits or other approvals, if any, for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation, modification, or replacement of utility poles to support small wireless facilities. 
a.  If doing so would be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 253(a), particularly as interpreted by the Federal Communications Commission's declaratory ruling adopted on August 2, 2018 (FCC 18-111), the city may institute a temporary moratorium on applications for small wireless facilities and the collocation thereof for no more than thirty (30) days in the event of a major and protracted staffing shortage that reduces the number of personnel necessary to receive, review, process, and approve or deny applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities by more than fifty (50) percent. 
(f)  Denial of an application. An application for a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole otherwise meeting the requirements of section 24-203(a)(1) or 24-203(b)(1) may be denied if the action proposed in the application could reasonably be expected to: 
(1)  Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control equipment or city-owned communications equipment; 
(2)  Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or non-motorized vehicles; 
(3)  Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement; 
(4)  Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the right-of-way; 
(5)  Materially obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the city, utility, or other third party; 
(6)  Fail to comply with applicable codes, including nationally recognized engineering standards for utility poles or wireless support structures; 
(7)  Fail to comply with the reasonably objective and documented aesthetics of a decorative pole and the applicant does not agree to pay to match the applicable decorative elements; 
(8)  Fail to comply with city's written policy or code requirements for undergrounding, or subsequently enacted for new developments, that require all utility facilities in the area to be placed underground and prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval; or 
(9)  Any other reason not prohibited by applicable law. 
(g)  Approval of an application. 
(1)  The director of public works or the director's designee shall review each application for a permit and, upon determining that: 
a.  The applicant has submitted all necessary information; 
b.  There is no basis under section 24-203(g) to deny the application; and 
c.  The applicant has paid the appropriate fee; 
the director of public works or the director's designee shall issue the permit. 
(2)  If the city approves an application, the applicant is authorized to: 
a.  Undertake the installation or collocation; 
b.  Operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any associated utility pole covered by the permit for a period of not less than ten (10) years, unless the applicant and city agree to a term of less than ten (10) years, which shall be renewed for equivalent durations so long as the applicant is in compliance with the criteria listed in section 24-203(f) and current on all fees due the city. 
(3)  The city may approve a permit subject to a reservation to reclaim space on the utility pole, when and if needed, to meet the utility pole owner's core utility purpose or a documented city plan projected at the time of the application. 
(h)  No application required. No application is required under this article for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance on previously permitted small wireless facilities; 
(2)  The replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless facilities that are the same or smaller in size, weight, and height; 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between utility poles in compliance with applicable codes; or 
(4)  Attachment of a small wireless facility to a city-owned electric distribution pole or facility where the city and a wireless services provider have an agreement in place that governs attachment to a city-owned electric utility distribution pole or facility. 
A person performing the permitted acts under this subsection may be required to provide the city with a description of any new equipment installed so that the city may maintain an accurate inventory of the small wireless facilities at a particular location. And provider shall immediately inform the city when a pole or pole attachment is no longer in use. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-204. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of small wireless facilities shall be in accordance with all applicable codes, including the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), and relevant city ordinances pertaining to construction, operation, maintenance, and repair inside or outside the right-of-way. 
(b)  All small wireless facilities shall be installed and located with due regard for minimizing interference with the public and with other users of a right-of-way, including the city. 
(c)  An applicant shall not place small wireless facilities where they will damage or interfere with the use or operation of previously installed facilities, or obstruct or hinder the various utilities serving the residents and businesses in the city of their use of any right-of-way. 
(d)  Any and all rights-of-way disturbed or damaged during the construction of small wireless facilities shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the applicant to its functional equivalence as existed before the disturbance or damage. 
(e)  Any wireless infrastructure provider, contractor or subcontractor must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable local ordinances and shall provide such necessary proof upon request by the city. 
(f)  Each wireless infrastructure provider, contractor or subcontractor shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as wireless services provider would have hereunder and applicable law if the work were performed by the wireless services provider. The wireless services provider shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of wireless infrastructure providers, contractors or subcontractors is performed consistent with their permits and applicable law, and shall be responsible for promptly correcting any acts or omissions by a wireless infrastructure provider, contractor or subcontractor. 
(g)  All equipment, attachments and poles installed shall bear clear signage of ownership and shall include an emergency contact phone number. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-205. - Indemnity, insurance, performance bonds. 
(a)  Indemnity. 
(1)  Wireless providers shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers and employees harmless against any damage or personal injury caused by the negligence of the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors. 
(b)  Insurance. Except as provided in this section, each small cell wireless provider shall provide, at its sole expense, and maintain during the term of an agreement or franchise, commercial general liability insurance with a reputable, qualified, and financially sound company licensed to do business in the State of Missouri, and unless otherwise approved by the city, with a rating by Best of not less than "A," that shall protect the small cell wireless provider, the city, and the city's officials, officers, and employees from claims which may arise from operations under an agreement or franchise, whether such operations are by the small cell wireless provider, its officers, directors, employees and agents, or any subcontractors of the small cell wireless provider. This liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property, resulting from all small cell wireless provider operations, products, services or use of automobiles, or construction equipment. The amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal injury and property damage shall be at least $3,000,000.00, but in no event less than the individual and combined sovereign immunity limits established by RSMo. § 537.610 for political subdivisions; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to waive the city's sovereign immunity. An endorsement shall be provided which states that the city is listed as an additional insured and stating that the policy shall not be cancelled or materially modified so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this section, or not renewed without thirty (30) days' advance written notice of such event being given to the director of public works. If the person is self-insured, it shall provide the city proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts. The insurance requirements in this section or otherwise shall not apply to a small cell wireless provider to the extent and for such period during an agreement or franchise as ROW-user is exempted from such requirements pursuant to RSMo. § 67.1830(6)(a) and has on file with the director an affidavit certifying that small cell wireless provider has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so exempted unless otherwise provided by agreement or franchise. The city reserves the right to waive any and all requirements under this section when deemed to be in the public interest. 
(1)  As part of the permit process, a wireless provider must provide proof of liability insurance coverage against any damage or personal injury caused by the negligence of the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors. The wireless provider's liability insurance policy must name the city or its officers and employees as additional insureds. 
(2)  In the alternative, a wireless provider must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that it has in effect a comparable self-insurance program in amounts as required by city. 
(c)  Performance bond. 
(1)  As part of the permit process, a wireless provider must post a performance bond of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per small wireless facility, not to exceed a total of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
(2)  The purpose of the performance bond is to: 
a.  Provide for the removal of abandoned or improperly maintained small wireless facilities, including those that the city determines need to be removed to protect public health, safety, or welfare; 
b.  Restore the right-of-way in connection with removals of small wireless facilities from the right-of-way; and 
c.  Recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless provider in over twelve (12) months, provided the wireless provider has been provided with reasonable notice form the city and has been given the opportunity to cure. 
(3)  Upon completion of the work associated with the small wireless facilities covered by the performance bond to the satisfaction of the director of public works or the director's designee, the director of public works or the director's designee shall eliminate the bond or reduce its amount after a time appropriate to determine whether the work performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established by the director of public works or the director's designee considering the nature of the work performed. 
(4)  Recovery by the city of any amounts under the performance bond or otherwise does not limit an applicant's duty to indemnify the city in any way, nor shall such recovery relieve an applicant of its obligations under a permit or reduce the amounts owed to the city other than by the amounts recovered by the city under the performance bond, or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may have. 
(d)  Exemption. 
(1)  Applicants that have at least twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in assets in the state and do not have a history of permitting noncompliance within the city's jurisdiction shall be exempt from the insurance and bonding requirements otherwise required by this section. The city may require an applicant to provide proof by affidavit that its assets meet or exceed this requirement at the time of filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-206. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Compliance with laws. Each applicant shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted or established, to the extent that they are consistent with state and federal law. 
(b)  Franchises not superseded. Nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve an applicant of the provisions of an existing franchise, license or other agreement or permit. 
(c)  Rights and remedies. 
(1)  The exercise of one remedy under this article shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of damages or penalties relieve an applicant of its obligations to comply with its permits. Remedies may be used alone or in combination; in addition, the city may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. 
(2)  The city hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provisions of this article. 
(3)  No applicant shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(d)  Incorporation by reference. Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall by implication include a provision that shall incorporate by reference this article into such permit as fully as if copied therein verbatim. 
(e)  Calculation of time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this article or any permit, and a period of time is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time. 
(f)  Severability. If any term, condition, or provision of this article shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision that has been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provisions shall there upon return to full force and effect without further action by the city and shall thereafter be binding on the applicant and the city. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-207. - Annexation. 
The provisions hereof shall specifically apply to any lands or property annexed as the date of such annexation. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-208. - Relocation of facilities. 
Whenever, by reason of changes in the grade or widening of a street or in the location or manner of constructing a water pipe, drainage channel, sewer, or other city-owned underground or above ground structure, it is deemed necessary by the city, in the interest of public safety and convenience, to move, alter, or change the location of underground or above ground facilities of a wireless provider, the wireless provider shall relocate such facilities, on alternative right-of-way provided by the city, if available, upon adequate notice in writing by the city, without claim for reimbursement or damages against the city. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-209. - Standards applicable to city. 
Any standards in this article relating to small wireless facilities shall be fully applicable to work performed by the city and its departments. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-210. - Savings clause. 
Nothing contained herein shall in any manner be deemed or construed to alter, modify, supersede, supplement or otherwise nullify any other ordinances of the city or requirements thereof, whether or not relating to or in any manner connected with the subject written hereof, unless expressly provided otherwise herein or hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-211. - Prior agreements. 
This article shall not nullify, amend or prohibit any mutual written agreements between the city and a wireless provider entered into prior to January 1, 2019, which shall remain in effect unless otherwise expressly prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Sec. 24-212. - Authority preserved. 
Subject to provisions of RSMo. §§ 67.5110 through 67.5121 while in effect, and applicable federal law the city shall continue to preserve and exercise all powers of zoning, land use, planning, aesthetic preservation, protection of public health and safety, and exercise of permitting authority within its boundaries including with respect to wireless support structures and utility poles unless specifically barred by state statute or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 23793 , § 1, 2-18-19)  
Chapter 26 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; special tax for public sewers, § 22-227; special tax for construction of district sewers, § 22-232; special tax for joint district sewers, § 22-242. 
State Law reference— Assessment and levy of property taxes, RSMo. § 137.010 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Conformance with state law. 
Except as otherwise provided by the charter, this Code or any other ordinance of the city, the assessment, levy, payment and collection of both real and personal property taxes shall be done as provided under the general statutes of the state relating to taxation and revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 16.020)  
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose of property taxes. 
For the support and improvement of the city, a tax shall be levied annually upon all property within the city, real and personal, taxable under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1964, § 16.030)  
Sec. 26-3. - Assessment of property. 
In assessing property, both real and personal, in the city, the county assessor shall assess all property in the city, and such assessment shall be taken as the basis from which the city council shall make the levy for city purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 16.040)  
Sec. 26-4. - City representation on county board of equalization. 
For the purpose of giving the city representation on the county board of equalization when such board is sitting for the purpose of equalizing the assessment of property in the city, such officials of the city as may be provided by law shall sit with the county board of equalization, shall have a vote on such board, and shall be paid for such services, as may be provided for by law. 
(Code 1964, § 16.050) 
State Law reference— Representation of certain constitutional charter cities, RSMo. § 138.015.  
Sec. 26-5. - Taxes not void for informality, noncompliance with time limits. 
An assessment of property or charges for taxes thereon shall not be considered illegal on account of any informality in making the assessment or the tax lists, or on account of the assessment not having been completed within the time required by law. 
(Code 1964, § 16.100)  
Sec. 26-6. - No exemptions from tax. 
The city council shall have no power to relieve any person from the payment of any tax or exempt any person from any burden imposed by law. 
(Code 1964, § 16.120)  
Sec. 26-7. - Date taxes become delinquent; lien. 
Upon the first day of January of each year, all unpaid city taxes shall become delinquent, and the taxes upon real property are hereby made a perpetual lien thereon against all persons in favor of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 16.170) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, RSMo. § 140.010.  
Secs. 26-8—26-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MERCHANTS' AND MANUFACTURERS' AD VALOREM TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City to have taxing powers of all cities, § 166. 
State Law reference— Merchants' ad valorem tax authorized, RSMo. § 94.080; similar provisions, RSMo. § 150.010 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed thereto in this section: 
Manufacturer. A person who shall hold or purchase personal property for the purpose of adding to its value by any process of manufacturing, refining or the combination of different materials; provided, the value of the raw material, finished products, tools, machinery and appliances held or purchased by such person, company or corporation shall aggregate one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Merchant. A person who shall deal in the selling of goods, wares and merchandise, including commission merchants, grocers and dealers in drugs and medicines, at any store, stand or place occupied for that purpose. 
(Code 1964, § 16.230) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-22. - Classification of property. 
For the purpose of city taxation, the raw material, finished products, tools, machinery and appliances used or kept on hand by manufacturers and the merchandise held by merchants shall constitute a class separate and distinct by itself. 
(Code 1964, § 16.240)  
Sec. 26-23. - Tax levied; computation. 
Manufacturers and merchants shall pay an and valorem tax, at the regular tax rate, on the greatest amount of goods, wares, and merchandise or raw material and finished products they may have on hand on any one day between the first Monday in January and the first Monday in April of the current year, as well as on the tools, machinery and appliances used in carrying on their business or owned by them on the first day of April each year. 
(Code 1964, § 16.250)  
Sec. 26-24. - Annual statement—Time of filing; contents. 
On or before the first day of May of each year, it shall be the duty of each person who shall have obtained an occupational license as otherwise provided for in this Code, to file with the city assessor, if a merchant, a statement of the greatest amount of goods, wares and merchandise, which he may have had on hand at any one time between the first Monday in January and the first Monday in April next preceding, or, if a manufacturer, the greatest amount of raw materials and finished products such manufacturer may have had on hand between the first Monday in January and the first Monday in April next preceding, and also the value of the tools, machinery and appliances used in carrying on the business. 
(Code 1964, § 16.260)  
Sec. 26-25. - Same—Verification. 
Such statement shall be signed and verified by the affidavit of such manufacturer or merchant, or some credible person for him, before some person authorized to administer oaths, that such statement contains a just and true account of the aggregate amount of all the goods, wares and merchandise, raw material and finished products and tools, machinery and appliances taxable under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 16.280)  
Sec. 26-26. - Same—Evidence of amount of tax due. 
In all suits upon the bonds required by section 26-29, a certified copy of the statement hereinbefore required to be filed in the office of the city assessor shall be evidence of the amount of taxes due from the person filing the same; but the plaintiff in the action may show, by competent testimony, that such statement does not contain the full amount of taxable property it should have contained. 
(Code 1964, § 16.290)  
Sec. 26-27. - Same—Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to file. Every manufacturer or merchant who shall fail to file with the city assessor a statement, as required by section 26-24 of this chapter, shall be deemed to have forfeited the bond given by him or them in virtue of this article, and shall be liable for, and in action thereon, judgment shall be rendered plaintiff in damages for three (3) times the amount of revenue which shall be found due for the year and costs. 
(b)  Filing false statements. Every manufacturer or merchant, who shall file or suffer to be filed, a false statement, shall be deemed to have forfeited his bond given in virtue of this article; and in action thereon, judgment shall be rendered for plaintiff in damages for four (4) times the amount of revenue found to be due for the year and costs. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16.300, 16.310)  
Sec. 26-28. - Same—Duties of assessor, collector and board of equalization. 
The assessor shall enter an abstract of statements referred to in the preceding section in a book to be provided for that purpose, to be known as the "Manufacturers' and Merchants' Tax Book," which shall be suitably ruled, with columns for the name of the manufacturer or merchant, the amount of his or their statements as returned to the assessor, the valuation of such statements as equalized by the board of equalization, the amount of each kind of tax levied thereon, and such other columns as may be found useful or convenient in practice; and the assessor shall, before the second Monday in July next after the filing of such statements, deliver a copy of such abstract for the year to the director of finance. After the board of equalization has completed the equalization of such statements, the director of finance shall extend on such book all proper taxes at the same rate as assessed for the time on real estate; and he shall, on or before the first day of November thereafter, make out and deliver to the business license administrator a copy of such abstract for the year, and take the receipt of the business license administrator therefor, which receipt shall specify the aggregate amount of taxes due thereon; and the director of finance shall charge the business license administrator with the amount of such taxes and take his receipt therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 16.270)  
Sec. 26-29. - License; bond. 
(a)  Any person applying for license to carry on the business of a manufacturer or merchant, shall, before he shall receive such license, execute a bond to the city, with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties, conditioned that he will, on or before the thirty-first day of December next following, pay to the business license administrator all taxes due on such license, which bond shall be approved by the business license administrator with such approval endorsed thereon, but in no case shall the mayor, councilmembers or city officers be received as sureties on such bond. 
(b)  When any manufacturer or merchant shall commence business after the first Monday in April in any year, he shall execute a bond as provided for in this section, conditioned that he will, on or before the first Monday of August next thereafter, furnish to the city assessor a statement, verified as herein required, of the largest amount of goods, wares and merchandise, or raw material and finished products he has on hand or subject to his control, whether owned by himself or consigned to him for sale, on the first day of every month between the time he commenced business and the first day of August; upon which statement he shall pay the same rate of tax in proportion to the time he has been engaged in business. 
(c)  Forms: 
(1)  The license shall be signed by the business license administrator and attested by the seal of the city, and shall be in the following form: 
The City of Columbia, to all who shall see these presents, Greeting: 
Know ye, that ___________, having on the _____ day of ________, 19___, given bond as a ___________, as required by ordinance, for the payment of all lawful taxes due on ___________ license; therefore the said ___________ is hereby authorized to pursue the business or avocation of a ___________ at any one place within said city from and after this date, until the 31st day of December, 19___. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the City of Columbia to be affixed this _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
	_____
Business License Administrator 
 
(2)  The bond may be in the following form: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we ___________, as principal, ___________ and ___________ as sureties, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Columbia, for the payment on the 31st day of December next following, to the business license administrator thereof, of all taxes which may be then due from the said ___________ upon his license as a ___________ for the twelve months ending on the 31st day of December next; and in default of such payment, to pay all damages and costs which may be adjudged against them by law. 
Given under our hands and seals this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____ (SEAL) 
	_____ (SEAL) 
	_____ (SEAL) 
 
Approved this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____
Business License Administrator 
 
(Code 1964, § 16.320)  
Sec. 26-30. - Penalty for failure to pay tax. 
Every manufacturer or merchant, to whom a license shall have been granted under this article, who has filed a correct statement as herein required, and failed to pay the amount of revenue so owing to the business license administrator, shall be deemed to have forfeited his bond, and in action thereon, judgment shall be rendered for plaintiff in damages for double the amount of such revenue and costs. 
(Code 1964, § 16.330)  
Sec. 26-31. - Suit to be brought on forfeited bonds. 
Upon the forfeiture of any bond as herein provided, it shall be the duty of the business license administrator to report the same to the city counselor, who shall institute suit thereon without delay, against the principal and all the securities, jointly or severally, as may be deemed advisable. 
(Code 1964, § 16.350)  
Sec. 26-32. - Quarterly returns. 
The business license administrator shall make quarterly returns to the director of finance, showing a list of all licenses granted by him and not previously accounted for, showing the name of the party to whom granted, the amount of tax collected on each, and the commencement and termination of each license granted; second, a statement of the bonds taken by him, and the penalty, date and obligors in each bond; and third, the number and kind of bonds on hand. 
(Code 1964, § 16.340)  
Secs. 26-33—26-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CIGARETTES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 15047, § 1, adopted November 18, 1996, repealed §§ 26-46—26-64. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 11.340, 11.350, 11.360, 11.370, 11.380, 11.390, 11.400, 11.410, 11.420, 11.430, 11.440, 11.450, 11.460, 11.470, 11.480, 11.490, 11.500, 11.510, 11.520, 11.530 of the 1964 Code; Ord. No. 9857, § 1, 6-20-83. 
 
Sec. 26-46. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed in this section: 
Cigarette. An item manufactured of tobacco or any substitute therefor, wrapped in paper or any substitute therefor, weighing not to exceed three (3) pounds per one thousand (1,000) cigarettes and which is commonly classified, labeled or advertised as a cigarette. 
Dealer. Any person who purchases cigarettes directly from a cigarette manufacturer and sells cigarettes as a first seller. 
First seller. All persons who make the initial or first sale or distribution of cigarettes within the city. 
Package. The individual package, box or other container in or from which retail sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Retailer. Any person who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes to consumers or to any person for any purpose other than resale. 
Sale. Any transfer of title or possession for a consideration or any agreement therefor. 
Wholesaler. Any person who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes for resale. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-47. - License—Required; application. 
(a)  Every dealer, retailer, wholesaler, manufacturer or other person desiring to engage in the business of selling cigarettes or offering, delivering or displaying cigarettes for sale within the city shall file an application for a license as outlined in section 13-22 of this Code. 
(b)  Every application for a license shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the business services administrator, and shall set forth such information as required. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-48. - Same—Grant of license. 
Upon approval of the application referred to in the preceding section, the business services administrator shall grant and issue to the applicant a license, as herein provided, for each place of business within the city set forth on the application.. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-49. - Same—Display of license. 
Licenses shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the places for which issued. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-50. - Same—Expiration. 
All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year, unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the business services administrator. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-51. - Same—Enforcement. 
The enforcement provisions of section 13-31 of this Code shall apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-52. - License tax—Imposed. 
Every dealer or wholesaler engaged in selling cigarettes or offering or displaying cigarettes for sale within the city shall pay an occupation license tax at the rate of ten cents ($0.10) per package for all cigarettes sold, offered or displayed for sale. The intent of this article is to levy an occupation license tax pursuant to Section 166 of the City Charter and Section 94.110 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-53. - Same—Payment of tax. 
(a)  The tax provided for by section 26-52 shall be paid by the dealer or wholesaler to the business services administrator by the 15th day of the month for the tax due for the preceding month. The canceled check, accompanied by the monthly cigarette tax reporting form, shall be proof of payment. This is the only occupation license tax that cigarette dealers or wholesalers shall pay to the city. No person shall sell or offer or display for sale at retail any cigarettes unless the cigarette tax has been paid. 
(b)  Every dealer or wholesaler shall generate a monthly cigarette sales report detailing the invoice number, customer name, daily purchases and returns of cigarette sales by customer within the city. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-54. - Same—Delinquent penalty. 
For each and every month, or part thereof, the cigarette license tax provided for under this article remains unpaid after it has become due and payable, there shall be added to such tax as a penalty, ten (10) per cent of the amount of such tax for the first month or part thereof the same is unpaid, and for each and every month thereafter two (2) per cent of the amount of such tax shall be added until the same is fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-55. - Rules and regulations—Records. 
(a)  Each dealer, wholesaler and retailer in the city shall procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of each shipment of cigarettes received, the date thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a period of three (3) years subject to the use and inspection of the business services administrator. 
(b)  All dealers, wholesalers and retailers within the city shall maintain and keep for a period of three years such other records of cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the city as may required by the business services administrator. 
(c)  The business services administrator and the administrator's duly authorized representatives are authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records, stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where they are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any such dealer, wholesaler or retailer pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this article. 
(d)  To verify the accuracy of the cigarette tax imposed and assessed by this article, each dealer, retailer and wholesaler shall give the business services administrator and the administrator's duly authorized representatives the means, facilities and opportunity to examine all records pertaining to cigarette sales and all cigarette inventories. 
(e)  The business services administrator is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Cigarette tax reporting information received from the state shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax payments. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-56. - Refunds. 
The business services administrator is authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations including a monthly cigarette tax reporting form with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for refunds and credits. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-57. - Oaths and affidavits. 
The business services administrator, or employees or agents duly designated and authorized by the business services administrator shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-58. - Dealers outside city. 
Any dealer whose place of business is outside the corporate limits of the city shall be bound by all the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 26-59. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8 of this Code; provided that each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 15047, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Secs. 26-60—26-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTELS AND MOTELS 
 
Sec. 26-76. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Gross daily rental receipts. The entire amount of any receipt from the rental of sleeping accommodations by hotels or motels, whether paid in cash, credits or property, excluding all state, federal and local taxes but without any other deduction or exemption therefrom whatsoever. 
Hotel, motel or tourist court. Any structure or building, under one management, which contains rooms furnished for the accommodation or lodging of guests, with or without meals being so provided, and kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation to transient guests or lodgers and having more than twelve (12) bedrooms furnished for the accommodation of such guests. 
Transient guest. A person who occupies a room in a hotel, motel or tourist court for twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or less. Any guest who is contractually obligated to make payment for a period in excess of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days shall be exempt from tax on the first twenty-eight (28) consecutive days of lodging. All charges for lodging to a guest in excess of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days shall be exempt. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1410; Ord. No. 9824, § 1, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 15959, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-77. - Tourism fund established. 
There is hereby established a convention and tourism fund. All taxes levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited to the credit of such fund as hereinafter provided. 
During the period when the tax under section 26-78 of this Code is levied at a rate of five (5) percent, sixty (60) percent of the taxes collected under this article shall be placed in a separate account to be used and expended by the city only for promoting conventions, tourism and economic development in the city. Twenty (20) percent of the taxes collected under this article shall be placed in a separate account to be used and expended by the city only for planning, promoting, operating and constructing tourist attractions and planning and promoting tourist events which have substantial potential to generate overnight visitation. Twenty (20) percent of the taxes collected under this article shall be placed in a separate account to be used and expended by the city for planning and constructing airport terminal improvements. As provided in section 26-78, the rate of tax shall be reduced from five (5) percent to four (4) percent on or before January 1, 2040. 
During the period when the tax under section 26-78 is levied at a rate of four (4) percent, seventy-five (75) percent of the taxes collected under this article shall be placed in a separate account to be used and expended by the city only for promoting conventions, tourism and economic development in the city. Twenty-five (25) percent of the taxes collected under this article shall be placed in a separate account to be used and expended by the city only for planning, promoting, operating and constructing tourist attractions and planning and promoting tourist events which have substantial potential to generate overnight visitation. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1400(A); Ord. No. 16278, § 1, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 21417, § 1, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 22951 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 22951 states, "This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2017."  
Sec. 26-78. - Additional license tax—Levied; remittance. 
(a)  In addition to the license fees levied on hotels and motels pursuant to section 13-20 of this Code there is hereby levied upon every person engaged in the business of operating and carrying on the business of the operation of a motel or hotel, an additional license tax of five (5) percent of the gross daily rental receipts due from or paid by any transient guests at hotels or motels. Such tax shall decrease to four (4) percent on or before January 1, 2040. 
(b)  The said license tax under this section shall be remitted to the city manager or his designee monthly and shall be due and payable on or before the twentieth day of the month for the license tax due for the preceding month. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1400(B), (C); Ord. No. 22951 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 26-79. - Same—Liability; inspection of records; estimate of revenue. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of operating and carrying on the business of the operation of a motel or hotel to file with the city manager, on forms prescribed by him, giving such information that may be necessary to determine the amounts to which the license tax shall apply for all gross daily rental receipts for the monthly period, to be submitted with monthly payments. 
(b)  The city manager or his representatives shall have the right at all reasonable times during business hours to make such examination and inspection of all books and records of the licensee as may be necessary to determine the correctness of such reports. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall make an estimation of the yearly revenue from such license tax to the council as a part of the yearly budget report. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1420)  
Sec. 26-80. - Same—Bond for renewal of business or liquor license when tax delinquent. 
Renewal of the city business license or liquor license of any person who has been delinquent in remitting the additional license tax for or during three (3) or more months during the year preceding renewal shall be conditioned upon the posting of a bond to secure payment of said taxes during the year of renewal. The amount of the bond shall be equal to the amount of license tax payments of such person during the year preceding renewal. The bond shall be subject to the approval of the city counselor. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1430)  
Sec. 26-81. - Same—Delinquent penalty; violations. 
For each and every month, or part thereof, any such license tax provided for under this article shall remain unpaid after the same shall become due and payable, there shall be added to such license tax as a penalty, ten (10) per cent of the amount of such license tax for the first month or part thereof the same is unpaid, and for each and every month thereafter two (2) per cent of the amount of such license tax shall be added until the same is fully paid. If the license tax as provided in this article is not paid by the last day of the month that said tax is due, the city manager or his designee may suspend or revoke the city business license and/or liquor license in accordance with the procedures provided by ordinance for the suspension or revocation of said licenses or said party. Such suspension or revocation shall not relieve the obligation to pay tax due or any future tax to become due. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any person subject to the provisions of this article who fails to file a statement or pay the tax or refuses to permit inspection of his books and records upon request, or who files a false or fraudulent statement, as required by this article or within the time required by this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1440)  
Sec. 26-82. - Convention and visitors department established; duties; director. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the administration of the city, a convention and visitors department for the purpose of promoting conventions and tourism within the city through the use and expenditure of the hotel and motel tax levied by this article. 
(b)  The head of this department shall be a department director of the city and shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager, removable at any time without cause. 
(c)  The director of the convention and visitors department shall be responsible for the promotion of conventions and tourism within the city through his staff and through such other promotions and activities as the city manager shall deem appropriate and for which the city council shall fund by budget appropriation. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1441)  
Sec. 26-83. - Convention and visitors advisory board—Established; composition; qualifications; terms. 
There is hereby established a convention and visitors advisory board. The board shall consist of twelve (12) members. Five (5) members shall be owners or operators of hotels or motels within the city limits. All board members shall have demonstrated by past activities an interest in the convention and tourism business. They shall be appointed and shall serve two-year terms unless sooner removed; provided, however, that the city council may, by initial appointment, stagger the terms of the board members as it may deem appropriate. The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) per cent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the council of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1442; Ord. No. 16297, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 16297, adopted Dec. 20, 1999, reads as follows: 
Two (2) of the members of the convention and visitors advisory board appointed to fill the new positions established in section 26-83 above shall serve terms expiring on September 30, 2000 and three (3) shall serve terms expiring on September 30, 2001.  
Sec. 26-84. - Same—Purpose; duties generally. 
(a)  The board shall be advisors to the city council, city manager and department director on the use of the funds created by the hotel and motel tax herein provided for and on the promotions and activities of the convention and visitors department. 
(b)  The board's advisory role shall be limited to advising the city council and staff; no administrative direction shall be made to the director or any staff member of the convention and visitors department. Any board member interfering with the administration of the department shall forfeit his post upon the affirmative vote of the city council. 
(c)  The board shall annually report to the city council on the: 
(1)  Annual budget of the convention and visitors department. 
(2)  Such projects and promotions as the city council or staff shall refer to the board for review. 
(3)  Such other duties as the city council may assign. 
(d)  The board shall develop and submit to the city council a proposed plan for use of the tax funds that are designated for tourist attractions and events. As part of the annual budget process, the board shall solicit proposals for the use of these tax funds and, after a public review process, make recommendations to the city council on the use of the funds. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1442; Ord. No. 16297, § 1, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 26-85. - Same—Rules of procedure; officers. 
The board shall require a quorum of seven (7) members and the affirmative vote of four (4) of its members to make any recommendation. It shall elect, from its membership, a chair and such other officers as it shall provide. 
(Code 1964, § 11.1443; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Secs. 26-86—26-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC UTILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 26-101—26-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAS 
 
Sec. 26-111. - License tax. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of supplying natural gas service in the city for compensation for any purpose shall pay to the city a license tax in an amount equal to seven (7) per cent of the annual gross receipts of such business. 
(b)  The gas service company shall pay the license tax required in subsection (a) of this section for each month, within thirty (30) days after the last day of each month. 
(c)  The tax required to be paid by this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation tax required of any person engaged in the business described in subsection (a) of this section, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person, nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything other than natural gas service, nor shall the tax herein required exempt any such person from the payment of any other tax which may lawfully be required other than an occupation tax on the business described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The seven (7) per cent license tax on annual gross receipts required in subsection (a) of this section shall not be required and collected on natural gas sold to the city water and light utility for power generation purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 11.210)  
Sec. 26-112. - Annual statement required. 
It is hereby made the duty of every person engaged in the business of supplying gas service for compensation for any purpose to file with the city clerk on the first day of September of each year, a sworn statement of the gross receipts of such person from such business for the twelve (12) months ending on the thirtieth day of June preceding the filing of such statement. The director of finance of the city shall be, and is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statement required and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 11-220)  
Secs. 26-113—26-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TELEPHONE 
 
Sec. 26-121. - Tax levied. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of supplying telephone service in the city for compensation for any purpose shall pay to the city a license tax in an amount equal to seven (7) per cent of the annual gross revenue received by such person for local exchange service from telephones located within the city limits. 
(b)  The telephone company shall pay the license tax required in subsection (a) of this section for each month within thirty (30) days after the last day of each month. 
(c)  The tax required to be paid by this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation tax required of any person engaged in the business described in subsection (a) of this section, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies on the real or personal property belonging to any such person, nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything other than telephone service, nor shall the tax herein required exempt any such person from the payment of any other tax which may be lawfully required other than an occupation tax on the business described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 11.320) 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, Ord. No. 19044, adopted May 15, 2006, was removed from the Code of Ordinances and restored § 26-121 as it appeared prior to that ordinance.  
Sec. 26-122. - Annual statement. 
It is hereby made the duty of every person engaged in the business described in section 26-121 to file with the city clerk on the first day of September of each year a sworn statement of the gross receipts of such person from such business for the twelve (12) months ending on the thirtieth day of June preceding the filing of such statement. The director of finance of the city shall be, and is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statement required, and for that purpose shall have access at all times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 11.330) 
Note— See editor's note to § 26-121.  
Secs. 26-123—26-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRIC 
 
Sec. 26-131. - License tax. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of supplying electric service in the city for compensation for any purpose shall pay to the city a license tax in an amount equal to seven (7) per cent of the annual gross receipts of such business. 
(b)  The electric service company shall pay the license tax required in subsection (a) of this section for each month, within thirty (30) days after the last day of each month. 
(c)  The tax required to be paid by this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation tax required of any person engaged in the business described in subsection (a) of this section, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person, nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything other than electric service, nor shall the tax herein required exempt any such person from the payment of any other tax which may lawfully be required other than an occupation tax on the business described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the water and light department of the city. 
(e)  The seven (7) per cent license tax on annual gross receipts required in subsection (a) of this section shall not be required and collected on sales of bulk electricity to the water and light department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11226, § 1, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 26-132. - Annual statement required. 
It is hereby made the duty of every person engaged in the business of supplying electric service for compensation for any purpose who is subject to the gross receipts license tax established in section 26-131 to file with the city clerk on the first day of September of each year, a sworn statement of the gross receipts of such person from such business for the twelve (12) months ending on the thirtieth day of June preceding the filing of such statement. The director of finance of the city shall be, and is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statement required and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11226, § 1, 9-15-86)  
Secs. 26-133—26-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT CHARGE 
 
Sec. 26-150. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this article: 
New construction includes additions to existing structures which increase square footage but does not include the rebuilding, remodeling or alteration of existing structures which does not increase square footage of existing structures. 
Person means any "person," as defined in chapter 1 of this Code, who is required to obtain a building permit pursuant to this Code. 
Total floor area means the floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls of the building under consideration, including the basement floor area, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 26-151. - Imposition of charge. 
Every person issued a building permit for new construction shall pay a development charge of fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of total floor area of new construction. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 17437, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 18789, § 1, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 19679, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20416, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 26-152. - Time of payment. 
The development charge shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 26-153. - Adjustments. 
It shall be the duty of the person issued a building permit to apply for an amended building permit if the total floor area of new construction of a structure exceeds the amount stated in the building permit application. The application for an amended building permit shall be made prior to final inspection. If a building permit is amended to increase the total floor area of new construction, an additional development charge shall be paid for the increased area. The additional development charge shall be paid at or before the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. If a building permit is amended to decrease the total floor area of new construction, a proportionate refund of the development charge paid shall be made to the person issued the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 26-154. - Administration. 
The development charge shall be paid to the community development department, division of building and site development. The division shall promptly forward all development charge receipts to the finance department to be deposited in a special fund and administered in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 21095, § 11, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 26-155. - Use of development charge revenue. 
All revenue received from the development charge shall be used solely for construction of collector and arterial streets. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 26-156. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article. The general penalty and continuing violations provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 12175, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 26-157—26-168. - Reserved  
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER DEVELOPMENT CHARGE 
 
Sec. 26-169. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this article: 
New construction includes additions to existing structures which increase square footage but does not include the rebuilding, remodeling or alteration of existing structures which does not increase square footage of existing structures. 
Person means any person, as defined in chapter 1 of this code, who is required to obtain a building permit pursuant to this code. 
Total floor area includes the floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls of a building, including the basement floor area, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features. Total floor area also includes the entire floor area of carports, decks and other structures which do not have outside walls and which cannot be lawfully constructed without a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-170. - Imposition of charge. 
Every person issued a building permit for new construction shall pay a stormwater development charge in accordance with the following table: 
Category 	Rate per Square Foot of 
Total Floor Area of New 
Construction 
Single-family residences; duplexes ..... 	 9 cents 
Multiple-family buildings; offices; 
schools; churches ..... 	16 cents 
Commercial; industrial; use categories 
not listed above ..... 	19.5 cents 
 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-171. - Time of payment. 
The stormwater development charge shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-172. - Exemption for providing stormwater runoff control. 
The stormwater development charge shall not be imposed on any person issued a building permit for new construction on property served by a stormwater detention facility which was privately constructed in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12A and which is privately maintained. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-173. - Adjustments. 
It shall be the duty of the person issued a building permit to apply for an amended building permit if the total floor area of new construction of a structure exceeds the amount stated in the building permit application. The application for an amended building permit shall be made prior to final inspection. If a building permit is amended to increase the total floor area of new construction, an additional stormwater development charge shall be paid for the increased area. The additional stormwater development charge shall be paid at or before the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. If a building permit is amended to decrease the total floor area of new construction, a proportionate refund of the stormwater development charge paid shall be made to the person issued the building permit. If the person issued a building permit decides not to build the structure, upon application, the stormwater development charge shall be refunded and the building permit, if it has not expired, shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-174. - Administration. 
The stormwater development charge shall be paid to the community development department, division of building and site development. The division shall promptly forward all stormwater development charge receipts to the finance department to be deposited in the stormwater utility fund. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 21095, § 11, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 26-175. - Use of stormwater development charge revenue. 
All revenue received from the stormwater development charge shall be used solely for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Sec. 26-176. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article. The general penalty and continuing violations provisions of chapter 1 of this code apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 13591 § 1, 2-15-93)  
Chapter 27 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; airport, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; civil defense, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; franchise entity regulation of video service providers, Ch. 10; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 27-1. - Director of utilities—Appointment and qualifications. 
The city manager shall appoint a director of utilities, who shall be trained and experienced in the operation and management of public utilities and qualified to perform the duties required by the charter and ordinances of the city. 
( Ord. No. 22578, § 6, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 27-2. - Director of utilities—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of utilities shall also serve as the director of the water and light department and shall have the following additional duties: 
(1)  The collection and disposal of garbage, ashes and refuse; 
(2)  The provision of sanitary sewer services, disposal and treatment of sewage; 
(3)  The construction and maintenance of stormwater management and drainage facilities; and 
(4)  The making and keeping of records of location, direction, depth and connector of all underground equipment and facilities. 
( Ord. No. 22578, § 6, 9-21-15 )  
Secs. 27-3—27-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ACCOUNTS AND BILLING 
 
Sec. 27-16. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Billing period. The utility usage period of thirty (30) days, except for initial or final bills. 
Customer. A purchaser of utility service. 
Cycle billing. A system employed which results in the rendition of bills for utility service to various customers on different days of any calendar month. 
Delinquent account. A bill remaining unpaid by a customer at least twenty (20) days from rendition of the bill by the department. 
Department. A department of finance for the city. 
Director. The director of the department of finance for the city. 
Discontinuance of service. A cessation of utility service to a customer not directly requesting termination. 
Estimated bill. A bill for utility services calculated using one or more estimated meter readings for the billing period. 
Fuel adjustment clause. The automatic adjustment procedure which recognizes variations in the cost of fuel for electric generation or purchased power. 
In dispute. Any matter regarding a customer's utility service which is the subject of a pending disagreement, or complaint by the customer. 
Non-summer. The period from October 1 through May 31. 
Rendition of bill by the city. The actual date on which the bill was mailed by the city. 
Residential service or use. The use of electricity and/or water for household purposes and/or the provision of sewer and/or refuse services. 
Settlement agreement. An agreement between a customer and the city purporting to resolve any matter in dispute between the parties, or which provides for the payment of monies not in dispute over a reasonable period of time. 
Summer. The period from June 1 through September 30 of each year. 
Summer surcharge. An amount calculated, for summer water rates by averaging the daily use during the billing period and then excluding from the surcharge calculation all days not falling within the summer as defined above and applying the surcharge rate to the average daily water use amount during the remaining days which exceeds one hundred twenty (120) percent of the customer's average monthly use during the months of January, February and March after that monthly average has been reduced to a daily average for use in the surcharge calculation for the current billing period. 
Summer water usage. All water consumption occurring during summer as defined in this section. 
Termination of service. A cessation of utility service request by the customer. 
Utility services. Water, electric, sewage or refuse collection service, or any combination thereof. 
Winter average consumption. The average monthly water use during the immediate preceding billing periods of January, February and March, provided, however, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  If a new customer account has no prior winter average consumption history at the property address, the winter average consumption shall be calculated based upon usage of the prior customer account at the property address to which the winter average applies until the new customer establishes a winter average consumption. 
(b)  If the property address of the new account has no winter average consumption in the immediate preceding billing periods of January, February and March, then the winter average consumption for the customer account at that property address shall be set at the winter average consumption for the customer's service class. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no residential customer shall be assigned a winter average consumption of less than four hundred (400) cubic feet (4 ccf) per month. 
(Code 1964, § 15.800; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 23874 , § 1, 5-20-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-17. - Application for utility service. 
Customers shall apply for utility service at a location designated by the city manager as the utilities accounts and billing office by submitting their name and address, the kind of service requested, and the location to be served, by making the necessary deposits, paying the service initiation fee, paying any required connection fees and completing the customer service agreement. No customer shall be refused service due to race, sex, creed, national origin, marital status, age, number of dependents, source of income, or place of residence in the service area. 
(Code 1964, § 15.810)  
Sec. 27-18. - Service fees. 
(a)  Service initiation fee. Each customer shall be charged a service initiation fee of six dollars ($6.00). 
(b)  Transfer fee. All customers requesting transfers of services to a new location will be charged a five dollar ($5.00) fee. 
(c)  Disconnect/reconnect fees: 
(1)  A fee shall be charged to a customer's account when a worker is dispatched to disconnect the customer's water or electric service for nonpayment. The fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for residential customers and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all other customers. 
(2)  An additional reconnection fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be charged to a residential customer's account, and an additional reconnection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all other customers, when the customer requests and receives same day reconnection service or requests and receives reconnection service on a weekend, a city holiday or any other time outside the regular working hours of the water and electric utilities. 
(3)  A fee equal to the actual costs of the city shall be charged to all accounts when it is necessary to utilize city forces to physically disconnect sewer services. Reconnection charges shall also be levied against the affected account on the basis of the actual costs of reconnection. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charges. Minimum monthly charges established in this Code for utility services shall be assessed for each location where the utility service is provided. Minimum monthly charges for water services and fixed monthly customer charges for electric services and fixed monthly service charges for sewage service shall be prorated based on the number of days of service received when a customer receives service at a location for less than a complete billing period. 
(e)  Additional charge for KYZ pulse circuit board. If a large or small general service customer requests the installation of a KYZ pulse circuit board into the electric meter for customer's sole use, the customer shall pay a nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars ($155.00) for the installation of the KYZ pulse circuit board. 
(Code 1964, § 15.820; Ord. No. 15144, § 1, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 15618, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 18218, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 21431, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22322 , § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 22787 states, "The new rates established in this ordinance shall be applied to utility bills beginning with the first complete cycle billed after April 30, 2016."  
Sec. 27-19. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  The city shall render a bill once during each billing period to every customer in accordance with the applicable rate schedule. 
(b)  The manner of furnishing the statement shall be as determined by the finance director, provided each customer is billed in a reasonable, predictable manner. 
(c)  The city may divide the service area into sections, and/or the customers into various classes for the purpose of rendering statements. Such sections or classes may be changed from time to time to meet the operating requirements of the city. Such sections or classes are for the sole purpose of establishing a billing rotation and shall have no affect on the amount or rate of billing. 
(d)  Each billing statement rendered by the city shall be computed on the actual usage during the billing period except as follows: 
(1)  The city reserves the right to render a bill based on estimated usage for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  When extreme weather conditions, emergencies, or work stoppages prevent actual meter readings. 
b.  When a customer fails to provide safe and reasonable access to the customer's premises for the purpose of reading the meter. 
c.  As provided for by the ordinance establishing the service. 
d.  Should the meter be damaged or tampered with in any manner which may render its readings inaccurate. 
(2)  Under no circumstances will the city render a bill based on an estimate as a customer's initial, or final bill of service. 
(3)  When issuing an estimated bill, the city shall: 
a.  Maintain accurate records of the reasons therefor and efforts made to secure an actual reading. 
b.  Clearly and conspicuously note on the bill that it is based on estimated usage. 
c.  Should the city underestimate a customer's actual usage, the customer will be given the opportunity, if requested, to make payment in installments. 
(e)  All service bills shall be due and payable in full twenty (20) days from the date the bill was mailed, after which they shall be considered delinquent. If the last day for remittance falls upon a weekend or holiday, or any other day when the offices of the department, regularly used for the payment of customer bills, are not open to the general public, the final payment date shall be extended through to the close of the next business day. The date of payment for remittance through the mail shall be the date on which the department receives the remittance. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the city shall assess late charges against all delinquent accounts. If a customer's bill is not paid in full by the date payment is due, the bill for the next billing period shall include a late charge equal to three (3) percent of the amount remaining unpaid on the due date of the preceding billing period. Late charges shall not be assessed against the balance due on a delinquent account if the customer is current on the payments required by a settlement agreement for the account. Late charges shall not be assessed against the balance due on a delinquent account if the service has been disconnected. 
(g)  Every bill for utility service shall clearly state: 
(1)  Present and previous meter readings for water and electric service as well as number of service days. 
(2)  Fuel adjustment factor, except when value is zero. 
(3)  Consumption of water and electric services during billing period. 
(4)  Billing date. 
(5)  Water and electric meter numbers. 
(6)  Any previous balance. 
(7)  Amount of in lieu of gross receipts tax and sales tax. 
(8)  Date when bill will be considered delinquent. 
(9)  Amount due for utility charges. 
(10)  Current amount due and total bill. 
(11)  Tax and rate classes. 
(12)  The address and/or phone numbers where information may be obtained on utility bills. 
(h)  The department may include charges for special services together with utility charges on the same bill if the charges for special services are designated clearly and separately from utility charges. 
(i)  If partial payment is made, the department shall first credit all payments to the balance outstanding for utility service except for customers who have energy efficiency loans as authorized by section 27-167 of this code which are eligible for inclusion on the utility bill and subject to utility shut-off for nonpayment. In such event, a partial payment will be first credited to any delinquent energy efficiency loan payments. 
(j)  Whenever a customer shall order his services terminated or otherwise cease to be a customer, all amounts owed by the customer to the city shall immediately become due. 
(k)  Bills for accounts to which services have been terminated or discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days shall be considered delinquent thirty (30) days after the final billing date. 
Should the account remain outstanding for a period of sixty (60) days, the account will be submitted to a collection agency for collection. All such collection costs, as well as any costs pertaining to adjudication, will be borne by the debtor. 
(l)  If, through no fault of the residential customer, the city fails to initiate billing in a timely manner or under-bills the residential customer, the residential customer shall not be billed an additional amount for any utility services received more than six (6) months before the current billing cycle. 
(m)  Customers paying by credit card shall be assessed a service fee to be determined by the finance director. 
(Code 1964, § 15.830; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 19550, § 2, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 21250, § 1, 3-5-12; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17)  
Sec. 27-20. - Security deposits. 
(a)  Each new customer shall be required to make a security deposit as a condition of service. 
(1)  Customers requesting services to a one-family dwelling or one-family unit of a larger residential building shall deposit the following amounts for receiving utility services: 
a.  Electrical service ..... $75.00 
b.  Water service ..... 25.00 
c.  Sewer service ..... 45.00 
d.  Refuse service ..... 20.00 
At the discretion of the finance director, the security deposit may be waived upon the customer establishing one (1) year (twelve (12) consecutive months) good credit or furnishing a letter of good credit from the customer's previous utility provider. The finance director will maintain a written policy that defines good credit. 
(2)  When more than one of the above services is requested, the amount of the deposit shall be the total amount of the fees shown for the services requested. The finance director may also increase security deposits for residential accounts to minimize the city's risks where appropriate. 
(b)  A residential landlord requesting services for a rental unit must provide proof of a valid certificate of compliance from the community development department for each property. The landlord shall make a standard security deposit for each rental unit for which the landlord has utility services with the city at the rates noted in section 27-20(a)(1), or may apply to participate in the Landlord Reversion Program (LLRP) as follows: 
(1)  Residential landlord participation in the Landlord Reversion Program (LLRP) requires completion of the LLRP application and written acknowledgement of the terms of the agreement as defined by the finance director. The maximum amount of cash security deposits a residential landlord shall be required to make, regardless as to the number of rental units, is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). At the discretion of the finance director, the customer may request the deposit be waived upon the customer establishing three (3) years (thirty-six (36) consecutive months) of good credit and timely payments with the City of Columbia. The finance director will maintain a written policy that defines "good credit." 
(c)  In order for customers to obtain service to a commercial establishment, a valid business license must be issued for that property address for any use other than single-family residential use, they shall be required to meet one (1) or both of the following provisions: 
(1)  Make a deposit based on twice the estimated amount of thirty (30) days' bill for those services requested for new accounts, and be adjusted to twice the actual average as necessary. The finance director may also increase security deposits for commercial accounts to minimize the city's risks where appropriate. 
(2)  Furnish equivalent bond or letter of credit. 
At the discretion of the finance director, commercial security deposits may be waived upon the commercial customer having established a minimum of three (3) years' continuous timely payments. 
(d)  Service deposits may be transferred or applied to a new residence or business location if a customer moves. Adjustment shall be made if the amount of deposit is inadequate or excessive. 
(e)  The department may require an additional security deposit as a condition of continued service if, in an unauthorized manner, the customer interferes with or diverts the service of the utility situated on or about or delivered to the customer's premises. The department may require a signed application for service and additional security deposit from any customer giving false information to access City of Columbia Utility Services. 
(f)  No additional security deposit shall be required by the department on the basis of the customer's age, sex, race, creed, national origin, marital status, number of dependents, source of income, or geographical area of residence. 
(g)  Upon termination of service, the deposit shall be credited to the final bill and the balance, if any, shall be returned to the customer. 
(h)  At the discretion of the finance director, the security deposit may be waived upon the customer establishing one (1) year (twelve (12) consecutive months) good credit or furnishing a letter of good credit from the customer's previous utility provider. The finance director will maintain a written policy that defines good credit. Should the deposit be credited to a customer's account and the customer's services discontinued subsequently due to nonpayment, the customer will be required to make the proper security deposits in addition to other charges and fees as a requisite for resumption of services. 
(i)  The department shall maintain a record of all deposits received from customers, showing the name of each customer, the location of the premises occupied by the customer at the time the deposit was required and each successive location while the deposit is retained, and the date and amount of deposit. 
(j)  Each customer posting a security deposit shall receive in writing at the time of tender of deposit receipts as evidence thereof, which, where applicable, contains the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name of customer. 
(2)  Place of payment. 
(3)  Date of payment. 
(4)  Amount of payment for fees and deposits. 
In addition, each customer shall sign a service agreement which states the terms and conditions governing the retention, payment and return of deposits. 
(k)  The department shall apply deposit standards uniformly as a condition of utility service to all customers. 
(Code 1964, § 15.840; Ord. No. 9786, § 1, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 10010, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 13243, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 18513, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 21431, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22265, § 1, 11-3-14 )  
Sec. 27-21. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  No person, except authorized employees of the city, shall disconnect any meter, connect to any meter, or disturb the service lines of any utility without written authorized permission. In the event the city shall discover evidence of tampering with any electric meter, lead in wire from the meter, any water meter, or lines used for water or sewage distribution, or other such line of the utility having the probable effect of rendering actual meter readings inaccurate, or to receive the service of the utility without proper payments, the city shall have the right to discontinue utility service to the customer and remove its property from the customer's premises. In addition, the water and light director may cause service to be discontinued due to: 
(1)  Violation of electric codes (per recommendation of community development, inspection division); 
(2)  Violation of health ordinance (per recommendation of health department); 
(3)  Request of fire department due to fires or fire danger; 
(4)  Request from community development because of unsafe condition of structure or dwelling; 
provided, however, that the city may determine to continue service or to reconnect service upon compliance with city codes and/or payment by the customer whose demand, use or bill was affected by such tampering, of the following, or any combination thereof, fees or charges at the city's election as determined by the city: 
(1)  The amount of any city revenue loss attributable to such tampering, with such amount loss determined by an estimate made by the water and light director or his/her designee; 
(2)  Cash deposit as determined by the director of finance or his/her designee; provided, however, that requests for such deposits shall be made only in the event that the customer does not currently have on file with the city a cash deposit in an appropriate amount; and 
(3)  The actual expenses incurred by the city in replacing and/or repairing the meter, service lines or wires, the making of any connection, and any bookkeeping and clerical expenses incurred in the preparation of the required billing. 
Prior to any service disconnection for nonpayment, the city shall give five (5) working days' written notice of such intent by mail to the customer at his billing address. Such notice shall give a telephone number and address at which such discontinuance may be contested. The finance director is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to establish an administrative procedure to handle such contests. 
(b)  The city may discontinue service to a customer for any legitimate business reason including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Nonpayment of a delinquent account. 
(2)  Failure to post required security deposit. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a settlement agreement relating to a current or prior utility account. 
(4)  Refusal to grant access at reasonable times to equipment installed upon the premises of the customer for the purpose of inspection, meter reading, maintenance or replacement: 
a.  If access is not provided within fifteen (15) days of initial notice, a second notice will be delivered at the customer's address, of intent to discontinue service unless reasonable access is provided within three (3) business days from the date of the second notice. 
b.  Following the expiration of three (3) business days, the account shall be discontinued and legal proceedings undertaken to recover the city's equipment. 
(5)  Failure of an applicant to use applicant's correct name when applying for utility service. 
(c)  If a customer fails to inform the department of his intent to terminate utility services, or fails to respond to a delinquent notice, services may be discontinued and that customer's service deposits utilized as payment of any delinquent accounts. The finance director shall establish a standard procedure for distribution of deposits to delinquent accounts, which procedure shall be approved by the city manager. Any portion of the service deposits remaining after all amounts owed for any service have been deducted shall be transferred to the water and light fund. Any person claiming such money, after transfer, may make proof of claim to the council and the transferred amount shall be paid him, without interest, provided such claim has not been barred by limitation under the laws. 
(d)  The city may discontinue service between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the date specified on the discontinuance notice, or within a reasonable time thereafter. Service shall not be discontinued on a day when the offices of the department are not available to the public for the purpose of reconnecting discontinued service. Service shall not be discontinued pursuant to nonpayment of a delinquent account within five (5) working days after an account becomes delinquent. Notice of discontinuance must be served five (5) working days prior to discontinuance. Service of notice is complete upon mailing. The department shall maintain an accurate record of the date of mailing. 
(e)  A notice of discontinuance shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the customer. 
(2)  Clear and concise statement of the reason for the proposed discontinuance, and cost of reconnection. 
(3)  Date on, or after which service shall be discontinued unless action is taken by the customer. 
(4)  Terms under which discontinuance may be avoided by the customer. 
(5)  The telephone number, during working hours and after hours, where inquiry/complaint may be made. 
(f)  Immediately preceding the discontinuance of service, the employee of the city designated to perform such function shall make a reasonable effort to contact and identify himself to the customer or responsible person then upon the premises stating action taken, reason for action, and phone numbers where inquiries may be made. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the city shall postpone the discontinuance of utility service to a residential customer for a time not in excess of twenty-one (21) days if the discontinuance will aggravate an existent medical emergency of the customer, a member of his/her family or other permanent resident of the premises where service is rendered. 
(h)  Services to residences will not be disconnected when the temperature is thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or less or when the temperature exceeds ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit; effort will be made to determine the health status of the person(s) residing on the premises before proceeding with disconnection. 
(i)  If the department is advised, prior to the date of discontinuance that any portion of bill is in dispute, the department shall record the date, place and time the complaint was made, and enter into the resolution process with the customer. 
(1)  The complaint may be initiated in person, by phone, or in writing. 
(2)  The department, in attempting to resolve the dispute in a mutually satisfactory manner, may employ those methods set forth by the finance director in the customer complaints process. 
(j)  Failure of the customer to enter into negotiation with the department to resolve a dispute or enter into a settlement agreement shall constitute a waiver of the customer's right to continuance of service and the city may then proceed to discontinue service as provided. 
(k)  When a complaint is made, the customer shall make payment of the nondisputed amount; if customer fails to make payment of the nondisputed amount within three (3) working days from the date of registering the complaint, the customer shall waive his right to continuance of service and discontinuance of service may proceed. 
(l)  Upon the customer's request, the city shall restore service promptly if the cause for discontinuance of service has been eliminated, applicable restoration charges paid and, if required, satisfactory credit arrangements have been made. At all times every effort shall be made to restore services upon the day restoration is requested, and in any event restoration shall be made no later than the day following the request. 
(Code 1964, § 15.860, Ord. No. 13243, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 21095, § 12, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 27-22. - Customer complaint procedure. 
(a)  The department shall cause to be established procedures which will ensure the prompt, efficient and thorough receipt, investigation and, where possible, resolution of all customer inquiries, service requests and complaints regarding residential utility service and charges. 
(b)  The department shall establish personnel procedures which, as a minimum, ensure that: 
(1)  Qualified personnel shall be available and prepared at all times during normal business hours to receive and respond to all customer inquiries, service requests, and complaints. The department shall make reasonable arrangements to ensure that customers unable to communicate in the English language receive assistance. 
(2)  Qualified personnel shall be available during normal business hours to receive and initiate response to customer contacts regarding any discontinuance of service or emergency condition. 
(3)  Qualified personnel responsible for and authorized to enter into such written agreements on behalf of the city shall be available at all times during normal business hours to respond to customer inquiries and complaints. 
(c)  The city shall prepare, in written form, information summarizing the responsibilities and rights of the city and its customers. Such information shall be displayed, and made available upon request at the department's utilities accounts and billing collection area, and issued to each new customer. The information shall concern, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Billing and estimated billing procedures. 
(2)  Methods for customer verification of billing accuracy. 
(3)  Explanation of operation of fuel adjustment clauses. 
(4)  Customer payment requirements and procedures. 
(5)  Security deposit requirements. 
(6)  Discontinuance and reconnection of services. 
(7)  Inquiry, service and complaint procedures. 
(8)  Procedure whereby a customer may avoid discontinuance of service during an extended period of absence. 
(d)  The city shall maintain records on each of its customers, containing the following information: 
(1)  The customer's payment performance in relation to due dates. 
(2)  The number and general nature of complaints registered. 
(3)  The number of settlement agreements that were made by the department and a synopsis of the terms, conditions and standards upon which the agreements were made. 
(4)  Actual number of discontinuances of service and number of reconnections. 
(5)  Refund of security deposits. 
(Code 1964, § 15.850)  
Sec. 27-23. - Settlement agreements. 
(a)  When the director and a customer arrive at a mutually satisfactory settlement of any disputed amount, or the customer does not dispute liability to the utility but claims inability to pay the outstanding bill in full, the director and the customer may enter into a written settlement agreement. The decision to enter into a settlement shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(b)  If a customer is in compliance with the terms and conditions of a settlement agreement, service shall not be discontinued for having a delinquent account. 
(c)  If the customer fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a settlement agreement, service may be discontinued. 
(d)  If a customer complaint or dispute involves the same question or issue presented in a prior complain or dispute, the director may utilize the facts found in the prior complaint or dispute in resolving the current dispute. 
(Code 1964, § 15.870; Ord. No. 16851, § 1, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 27-24. - Resale of utility services. 
(a)  No customer shall sell at a profit, or offer for sale at a profit any utility service purchased for his or her sole use from the city. 
(b)  Any customer wishing to resell a utility service, shall do so only after having first obtained authorization from the city council. 
(c)  Any customer reselling utility service, regardless of whether the utility service so resold is metered or not, shall from time to time as determined by the city manager, furnish evidence that such resale is in compliance with all rules relating to such. 
(d)  Any customer wishing to resell utility service may be required, as determined by the city, to install submeters where required and maintain records at such customer's expense, for the purpose of determining compliance with this section. 
(Code 1964, § 15.880)  
Sec. 27-25. - CASH program. 
(a)  The CASH program is established to assist eligible senior citizens and disabled persons in paying utility bills and to assist eligible senior citizens in making utility related emergency home repairs. 
(b)  City utility customers may specify amounts they wish to contribute to the CASH program and have such amounts charged on their utility bills. Contributions to the CASH program shall be accounted for separately. 
(c)  To be eligible to receive assistance as a senior citizen, an individual must be a least sixty (60) years old. To be eligible to receive assistance as a disabled person, an individual either must be currently receiving income based on disability status (for example social security disability payments) or must be totally unable to work because of a physical or mental impairment as documented by a health care professional. 
(d)  An individual must meet the following guidelines to be eligible to receive assistance under the CASH program: 
(1)  The individual must be a city electric utility customer and the utility account must be in the individual's name. 
(2)  The individual's household income must be at or below one hundred fifty (150) percent of the federal government's poverty guidelines. 
(3)  The individual's other resources must be exhausted. 
(e)  Assistance in paying utility bills is subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The individual seeking assistance must be without utility service or the individual's utility service must be due for disconnection. 
(2)  Payments may be made only for electric, water, sewer or utility deposit. Payments for utility deposits shall be made no more than one (1) time per household and shall be for a maximum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Payments shall not be made for fees of any kind including disconnection fees and reconnection fees. 
(3)  No more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be paid in assistance for any individual in any twelve (12) month period. 
(4)  Disabled individuals are only eligible for the amount of assistance needed to avoid disconnection, for reconnection or for a deposit. Senior citizens may apply for the annual maximum amount regardless of their account status. 
(f)  Determinations of eligibility and the amount of assistance to be granted to applicants shall be made by the director of health services or the director's designee, whose determination shall be final. 
(g)  The director of health services is authorized to establish rules and regulations implementing the CASH program. 
(Ord. No. 16630, § 1, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 18270, § 1, 10-4-04)  
Sec. 27-26. - HELP program. 
(a)  The HELP program is established to assist eligible families with children in paying utility bills. 
(b)  City utility customers may specify amounts they wish to contribute to the HELP program and have such amounts charged on their utility bills. Contributions to the HELP program shall be accounted for separately. 
(c)  An individual must meet the following guidelines to be eligible to receive assistance under the HELP program: 
(1)  The individual must be a city electric utility customer and the utility account must be in the individual's name. 
(2)  The individual's household income must be at or below one hundred fifty (150) percent of the federal government's poverty guidelines. 
(3)  The individual's other resources must be exhausted. 
(4)  The individual must be the parent or guardian of a child who is eighteen (18) years of age or younger, in the physical and legal custody of the individual and in school (unless the child is unable to attend school because of age or disability). 
(d)  Assistance in paying utility bills is subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The individual seeking assistance must be without utility service or the individual's utility service must be due for disconnection. 
(2)  An individual is eligible to receive only the amount of assistance needed to avoid disconnection, for reconnection or for a deposit. Payments for utility deposits shall be made no more than one (1) time per household and shall be for a maximum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Payments shall not be made for fees of any kind including disconnection fees and reconnection fees. Heating and cooling bills shall have priority over other types of utility bills. 
(3)  No more than two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00) shall be paid in assistance for any individual in any twelve (12) month period. Assistance is available one (1) time per twelve (12) month period. There is a life time limit of five (5) times for assistance under the HELP program. 
(e)  Determinations of eligibility and the amount of assistance to be granted to applicants shall be made by the director of health services or the director's designee, whose determination shall be final. 
(f)  The director of health services is authorized to establish rules and regulations implementing the HELP program. 
(Ord. No. 16630, § 1, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 18270, § 1, 10-4-04)  
Sec. 27-27. - Columbia Trust. 
(a)  City utility customers may specify amounts they wish to contribute to the Columbia Trust and have such amounts charged on their monthly utility bills. Utility customers may specify that their contributions be made to any of the following Columbia Trust accounts: 
(1)  Community arts programming. 
(2)  Community beautification. 
(3)  Youth recreation scholarships. 
(4)  Public health. 
(5)  Columbia fire department. 
(6)  Columbia police department. 
(b)  Contributions made to the Columbia Trust through the utility checkoff program shall be placed in the account specified by the donor. Funds in each of these accounts shall be spent only on programs approved by the city council that are for the purpose indicated by the name of the account. 
(c)  The minimum amount that a utility customer may contribute to a Columbia Trust account through the utility checkoff program is one dollar ($1.00) per month. 
(d)  The director of finance is authorized to establish rules and regulations implementing the Columbia Trust utility checkoff program. 
(Ord. No. 16850, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 20309, § 1, 6-15-09)  
Secs. 27-28—27-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND LIGHT SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Required connection to water and sewer system under minimum properties standards code, § 6-145. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-36. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words or terms are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Community food garden. A collectively gardened area located on a lot or lots owned or leased by a property owner's association, homeowner's association, tenant's association, non-profit organization, public agency, or other functionally equivalent entity, which is primarily intended for the purpose of cultivation of fruits and vegetables by individuals, either in individual garden plots or communally, and for noncommercial purposes. Under no circumstances may food grown and cultivated in a community food garden be sold or exchanged for consideration. The designation of an account as a community food garden is subject to the approval of the director upon application by the customer. All community food garden areas shall be separately metered and any water used by the customer shall be solely for the purpose of the cultivation of fruits and vegetables within the designated community food garden area. The director may remove the designation of community food garden from any customer account that does not meet this definition. 
Customer. The corporation, association, or individual legally using water or electricity supplied by the department. 
Customer-generator. A consumer of electric energy who purchases electric energy from the city and is the owner of a qualified net metering unit. 
Department. The Water and Light Department of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Director. The director of the water and light department of the city, or his authorized representative. 
Easement. The land legally designated for the installation and maintenance of water, electric or other utility lines necessary to properly serve the public with utility services. 
Lot. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision, or parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision plat of record, survey map, or by metes and bounds description. 
Meter. A device installed at each customer's premises for the purpose of measuring the quantity of water or electricity used. 
Net energy metering. The measurement of the amount of electric energy supplied to a customer-generator by the department and the measurement of the electric energy generated by a customer-generator that is delivered to the local distribution system at the same point of interconnection. 
Plan. A map of a subdivision showing the location, arrangement and size of lots, streets, easements, and other rights-of-way. 
Property. A lot, tract, or other parcel of land. 
Property owner. An individual, corporation or association holding legal title or otherwise having legal control of a property. 
Qualified net metering unit. An electric generation unit which: 
(a)  Is owned by a customer-generator. 
(b)  Is a hydrogen fuel cell or is powered by sun, wind or biomass. 
(c)  Has an electrical generating system with a capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kilowatts (kW). 
(d)  Is located on premises that are owned, operated, leased or otherwise controlled by the customer-generator. 
(e)  Is interconnected and operates in parallel and in synchronization with the electric system. 
(f)  Is intended primarily to offset part or all of the customer-generator's own electrical energy requirements. 
Renewable energy credit, certificate or attribute (REC). A tradable certificate, credit, or attribute that is either certified by an entity approved as an acceptable authority by the Public Service Commission, or as validated through the Public Service Commission's approved REC tracking system, or a generator's attestation. An REC must be validated through an attestation signed by an authorized individual of the company owning the renewable resource and shall contain the name and address of the generator, the type of renewable energy resource technology, and the time and date of the generation. An REC represents that one (1) megawatt-hour of electricity has been generated from renewable energy sources. An REC includes, but is not limited to, solar renewable energy credits. An REC expires three (3) years from the date the electricity associated with that REC was generated. 
Resale service. Electrical service used by the customer for resale to another at a profit or at a cost related to the amount of usage. 
Residential dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof with kitchen facilities, designated or used for residential occupancy, including but not limited to, such units when constituting or a part of one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and apartment hotels, but not hotels or motels, except where the units are occupied by the same individual or group of individuals for thirty (30) days or more. 
Right-of-way. A street or roadway dedicated to the city or to the State of Missouri. 
Service area. All of the city limits and any other areas where the department furnishes water and/or electric service. 
Standby service. Electrical service which is not used as the primary source of energy for a specific function or purpose but which is used only as a reserve or as a backup to the primary source of energy for the specific function or purpose. 
Subdivision. A parcel of land divided into two (2) or more lots or other divisions of land. 
Submeter. A meter that is used in series with another meter for the purpose of measuring a quantity of water or electricity a second time. 
Supplementary service. Electrical service which is not used as the primary source of energy for a specific function or purpose but which is used as a supplement to the primary source of energy, either routinely or on an emergency basis, for the specific function or purpose. 
Value of electric energy. The average cost per kWh of the energy component of applicable kWh rates. This value will be based on purchased energy, including charge for energy, transmission, losses, and any fuel adjustments per kWh and will include fuel costs for energy generated at department facilities. Value of electric energy does not include capacity charges, distribution expenses, or other overhead expenses which may be part of applicable kWh rates. 
Water and electric light works. All the physical property of the city including wells, pumping plants, pipe lines, generating plants, substations, transmission lines, distribution lines, buildings, and all other equipment, apparatus and property used for the sole purpose of obtaining, producing, generating, distributing and delivering water and electricity. 
(Code 1964, § 15.005; Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 21312, § 1, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 23873 , § 1, 5-20-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-37. - Director—Appointment and qualifications. 
There shall be a director of the water and light department, who shall be trained and experienced in the operation and management of public utilities, and qualified to perform the duties required of the director by the charter and ordinances of the city. The director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 15.010; Ord. No. 22578, § 6, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 27-38. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The director of the water and light department shall have such powers and duties as are provided by the charter of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15.020)  
Sec. 27-39. - Water and light advisory board—Appointment and terms of members. 
There shall be a water and light advisory board which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the council. Appointments shall be made for terms of four (4) years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. 
(Code 1964, § 15.030; Ord. No. 14466, § 1, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 27-40. - Same—Qualifications; organization; powers and duties; compensation. 
The qualifications of members, organization, and powers and duties of the board shall be such as are provided by the charter of the city. Members shall serve without pay, but they shall be reimbursed for reasonable, necessary expenses incurred in their capacity as members of the water and light advisory board. 
(Code 1964, § 15.040)  
Sec. 27-41. - Same—Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
The board shall meet regularly at such times and places as the board shall determine. A quorum for the transaction of business at such meetings shall be a majority of the duly appointed and acting members of the board. The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair of the board to promptly notify the city council of the vacancy. 
(Code 1964, § 15.041; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 27-42. - Water and electric revenue bond fund. 
There is hereby established a fund designated the "water and electric revenue bond fund." There shall be transferred from the water and light fund and deposited into such fund monthly, sums at least equal to one-sixth of the amount of interest that will become due on all water and electric revenue bonds, issued under the date of May 1, 1948, then outstanding on the then next interest payment date, plus at least one-twelfth of the amount of principal that will become due on such water and electric revenue bonds, issued under date of May 1, 1948, on the next maturity date. Such money so transferred and deposited into the fund hereby created shall be immediately remitted to the Mercantile-Commerce Bank and Trust Company, St. Louis, Missouri, paying agent designated in such water and electric revenue bonds of the city, and issued under date of May 1, 1948. 
(Code 1964, § 15.050)  
Sec. 27-43. - Water and electric revenue bond reserve fund. 
There is hereby created a fund designated as the "water and electric revenue bond reserve fund." There shall be transferred monthly from the water and light fund, and deposited into the water and electric revenue bond reserve fund the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Such transfers and deposits shall continue until the balance in the aforesaid bond reserve fund shall equal one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Such fund shall be used only for the payment of the principal of and the interest on the water and electric revenue bonds of the city issued under date of May 1, 1948, and only then when other funds are not available to meet such payments. Should such funds be reduced or depleted by reason of meeting any of such water and electric revenue bond obligations, additional transfers and deposits, at the rate of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per month as hereinbefore provided, shall be made until such fund shall be replenished and shall have credited thereto not less than the aforesaid one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Code 1964, § 15.060)  
Sec. 27-44. - Water and electric depreciation fund. 
There is hereby created a fund known as the "water and electric depreciation fund." Into such fund there shall be transferred monthly, from the water and light fund, and deposited a sum equal to the depreciation chargeable against the properties from time to time constituting the water and electric light works of the city. The amount of depreciation and the amount to be transferred monthly into the fund hereby created shall be determined according to a formula heretofore or hereafter determined by the consulting engineers employed by the city. The sums so deposited into such fund shall be expended only for unusual and extraordinary repairs and replacements of the water and electric light works and for emergency expenses of such works. 
(Code 1964, § 15.070)  
Sec. 27-45. - Efficiency programs. 
The director is authorized to research, develop and implement programs which enhance efficient use of water or electric services, reduce peak demands, reduce distribution and maintenance costs to the utility, and promote water or electric conservation among consumers. Prior to implementation of any program on a city-wide basis, the director shall make a report to council. 
(Ord. No. 13478, § 1, 10-5-92)  
Sec. 27-46. - Specialized utility services. 
The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with cities, private utilities, industrial or commercial customers or public utility districts to provide specialized utility services using city equipment and staff. The fees charged for such services shall not be less than the actual cost of providing such services to the requesting party. 
(Ord. No. 16543, § 1, 8-21-00)  
Secs. 27-47—27-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Private fire hydrants, § 9-6; water supply for food service establishments, § 11-156(a); water pollution and contamination in public parks, § 17-67. 
 
Sec. 27-51. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Customer's water installation. All pipes, valves, stops, plumbing or contrivances owned by the customer and used in connection with, or forming a part of, the customer's installation for using water for any purpose including lines or pipes used for the purpose of connecting such installation to the department's water meter, curb stop, or water main, or other part of the distribution system as the case may be. 
Distribution system. That part of the city's water and light works used to distribute water from points of treatment and storage to the customers served; including mains, valves, fittings, service lines, and other appurtenances. 
Water main. The main lines or pipes, usually located in the street, and used for supplying water to a number of customers, or an entire area. 
Water service line. The pipe, valves, fittings, water meter, meter box, and all other fixtures owned by the department and used to connect the customer's water installation to the water main. 
(Code 1964, § 15.300) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-52. - Water service lines—Ownership; application; fees. 
(a)  Water service lines, including the water main tap, the pipe, fittings, and valves between the main and the customer's installation, the water meter, its appurtenances and the meter box shall be and remain the property of the department, which shall be responsible for their perpetual maintenance. 
(b)  Application for a water service line shall be simultaneous with application for water service to previously unserved properties and shall be accompanied with the normal service deposit as well as a connection fee. It shall be understood that the service will be placed into immediate use, and billing shall be started at the completion of the first full month after the connection. 
(c)  Water service lines to previously unserved properties or to properties previously served by an inadequate or non-city-owned service line within the water utility service area shall be installed upon application and only after all requirements for water main extension and payment have been met. The required fees for connection, tap and meter installation, where applicable, shall be paid at the time of application or may be billed during the normal billing cycle in the month subsequent to the date of application, at the city's option. The city may demand payment in cash. 
(1)  System equity charge (applies to all connections) shall be based on meter size under the following schedule: 
Size of water meter 
Inches      System Equity Charge 
5/8 and ¾ ..... $576.00 
1 ..... 576.00 
1½ ..... 1,296.00 
2 ..... 2,303.00 
3 ..... 5,182.00 
4 ..... 9,213.00 
6 ..... 20,729.00 
In the case of a multiple-family facility, or multiple commercial facilities, that chooses to install a single water meter, the system equity charge will be the sum of the fees that would have been charged to each unit of the facility, had each unit been separately metered. In calculating this fee, the department shall take into account the meter size that would have been required to separately meter each unit. 
(2)  Tap fee. This fee shall be in addition to the system equity charge and meter fee and shall be assessed for each tap made by the department on public water mains. The tap fee will be waived when the only purpose of the tap is for installing a sprinkler system in a structure built before the requirement of fire sprinklers. On each tap, the customer shall be assessed as follows: 
Size of Meter     Tap Fee 
1-inch ..... $1,000.00 
1½—2-inch or 1-inch commercial ..... 335.00 
4-inch and larger ..... 575.00 
For all commercial services or connections larger than one (1) inch, the customer shall be responsible for supplying all materials to department specifications, all necessary permits, preparation of the water main so that the tap may be made (including saw cutting of pavement, if required), site excavation, installation of the service line across the street (if required), and all applicable site restoration costs. All excavations under pavement must be restored per City of Columbia, Boone County Public Works, or Missouri Department of Transportation specifications as determined applicable by the director. 
(3)  Meter box and appurtenances fee. On properties (generally industrial, commercial or multiple-family residential in use) served by private water mains or private water service lines, where one or more water meter is required and the meter box(es) and appurtenances are to be installed by a plumbing, mechanical or general contractor, the meter box(es) and appurtenances shall be furnished by the customer, based on department specifications, and no fees shall be assessed. On properties served by public mains, the customer shall be assessed per meter as follows: 
Size of Meter     Meter Box and
Appurtenances Fee 
5/8 -inch ..... $450.00 
1-inch ..... 450.00 
This fee shall be in addition to the system equity charge, tap fee (which shall be assessed if the department taps a public water main and whether or not a valve/stop and valve box are installed) and meter fee. The department may, at its option, provide single or double meter settings per meter box, with no adjustment to the meter box and appurtenance fee. 
The customer shall provide and install to department specifications the meter box for meters having inlet and outlet openings larger than one (1) inch in diameter and no fees shall be assessed. 
(4)  Meter fee. In addition to the system equity charge, each customer who requests service to previously unserved properties, or to properties where a meter of greater size than the previous meter is required, shall be assessed a meter fee. All meters installed after October 1, 2004 shall be remote-read meters and fees will be as follows: 
Size of Meter     Meter Fee 
5/8 -inch ..... $250.00 
¾-inch ..... 270.00 
1-inch ..... 300.00 
For meters larger than one (1) inch, the meter fee shall be the actual cost of the meter, plus a markup to cover the actual cost of overhead as determined from cost computed at the end of each fiscal year. 
(d)  Water service lines to previously unserved properties outside the city limits shall be installed by the department upon application and payment of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the charge for similar services within the city, and only after all requirements for water main extension and payment have been met. 
(e)  The department may, at the option of the director, install water service lines to vacant and previously unserved properties prior to receiving application for such service line; provided, however, that service lines so installed shall not be used for the purpose of providing service to a customer until after such customer has made formal application and paid the connection fee for such service. 
(f)  In addition to the herein-stated fees, each new customer who requests and receives a water service connection to a water main which was installed by the department, or at the expense of the department, shall pay a proportional share of the cost of the water main. (See section 27-72.) 
(Code 1964, § 15.310; Ord. No. 9992, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 12834, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 13554, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 14214, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14618, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 14978, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16589, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 17021, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17435, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17834, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18218, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18688, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19210, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19697, § 1, 10-1-07; Ord. No. 19811, § 1, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 20052, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20171, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 21431, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22216, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22578, § 6, 9-21-15 ; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17)  
Sec. 27-53. - Same—Location. 
(a)  The location of the water service line, in relation to the water main and the property to be served, shall be determined by the department. 
(b)  A permanent meter box shall be installed at the customer's property line in a location determined by the department. The meter box shall be installed to match the existing land surface, unless the customer submits a written description or plan of proposed relandscaping to the department. 
(c)  All meters for commercial services installed after October 1, 2017 shall be indoors. When it is impractical to install the meter box for residential services at the property line, as determined by the director, the water meter may be installed indoors or elsewhere on the property to be served. All meters shall be protected from damage or freezing and, when located indoors, and be readily accessible in an unlocked room or enclosure. If a meter becomes inaccessible, at the option of the department, the customer must make provision for its relocation or for a remote reading device. Regardless of its location, the customer shall be responsible for damage to the meter or its appurtenances, caused by the customer's negligence or failure to properly safeguard and protect such meter and appurtenances from hazards. 
(d)  The department reserves the right to relocate the water service line or any appurtenance thereof, at its own expense. If the customer desires relocation, or a change in elevation, of the water service line or any appurtenances thereof, he shall make written request to the department and deposit the estimated cost for labor, equipment and material, plus overhead, to complete this relocation or change with the department. In the event of an underestimate, the customer will be billed for the remainder; in the event of an overestimate, the excess will be refunded. 
(e)  If the customer should relandscape his property, making it difficult to read the meter, the department may relocate or change the elevation of the meter and meter box and charge the customer the actual cost of labor, equipment and material, plus overhead therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 15.311; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17)  
Sec. 27-54. - Metering. 
(a)  Each of the following types of facilities shall comprise a metering unit and be metered individually; provided, however, that the owners of a multiple-family facility shall have the option of installing a single water meter for each facility, but the rate charged for water service on such single meter shall be as set forth under subsection (c) herein, and the account for water service shall be in the name of the owner or the owner's representative: 
Apartment. 
Boarding or lodging house. 
Club; accommodating or assembly-type cooperative house. 
Dormitory. 
Dwelling, one-family. 
Dwelling unit in multiple-family building. 
Farmstead. 
Hotel. 
Industrial or manufacturing plant. 
Mobile home park. 
Motel or tourist court. 
The general rule for establishing metering units for any other types of facilities not mentioned above shall be one meter for each family unit used for residential purposes and one meter for each business or industry. 
Exception A: Commercial business property may be considered a single metering unit when, in the opinion of the director, it is not practical to separately meter each business. 
Exception B: Owners of mobile home parks shall have the option of installing a water meter on each individual mobile home, provided they install a water main system within the park, which is certified by the director or his designee as meeting city designs standards and which is in accordance with the city's water main extension policy, and that such water mains along with necessary easements are dedicated to the city. 
(b)  When requesting water service, the customer may be required to furnish information as to his expected water demand. The department shall then determine the proper type and size of meter to be installed. The department reserves the right to change the meter size at any time in order to improve registry or flow. All meters having openings four (4) inches in diameter or larger shall be accompanied with a properly valved meter bypass as a part of the meter box installation. 
(c)  Whenever a mobile home park, apartment house or other multiple-family facility is served with water through a single meter, all applicable charges defined in section 27-122, section 27-123 or section 27-124 shall apply. 
(d)  Statement for service furnished to multiple-family units through a single meter shall be sent only to the person or party who requested such service and established an account with the department for such service. In no case will the department send individual statements to tenants of such facilities for their proportionate share of the service furnished. 
(Code 1964, § 15.320; Ord. No. 13414, § 1, 8-17-92; Ord. No. 15196, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 )  
Sec. 27-55. - Testing and nonregistration of water meter. 
(a)  Each water meter shall, by comparison with accurate standards, be tested and calibrated by the department. If a meter shall be found inaccurate, it shall be restored to accurate condition or a new meter shall be substituted. 
(b)  The customer has the right to request a special meter test at any time. If any test made at the customer's request discloses that the meter is registering correctly, or within two (2) percent of normal, the customer shall bear a portion of the expense related to performing the test, in an amount not to exceed the following: sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for meters one (1) inch or less and one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for meters larger than one (1) inch. The expense of all other tests shall be borne by the department. 
(c)  Results of calibrations and tests, when requested by the customer, shall be furnished to the customer. If any meter is found to register more than two (2) percent above or below normal, then the readings of that meter, previously taken for billing purposes, shall be corrected according to the percentage of inaccuracy found. Correction for residential customers shall extend back six (6) months previous to the date of meter removal and the customer's bill shall be adjusted, upward or downward as the case may be, for the corrected period. 
(d)  Should the meter become defective or fail to register correctly, the quantity of water used shall be determined by the amount used during the same period of the preceding year, or the average amount for the three-month period immediately preceding the defective registration. 
(Code 1964, § 15.321; Ord. No. 19550, § 2, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 22927 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-56. - Customer's water installation. 
(a)  The customer's water installation shall extend from: 
(1)  The discharge of the water meter, where the meter is located at or near the property line. 
(2)  The property line, where the meter is located elsewhere on the property. 
(3)  The water main tap, where an unmetered fire protection or sprinkler system serves the property, or where a private water main is extended from the city water main. 
(b)  The customer assumes all responsibility for the construction, maintenance, and any necessary relocation of the customer's water installation; he shall make every effort to keep this system free from leaks. Apparent leaks in the customer's water installation, whether registered on the water meter or not, shall be repaired by the customer within ten (10) days of receipt of written notice by the department. If repairs are not made, the department shall issue written notice of disconnection, and five (5) days thereafter may discontinue water service until the leak is repaired. If, in the judgment of the department, an apparent leak in the customer's water installation endangers public safety, constitutes a serious nuisance, or wastes a considerable amount of water, the department may discontinue water service without previous notice to the customer. Hidden leaks in the customer's water installation shall be repaired, after discovery, under the same provisions as apparent leaks. If any leak is known or suspected to have registered on the water meter, and if the customer, upon discovery or notification of the leak, has promptly repaired or caused to be repaired such leak, the customer's water and sewer charge (if affected) for a period not exceeding three (3) months, including the billing period during which the leak was discovered and two (2) previous periods, shall be adjusted downward in the amount of one-half the normal charge for the excess water. 
(c)  If any customer fails to promptly repair apparent leaks or hidden leaks after notification, or to take other measures to eliminate the wasting of water through leaking installations, no adjustment of monthly charges will be made. 
(Code 1964, § 15.330)  
Sec. 27-57. - Cross-connections. 
(a)  Cross-connections include any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or any unapproved source or system. Cross-connections include any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in waste water or any other source of contamination and any source or system that is, in the opinion of the director, based on the standards of the Missouri Division of Health, nonpotable, and through which backflow can occur to contaminate the department's system. Cross-connections include bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can occur. Cross-connections may be direct or indirect. A cross-connection is direct when the department's water system is physically joined to a system containing unsafe water, sewage, or other waste that could contaminate the safe water system. A cross-connection is indirect when a source of contaminated water may be blown across, sucked, or diverted into the department's system. 
(b)  Unprotected cross-connections in the customer's water installation are not permitted. If an unprotected cross-connection is discovered, the department, after giving the customer no less than fifteen (15) days' notice of its intention, will discontinue service, unless the condition is corrected or an approved backflow prevention device is installed by and at the expense of the customer. If, in the opinion of the director, a real and serious threat to public health is posed, the department may discontinue service without notice. 
(c)  Service connections will not be made nor allowed to continue where there is, in the opinion of the director, a strong potential for hazardous cross-connections, unless the customer will install and maintain, at the customer's expense, a backflow prevention device approved by the department. 
(d)  Those facilities classified as actual or potential Class I backflow hazards (by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources or the director) shall be equipped, at a minimum, with an air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Those facilities classified as actual or potential Class II backflow hazards shall be equipped, at a minimum, with a double-check valve assembly. 
The director, at the director's discretion, may require a device at other facilities dangerous to public health. 
(e)  Backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the director before installation by the customer and shall have been certified by a recognized testing laboratory acceptable to the director. Installation and initial testing shall be approved by the department. 
(f)  The customer shall install and maintain all backflow prevention devices in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for bypassing the devices. The customer shall permit access to the premises by the certified backflow prevention assembly tester, supplier of water and DNR representatives, at reasonable times and upon presentation of identification, for inspection of the customer water system or testing of backflow prevention assemblies installed in accordance with this ordinance. 
(g)  Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the department for all backflow prevention devices. Inspection intervals will not exceed the minimum requirements set out in the Rules of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. As a courtesy only, the department may send a reminder notice to customers with known backflow prevention devices. 
(h)  It shall be the responsibility of the customer to have each assembly inspected and tested by a properly certified and listed tester at the time of construction or installation and each year thereafter, no later than thirty (30) days after the anniversary of the original inspection test date. Backflow prevention assembly testers shall be certified through a Department of Natural Resources approved program and be listed with the department. 
(i)  Testers shall report to the supplier of water and the customer the results of inspections or tests conducted in compliance with applicable state regulations. Reports of tests shall contain the signature of the certified tester, attesting to the compliance or noncompliance of the assembly with established operational requirements. Reports shall be submitted to the department within thirty (30) days after performing the inspection or test. 
(j)  Testing, inspection, and overhaul of devices may be performed by department personnel when it is deemed in the interest of the department and other customers. The device owner will be charged not less than the actual cost for the testing and inspection, plus any cost for replacement or repair parts and other materials. 
(k)  A violation of any part of this section may cause the customer's water supply to be disconnected by the department. 
(Code 1964, § 15.331; Ord. No. 17835, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 22578, § 6, 9-21-15 )  
Sec. 27-58. - Fire protection. 
(a)  The department shall not furnish and install fire hydrants except to replace or relocate existing obsolete units or on new water mains installed by the department. Fire hydrants shall be furnished and installed as prescribed in division 3 in the same manner as other material used for water main extensions and shall be sized, located and constructed in accordance with the regulations, specifications and requirements of the department and under the inspection and direction of the director. 
(b)  The department shall be responsible for supplying water in adequate pressures and flows for fire protection purposes, everywhere within the city that water mains have been installed by the department or accepted for ownership by the council. The minimum flows for fire protection in single-family residential areas shall be eight hundred (800) gallons per minute for four (4) hours with a minimum system residual pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch. The minimum flow for fire protection in all other areas shall be determined by the fire chief or his designee using tactical formulas developed by the National Fire Academy or any other organization with expertise in firefighting techniques. The minimum flow for fire protection based on a tactical formula may be reduced by the fire chief or his designee following a thorough risk evaluation but shall be at least eighty (80) percent of the Insurance Services Office (ISO) needed fire flow. If a risk evaluation for certain property results in a needed fire flow exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) gallons per minute, the property owner, as a condition to receiving a building permit, may be required to provide facilities to meet the fire flow requirement or participate in the cost of city water system improvements needed to meet the fire flow standards. 
(c)  Hydrants may be installed by property owners or other interested parties outside the city limits on water mains distributing city water by approval of the director and in compliance with department specifications and under department inspection. Upon satisfactory inspection of the hydrant or council acceptance of the water main extension complete with hydrants, the fire hydrants shall become and remain the property of the city, in consideration of the perpetual upkeep and maintenance. 
(Code 1964, § 15.360; Ord. No. 15628, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99) 
Cross reference— Emergency water regulations, § 7-5.  
Sec. 27-59. - Fire protection facilities—On private property. 
(a)  The department will furnish unmetered water to supply standpipes and sprinkler systems at the charge established and in effect at the time as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(b)  The department shall tap the main for such service upon application and deposit by the customer of the estimated cost for labor, equipment and material plus overhead. In the event of an underestimate, the customer will be billed for the remainder; in the event of an overestimate, the excess will be refunded. 
(c)  Upon approval of the department, the customer shall provide all materials and construct all parts of the system from the water main tap. Fire hydrants with their associated tees, valves and piping shall comply with department specifications and shall be installed under department inspection at locations specified by the department. 
(d)  With the exception of fire hydrants, the entire system, from the discharge side of the valved water main tap, shall be and remain the customer's installation and the department shall not be responsible for maintenance. Upon passing final inspection and in consideration of perpetual upkeep and maintenance of the hydrants, ownership of the fire hydrants shall be transferred to the city and the city shall be granted easement rights to access the hydrant in an area around the hydrant having a minimum size of twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet with the hydrant centered in the twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet area. The customer shall make no unmetered use of this facility other than for fire protection. 
(Code 1964, § 15.361; Ord. No. 15628, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 27-60. - Same—Relocation. 
(a)  Relocation of a fire hydrant occupying a city right-of-way or easement may be made by the department upon written request of an owner of property adjacent to such hydrant and the deposit of the estimated cost of relocation, plus overhead, with the department. In the event of an under or over-estimate, the owner will be billed for or refunded the difference; provided, the department reserves the right to refuse to relocate the fire hydrant if, in its opinion, such relocation would be detrimental to the safety, convenience or protection potential of the hydrant. 
(b)  Hydrants mislocated by the department on private property shall be relocated at the expense of the department upon written request of the property owner. 
(c)  Relocation of water pipes supplying standpipes or sprinkler systems shall be the responsibility and expense of the customer. 
(Code 1964, § 15.362; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99)  
Secs. 27-61—27-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER MAINS 
 
Sec. 27-71. - Extension of distribution water mains, generally. 
(a)  The extension of distribution water mains may be initiated and made in one of the following ways: 
(1)  The city council may, by ordinance, declare the necessity for and direct the extension of water mains as a public improvement, as provided for in chapter 22 of this Code. 
(2)  Any individual, group of individuals, corporation, association, institution, club or other parties desiring to become customers and to purchase water from the department, may upon approval of proper application and as otherwise herein provided, extend the city's water mains, provided all such extensions shall be wholly within the corporate city limits. 
(b)  All applications for permission to make such extension shall be submitted in writing to the director of the water and light department, who shall approve or disapprove such application. The application shall clearly indicate the desired route and approximate length of the extension and that the applicant agrees to the following: 
(1)  To construct the entire extension from the end of the existing water main to and across the entire frontage or other dimension of the lot or tract to be served, except as otherwise herein provided. Such extension shall be of pipe size, as determined by the director, which will provide adequate fire protection and service to the area, but in no case shall the pipe size be less than six (6) inches. Should the department require a pipe size larger than that required to provide adequate fire protection and service to the area, then the department shall pay for the difference in cost of such larger size. 
(2)  To size, locate and construct the extension in accordance with the regulations, specifications and requirements of the department, and under the inspection and direction of the director. 
(3)  Upon completion, and after passing final inspection and tests, to transfer ownership of the complete water main extension to the city in consideration of its perpetual upkeep and maintenance. The department shall not be required to provide service or to perform maintenance on such water main extension until after the transfer of ownership has been completed. 
(4)  To assume the cost of the entire extension. 
(5)  Applicant property owners requesting permission to extend water mains for the purpose of supplying one inch or smaller water service for a homestead, farmstead or recreational property zoned A, O, or R-1 shall: 
a.  Pay for the extension of the main to his property line; and 
b.  Pay for the extension of the main across the frontage or other abutting dimension of his tract, unless the frontage or other abutting dimension exceeds two hundred (200) feet, in which case the property owner shall bear the costs of extending the main to a point adjacent to where service is required but in no event less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(6)  In the event that an applicant property owner does not extend the main across the full lot frontage or above abutting dimension under the provisions of subsection (b)(5) herein, all holders of an interest in the property shall enter into a written agreement in a form approved by the city counselor, prior to such extension, obligating such owners to pay the balance of the cost of extension at such time as such extension is required by residential or commercial development of the tract or at the date future water services are requested for the subject tract. 
(c)  When the city council by ordinance directs the extension of water mains as a public improvement to be paid for by special tax bills issued to adjoining properties, lots, or tracts served by water mains that do not extend entirely across the frontage or other dimensions of such property, such property shall be assessed the cost of the extension across the remaining footage, at the time of such extension; provided, that if an owner of the property in question has previously paid for extension of a water main to provide water service to such property, the water main footage for which payment was previously made shall be taken into account in determining the amount of the assessment as follows: 
Foot frontage of property minus water main footage for which payment was previously made equals footage to be assessed. 
The terms and conditions for the sale of water outside the city limits shall be as established and approved by the council. 
(Code 1964, § 15.340; Ord. No. 23117 , § 7, 3-20-17)  
Sec. 27-72. - Extension of water (trunk) mains by department. 
(a)  As stipulated in section 27-71 above, distribution water mains are extended at the expense of parties other than the department; however, in order to provide a complete adequate water distribution system to all areas of the city, the department has installed and extended, and may continue to install and extend, water mains, generally called trunk mains, within the city limits under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Through an undeveloped area to bring service to a developed or developing area. 
(2)  To provide an increase in water volume and pressure to a developed area. 
(3)  To close loops in the distribution system to provide circulation and increased volume. 
(4)  To connect and bring service to a water distribution system other than the city's for the purpose of taking over or acquiring such system. 
(5)  For the purpose of replacing, to bring up to city standards, water mains which are acquired from others. 
(6)  Any other reason which, in the opinion of the director, is essential to providing adequate service to an area of the city, yet is not an immediate benefit to the properties adjoining the water main. 
(b)  The director shall determine the priority of need and the location of water mains to be installed by the department. Such determination shall consider the actual needs of the area to be served as well as the availability of funds. First priorities shall be given to developed areas which have service that may be inadequate under given conditions. 
(c)  When a customer requests a connection which, in the opinion of the director, can be made from a trunk main or other main which has been installed at the sole expense of the department, such customer shall pay to the city a proportional share of the cost of the water main according to the following formulas: 
(1)  For connections two (2) inches or smaller: The number of feet of water main fronting on or otherwise bordering the lot or tract being served multiplied by the department's latest estimated per foot cost of installed six-inch water main of the same material as the main to which the service line is being connected. 
(2)  For connections larger than two (2) inches: The number of feet of water main fronting on or otherwise bordering the lot or tract being served multiplied by the department's latest estimated per foot cost of installed water main of the same size and material as the main to which the connection is being made. In no event shall the customer's cost be less than the department's latest estimated per foot cost for installed six-inch main of the same material nor more than the department's latest estimated per foot cost for installed water main of the size determined by the director as necessary to provide adequate fire protection and service to the area. 
(3)  For connections one inch or smaller to homesteads, farmsteads or recreational property with frontages or other abutting dimensions greater than two hundred (200) feet, the property owner shall, as consideration for such connection: 
a.  Pay an amount equal to the actual cost (at the date of such request) of one hundred (100) feet of six-inch water main; and 
b.  An agreement in a form approved by the city counselor obligating all of the owners of a real property interest in the tract to pay the balance of the actual cost of a six-inch main across the tract at the date future services are requested or the tract is developed for residential or commercial uses. 
(d)  The department shall review and update its estimates at least once a year, using the latest available costs of pipe, labor and equipment and shall base the number of hours required on actual installations of a comparative type, which have been made in the recent past. 
(e)  When it is apparent that a city installed water main can serve customers on both sides of the right-of-way, only one-half of the above charge shall be assessed to any customer. Where customers' properties front on highway rights-of-way or other rights-of-way where the controlling authority will not permit service crossings, the full estimated cost of the main shall be assessed to any customer. 
(f)  The monies received as payment for water mains, as herein provided, shall be placed in the extension, improvement, enlargement and betterment fund established by the city charter, and shall be expended only for the purpose of installing and constructing additional water main extensions. 
(Code 1964, § 15.341)  
Sec. 27-73. - Declaration of necessity for improvement. 
Whenever the council shall deem an improvement to the distribution system as defined in section 27-51, whether on petition or otherwise, it shall, by ordinance, declare such improvement necessary to be done, together with the reason therefor and shall cause plans and specifications for such work and improvement together with an estimate of the cost thereof, to be prepared by the director of the water and light department and filed with the city clerk, subject to inspection of the public, which ordinance shall also set out in detail the course along which the water main pipes are to be laid, the depth, the dimensions of the pipe, the source and the termination thereof, together with the necessary valves and other equipment and appurtenances in connection with the pipe, and cause the ordinance to be published in some newspaper printed in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 14.940)  
Sec. 27-74. - Owners to have thirty days to make improvements. 
(a)  The ordinance referred to in section 27-73 above shall provide that after the publication thereof, the owners of the property affected by the improvement shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the publication to make and complete the improvement provided for in the ordinance under the direction of the director of the water and light department and in conformity with the plans and specifications filed as provided for in section 27-73. At the end of such thirty (30) days, the owners of the land affected by the improvement shall cease to have a right to make the improvement by private contract and the council shall have the power to cause a contract for such work to be let to the lowest and best bidder on the plans and specifications filed as aforesaid with the city clerk by the director of the water and light department, not less than one week's advertisement for bids thereon being made in some newspaper published in the city. 
(b)  In the event there are no bids received, that bids are above estimates, or all bids are rejected for any reason, the city council may order the city clerk to advertise for bids as in the first instance, or may, by ordinance, order and require the city official charged with the responsibility for such improvement under the charter to perform such work, using the city's own departments and employees, in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted therefor and the conditions of the charter and this article. Such city official shall keep an accurate account of the cost of the separate items thereof, and the city shall pay for the labor and material and all other costs of such work out of any funds which they may have on hand available for such purpose; and at the completion of such work, either by contract or by the city as last provided, shall provide for payment therefor as set forth in the charter, this article and other ordinances governing public improvements. 
(Code 1964, § 14.950)  
Sec. 27-75. - Special assessments—Authority to levy. 
The city council may provide for the paying of the cost of laying and extending water main pipes by such city by levying a special assessment, as herein provided, on the lots and tracts of land fronting or abutting on either side of the street, avenue or alley along the distance so improved in proportion to the front foot, whenever a majority of the resident owners of the property liable to taxation therefor and who shall own a majority of the front feet owned by residents of the city abutting on the street or alley along which the improvement is to be made, shall petition the city council for such improvement; or whenever such body, in its discretion, shall deem extension of water mains necessary for sanitary or other purposes conducive to the public welfare. 
(Code 1964, § 14.930)  
Sec. 27-76. - Same—Cost to be assessed proportionately. 
As soon as the work shall have been contemplated in conformity with contract, the director of the water and light department of the city shall compute the cost thereof and apportion such cost among the various lots and tracts of land chargeable therewith, charging each lot or tract of land with its proportionate part of such cost as required herein, and shall make a written report to the council that such improvements be completed in accordance with the contract for the same and describe therein the lots and tracts of land chargeable with the part of the cost of such improvement and the amount with which it is chargeable and the name of the owner thereof. If the council accepts the work and approves the report, they shall, by ordinance, levy and assess the cost of the improvements against the various lots and tracts and parcels of land in proportion to the front footage as provided herein and direct the clerk to issue tax bills in accordance with the levy and assessment of the ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 14.960)  
Sec. 27-77. - Same—Special tax bills assignable and collectible. 
All special tax bills issued by the city as herein provided for laying and extending of water main pipes shall be assignable and collectible in any action brought by the owner or holder of such bills, but the city shall not be liable for the cost in any such suit in any action brought by the owner or holder of such tax bills, and such tax bills shall, in any action thereon, be prima facie evidence of the regularity of the proceedings for such special assessments and of the validity of the bills, of the doing of the work and of the furnishing of the material charged for, and of the liability of the property to the charge stated in the bills. 
(Code 1964, § 14.970)  
Sec. 27-78. - Relocation of mains. 
Relocation or adjustment in elevation of an existing water main, required because of changes proposed by a property owner or other private party, shall be made under the direction and inspection of the director at no cost to the department. 
(Code 1964, § 15.342)  
Sec. 27-79. - Private water mains. 
(a)  Private water mains shall be supplied with water by the department so long as the mains are in good condition and do not provide a health hazard. 
(b)  Private water mains shall not be permitted to occupy city rights-of-way or easements, except at the point of connection to the distribution system, unless such mains were in operative use in the distribution of water prior to the dedication and acceptance of such right-of-way or easement. 
(c)  Proposed private water mains shall be installed only under the approval, direction and inspection of the director. 
(d)  Private water mains shall be and remain the property of the individual, corporation or association claiming ownership; the department shall have no responsibility for their maintenance. 
(e)  The department shall not bear the expense of reconnecting customers from private mains to the city mains; in all circumstances, the actual cost of labor, equipment and material, plus overhead, by not more than the standard water service charge, shall be charged the customer. 
(Code 1964, § 15.350)  
Secs. 27-80—27-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRIC SERVICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical outlets required under minimum properties standards code, § 6-162. 
 
Sec. 27-86. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Distribution system. That part of the city's water and light works used to distribute electrical energy from the generating plants or substations to the customers served, including poles, fixtures, wires, cables, conduits, manholes, switches, protective devices, transformers, meters, regulating equipment and other accessories. 
Meter socket. A device used for mounting and connecting the electric meter. 
Non-standard electric meter. Any electric meter that does not conform to the department's predominate specifications for electric meters will be considered non-standard. Non-standard electric meters shall be electro-mechanical in design and shall not have any radio read equipment installed. All department meters, including non-standard meters, must meet American National Standards Institute C12.1 and C12.20 standards. 
Service drop. The overhead wires or cables installed from the department's electric line to the first point of attachment to the customer's building or other structure. 
Service entrance. The conduit wire fittings and accessories used between the termination of the service drop or underground service and the customer's service equipment. 
Service equipment. The main circuit breaker(s) or fused switch(es) and their accessories which constitutes the main control and means of cutoff for the supply to a customer's premises. 
Underground service. The underground wire, cable, conduit and other devices installed from the department's electric line or facility to the customer's building or other structure. 
(Code 1964, § 15.400; Ord. No. 22092, § 1, 6-16-14 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-87. - Availability of service. 
(a)  Electric service shall be available at any location within the city limits as herein provided and provided the department's distribution system is within the area or can be extended to the area as herein provided in section 27-88 of this chapter. 
(b)  Single-phase service at 120/240 volts up to one hundred (100) kilowatts shall be available to any customer, except that the department may provide grounded wye service at 120/208 volts in areas where such existing secondary voltage is established. 
(c)  Three-phase service shall be available to any business or commercial establishment or industry whose premises is located within an area zoned by the city for business, commercial or industrial use, and shall be available to customers in other areas who utilize electric motors larger than ten (10) horsepower or customers who, in the opinion of the director, will have a maximum electric demand above one hundred (100) kilowatts. Three-phase service will not be provided to residential trailers, one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, apartment buildings or any other buildings located in areas zoned for residential use, except as provided above. 
(d)  Electric service for space heating may be refused to any customer whose premises is not constructed and insulated in accordance with the latest recommendations and standards of the Electric Heating Association. 
(Code 1964, § 15.420)  
Sec. 27-88. - Extension of distribution system. 
(a)  Any person or parties desiring electric service at a location which will require an extension of the distribution system shall make written request to the director for such extension. 
(b)  All extensions of the distribution system made within the boundaries of residential subdivisions, except major feeders installed along the perimeter of residential subdivisions, shall be made underground. 
(c)  All extensions of the distribution system not made within the boundaries of residential subdivisions shall be made underground, except when, in the judgment of the director, soil conditions, type of terrain, voltage class or capacity of circuit, or other conditions make underground extensions impractical or unfeasible. 
(d)  The person or parties desiring an extension of the distribution system shall provide right-of-way within the subdivision as required by the department for such extension. 
(e)  The cost of an underground extension in the city limits shall be shared by the department and the person or parties requesting the extension. The person or parties requesting the extension shall install or pay for the installation of the trenching and conduit system. Materials for the conduit system will be provided by the department. Where joint trenching with other utilities is done, the department will coordinate the work and reimburse the person or parties requesting the extension and doing the work the appropriate share of the joint trench cost sharing. The cost of the trenching will be based on the cost received by the department from its trenching contractor and will be updated annually. The department shall install the remainder of the electric system at its cost. 
(f)  The cost of overhead extensions in the city limits or to serve customers in the city limits shall be borne by the department. 
(g)  For extensions outside the city limits, the person or parties requesting such extension shall bear that portion of the costs required, in the judgment of the director, to make the extension economically feasible. 
(Code 1964, § 15.430; Ord. No. 19481, § 1, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 27-89. - Service drops—Installation; use. 
The department shall furnish and install the service drop to the customer's building or other structure and shall make the connection to the customer's service entrance conductors, except as provided in sections 27-91 and 27-94. Service drops shall be used to provide service at secondary voltages only. 
(Code 1964, § 15.440)  
Sec. 27-90. - Same—Point of attachment. 
(a)  The customer shall provide the department a point on his building or structure for attaching the service drop. Such point of attachment shall meet the department's requirements for strength and clearance and shall permit the attachment of the service drop in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable city codes. 
(b)  The customer shall provide the point of attachment in a location that is accessible, and provides a route for the service drop that is clear and free of obstructions, and shall obtain approval of the location from the department. The department shall not be required to supply service to a customer who fails to obtain such approval or who fails to provide the point of attachment in the approved location as required herein. 
(Code 1964, § 15.441)  
Sec. 27-91. - Service pole. 
(a)  When overhead distribution is installed, the customer may request the department to terminate its line on a service pole. When requested, the department will furnish and install such service pole, except temporary service poles. (See section 27-100(b).) The location of the service pole must be on the customer's premises and must be agreeable to the department. 
(b)  When a service pole is utilized, the customer shall furnish, install and maintain his own service drops or underground service. 
(c)  When a service pole is used, the department's meter shall be installed on the service pole in compliance with section 27-96(c) of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 15.442)  
Sec. 27-92. - Service entrance. 
The customer shall furnish and install the service entrance and, when required, shall install the department's meter socket in the service entrance run. 
(Code 1964, § 15.443)  
Sec. 27-93. - Underground service. 
(a)  Underground services are required in all new residential subdivisions, except that where poles and overhead lines have previously been installed or are required for reasons permitted by this Code, the service may be provided by the use of a service drop. 
(b)  Underground residential services shall be installed by the department at no cost to the person or parties requesting the service, except that when rock excavation or other extreme conditions create costs in excess of normal installation costs, as established by the department records, the department may require the person or parties requesting the service to pay that portion of the costs which are in excess of a normal installation. 
(c)  All underground services, except residential underground services,, shall be made in the same manner and under the same terms and conditions as an extension to the distribution system. (See section 27-88.) 
(d)  Underground services shall terminate in a junction box, meter socket or other enclosure located outside of the building or facility being served. The location of this enclosure shall be as designated and/or approved by the director. It shall be the customer's responsibility to extend his service entrance from this enclosure. 
(e)  Any residential customer may request the department to extend the underground service beyond the approved and designated termination point. (See subsection (d) of this section.) Upon receipt of such request, the department shall make such extension under the following conditions: 
(1)  The installation shall be made in complete compliance with the standards, specifications and construction requirements of the department. 
(2)  The junction box, meter socket or other enclosure shall be located on the load end of the underground service and such location shall remain on the outside of the building. 
(3)  The service line extension shall be made at the same time that the normal service is installed. 
(4)  The customer shall pay the department for the actual cost of the additional service line, as established by the department. 
(Code 1964, § 15.444)  
Sec. 27-94. - Primary metering. 
The department shall furnish, install and maintain all primary metering equipment. When service is requested at primary voltage, the customer shall furnish, install and maintain all parts of the electric system beyond the primary metering point. Primary metering may be installed on any other service, when, in the opinion of the director, such type of metering best meets the requirements of the electric load to be served. 
(Code 1964, § 15.455)  
Sec. 27-95. - Secondary metering. 
(a)  The department shall furnish the electric meter and meter socket. The meter loop, including all conduit, wire, fittings, fasteners and other accessories required for mounting and connecting the meter shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the customer. 
(b)  If a residential customer requests that a non-standard electric meter be installed, the customer shall pay a nonrefundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the department to select, purchase, test and install the non-standard electric meter. Non-standard electric meters will not be installed for non-residential services. 
(Code 1964, § 15.450; Ord. No. 22092, § 1, 6-16-14 )  
Sec. 27-96. - Meter location. 
(a)  Meters shall normally be installed outdoors in a location approved by the department. 
(b)  Meters may be installed indoors by special approval of the director, provided the customers agree to the following: 
(1)  To leave the premises unlocked during all regular working hours of the department, or to otherwise provide ready access to the meters at all times. 
(2)  To provide a clear space of at least three (3) feet horizontally from all meters and to provide a clear, unobstructed passageway to all meters at all times. 
(3)  If special meter-mounting equipment is required, such as group meter sockets, or combination meter socket and service switches, the customer shall furnish and install such equipment. 
(c)  Meters outdoors shall be installed a minimum of five and one-half (5.5) feet and/or a maximum of seven (7) feet above the ground or other accessible pedestrian surface. Meters indoors shall be installed at a minimum of three (3) feet and/or a maximum of seven (7) feet from the floor. 
(Code 1964, § 15.451)  
Sec. 27-97. - Request for meter test. 
(a)  Any customer may request a meter test, to determine the accuracy of his meter at any time. Such test will be made by the department, by comparison with accurate standards. The results of such tests, when requested by the customer, shall be furnished to the customer. 
(b)  If any test made at the request of the customer discloses that the meter is registering correctly, or within two (2) percent of normal, the customer shall bear a portion of the expense related to performing the test, in an amount not to exceed the following: sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for residential meters or one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for commercial and industrial meters. The expense of all other tests shall be borne by the department. 
(c)  If any meter is found to register more than two (2) percent above or below normal, then the readings of that meter, previously taken for billing purposes, shall be corrected according to the percentage of inaccuracy found. The customer's bill shall be adjusted upward or downward as the case may be, for the corrected period. 
(d)  After testing, meters shall be calibrated and restored to an accurate condition in accordance with industry standards, before being placed in service. 
(Code 1964, § 15.458; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-98. - Defective or nonregistering meters. 
(a)  When it is determined by the department that a meter is defective from any cause, including improper connection or misapplication, and the percentage of error cannot be determined, or when a meter fails to register the electric energy consumed, the customer's bill shall be adjusted on the basis of an estimate made by the director. 
(b)  Billing estimates for electricity shall be based on a like period of time during the previous year, with allowance being made for any increase or decrease in electric appliances or other energy consuming devices. 
(c)  Adjustments to customer's bills, on the basis of estimates, shall be made only for the billing period during which the defective meter was discovered, except that, if it is possible to establish, beyond any reasonable doubt, that the meter was defective during prior billing periods, adjustments on the basis of estimates shall also be made for such other billing periods not to exceed six (6) months for residential customers. 
(Code 1964, § 15.459; Ord. No. 19550, § 2, 6-4-07)  
Sec. 27-99. - Current transformers. 
(a)  When, in the judgment of the director, the maximum load on a service will exceed two hundred (200) amperes, such service shall be metered by the use of current transformers. The department will furnish the current transformers, and if installed outdoors, the department will install the current transformers. The customer shall provide a suitable mounting space for the current transformers at the supply end of the service entrance. 
(b)  If mutually agreed by the customer and the department, the current transformer may be installed indoors. If installed indoors, the customer shall furnish and install an approved enclosure and shall install the department's current transformers in the enclosure. When current transformers are used, the customer shall furnish all material required for the meter loop in accordance with all other applicable provisions of these ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 15.452)  
Sec. 27-100. - Temporary electric service. 
(a)  When requested, the department will furnish and install a temporary electric service. When the following conditions exist, the charge for a single phase, 3 wire, up to one hundred (100) amperes, temporary electric service shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(1)  The service will be used for the purpose of constructing a building or other facility which, when completed, will be permanently connected to the department's electric distribution system. 
(2)  The permanent facility will utilize a service at the same phase and voltage as the temporary service. 
(3)  All poles, wires, cables, transformers or other appurtenances utilized or installed, except the department furnished temporary service equipment, shall be placed in a permanent location and required for providing the permanent service. 
At the above locations, the department will furnish and install one temporary electric service consisting of a meter base and meter, two 20 ampere, 120 VAC, grounded, duplex outlets and one 50 ampere, 4 wire, single phase, 240 VAC (208 VAC at some locations) outlet mounted in a weatherproof enclosure, installed on or beside the pole, transformer or secondary box that is to permanently serve the lot or facility. The temporary electric service equipment shall remain the property of the department and will be maintained by the department. 
(b)  Temporary electric service to any facility that will not be connected permanently to the department's electric distribution system, temporary service of a different phase or voltage other than that will be utilized permanently, temporary service requiring more than 100 amperes, single phase, or temporary service requiring the installation of any poles or wires, or other electrical distribution material or apparatus which will not be utilized permanently, shall be available only if the customer requesting such service assumes all costs incurred by the department in installing and removing such service, including the cost of labor, material not salvaged, engineering, supervision and overhead. The customer shall furnish and install the temporary service pole, or other approved support, for attachment of the service drop. The customer shall furnish and install the meter loop, service entrance, etc., in accordance with sections 27-92 and 27-96. All temporary service equipment and facilities furnished and installed by the customer shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Weatherproof construction. 
(2)  Minimum capacity of 150 amperes, single phase, 3 wire. 
(3)  Neutral conductor and all metal parts grounded. 
(4)  Where a service drop does not cross a public street or alley, the pole shall consist of two-inch by six-inch boards securely braced to withstand five hundred (500) pounds of horizontal pull at the top in the direction of the service drop. 
(5)  Where a service drop crosses a public street or alley, the pole shall consist of a treated pine, or equivalent, pole having a circumference at the top of fifteen (15) inches or more and of sufficient length to provide eighteen (18) feet of clearance above the street or alley surface. The pole shall be placed a minimum of four and one-half (4½) feet into the ground and braced or guyed to withstand one thousand five hundred (1500) pounds of horizontal pull at the top in the direction of the service drop. 
(c)  Temporary electric service equipment, temporary poles, etc., shall be placed on the lot where the permanent structure is to be located and shall be located in an area that is accessible and provides a route for the service drop that is clear and free of obstructions. Temporary services shall not be attached to trees in any manner. 
(d)  All temporary service provided shall be subject to and in accordance with the City of Columbia Electrical Code. The department may disconnect temporary service at any time for failure to comply with the above, or for safety reasons. The department may, without notification, remove any temporary service that has been off for more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 14216, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14216 § 1, adopted September 19, 1994, repealed § 27-100 and enacted the provisions set out herein. Section 27-100 was formerly derived from Code 1964 § 15.500 and Ord. No. 10480 § 1, adopted March 4, 1985.  
Sec. 27-101. - Temporary removal of service drop. 
(a)  Permitted. When requested, the department shall temporarily disconnect, remove and later reinstall an overhead service drop for the purpose of allowing the property owner to trim or remove trees, erect structures or perform other acts upon his property which, due to the location of the service drop, cannot safely and expediently be done with the service drop in place. 
(b)  Request, liability of applicant. The request for such work shall be submitted to the department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time the removal is desired. It shall be the responsibility of the party requesting this work to arrange with all customers affected for a service interruption. The department assumes no responsibility for damage or inconvenience caused by the interruption of service. 
(c)  Point of attachment. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide the department with a suitable point of attachment for reinstallation, meeting the same requirements as those for a new service drop. (See section 27-90.) 
(d)  Charges. The charge for removal and reinstallation of a single-phase service drop shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). For three-phase service drops, the charge shall be the actual costs incurred by the department in removing and reinstalling such service, including the cost of labor, material necessitated by the reinstallation, engineering, supervision and overhead. 
(Code 1964, § 15.505; Ord. No. 17021, § 1, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 27-102. - Voltage and phase. 
Electrical service will normally be provided at 120/240 volts, single-phase, sixty-cycle or 120/208 volts, three-phase, sixty-cycle, except that in areas where the department's existing secondary voltage is other than above, such existing voltage may be provided. Other service voltages may be provided if requested, by special approval of the director. Customers shall inform the department, at the time of making application for service, of the phase and voltage desired. 
(Code 1964, § 15.410)  
Sec. 27-103. - Constant supply of electrical energy not guaranteed. 
The consumer shall agree that the department does not guarantee a constant supply of electrical energy and that the department and/or the city shall not be liable for damage for any failure to supply the same. 
(Code 1964, § 15.530)  
Sec. 27-104. - Motor installations. 
(a)  Electric motors larger than ten (10) horsepower shall be three-phase, except by special approval of the director. 
(b)  The starting current for any three-phase motor shall not exceed eight (8) percent of the full load capacity for the department's distribution feeder which serves the motor. The maximum size motor which will be permitted to start across the line without current limiting starters for various feeder voltages, is as follows: 
2,400 volt feeder ..... 	 25 horsepower 
13,800 volt feeder ..... 	150 horsepower 
 
(Code 1964, § 15.520)  
Sec. 27-105. - Customer generation—Net metering. 
(a)  To the extent required of retail electric suppliers by Section 386.890 RSMo, a customer of the city electric utility may install and operate electric generation facilities, compatible with the electric utility, which are qualified as a net metering unit. 
(b)  Sales of electricity to and purchase of electricity from customer generation shall be in accordance with rates established in division 5 of this article. 
(c)  Each qualified net metering unit used by a customer-generator shall meet all applicable safety, performance, synchronization, interconnection and reliability standards established by the Missouri Public Service Commission, the National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and Underwriters Laboratories for distributed generation. The customer-generator's system shall contain a switch, circuit breaker, fuse or other easily accessible device or feature located in immediate proximity to the customer-generator's metering equipment that would allow a utility worker the ability to manually and instantly disconnect the unit from the city's electric distribution system. 
(d)  Liability and insurance requirements. 
(1)  For any cause of action relating to any damages to property or person caused by the generation unit of a customer-generator or the interconnection thereof, the city shall have no liability absent clear and convincing evidence of fault on the part of the city. 
(2)  For customer-generators of ten kilowatts (10 kW) or less, the customer-generator is not required to carry additional liability insurance. 
(3)  For customer-generators greater than ten kilowatts (10 kW), the customer-generator shall carry no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of liability insurance that provides for coverage of all risk of liability for personal injuries (including death) and damage to property arising out of or caused by the operation of the net metering unit. 
(Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 21312, § 1, 5-7-12)  
Sec. 27-106. - Renewable energy standard. 
(a)  The city shall generate or purchase electricity generated from eligible renewable energy sources at the following levels: 
(1)  Two (2) percent of electric retail usage (kWhs) by December 31, 2007; 
(2)  Five (5) percent of electric retail usage (kWhs) by December 31, 2012; 
(3)  Fifteen (15) percent of electric retail usage (kWhs) by December 31, 2017; 
(4)  Twenty-five (25) percent of electric retail usage (kWhs) by December 31, 2022; and 
(5)  Thirty (30) percent of electric retail usage (kWhs) by December 31, 2028. 
(b)  This renewable energy shall be added up to these kilowatt hour levels only to the extent that it is possible without increasing electric rates more than three (3) percent higher than the electric rates that would otherwise be attributable to the cost of continuing to generate or purchase electricity generated from one hundred (100) percent non-renewable sources (including coal, natural gas, nuclear energy and other non-renewable sources). 
(c)  Eligible renewable energy generation may be provided by wind power, solar energy, bio-energy sources or other renewable sources which meet the environmental criteria approved by the city council after review by the environment and energy commission and the water and light advisory board. Electricity produced from on-site renewable energy systems owned by Columbia Water and Light customers ("net metering") may be included within the calculation of the levels required in subsection (a). 
(d)  Renewable energy generation sources located within Missouri may receive preferential consideration in the selection process. 
(e)  Each year prior to February 1, the water and light department shall publicly release a renewable energy plan detailing a proposal for how the city would comply with this section during the following year. The plan will explain the city's due diligence in pursuing renewable energy opportunities and detail all cost assumptions and related utility rate calculations, except with regard to confidential information that may be withheld pursuant to state law. The plan will then be reviewed by the environment and energy commission and water and light advisory board and submitted to the city council for approval following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18196, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 21935, § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 23725 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18196, passed by city council on Aug. 16, 2004, called for election; said ordinance was passed by the voters on Nov. 2, 2004.  
Secs. 27-107—27-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RATES 
 
Sec. 27-111. - Electricity—Metering of residential dwelling units. 
Each residential dwelling unit must have a separate meter through which the electricity supplied the residential dwelling unit shall be measured for billing by the department. Metering of electricity supplying more than one residential dwelling unit through a single meter for billing by the department (master metering) is prohibited; except where in the sole discretion of the director, master metering is in the best interests of the city due to the utilization of alternative power sources which are incompatible with single metering. 
(Code 1964, § 15.555; Ord. No. 22664, § 1, 12-7-15 ; Ord. No. 23262 , § 1, 8-7-17)  
Sec. 27-112. - Same—Residential service rate. 
(a)  Application: The residential service rate applies to all customers where service is supplied to a residential dwelling unit. No other service rate shall be available for service to which the residential service rate applies. Each residential dwelling unit must have a separate meter through which the electricity supplied the residential dwelling unit shall be measured for billing by the department. If a portion of the electric service supplied to a dwelling unit is used for nonresidential purposes, the customer can arrange his wiring in such manner that the electric service for residential purposes can be metered separately and this rate schedule is applicable to the portion used for residential purposes. The residential service rate shall not be available for standby, supplementary or resale services. 
(b)  Type of service: The type of service shall be single-phase, sixty-hertz, 120/240. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge: The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustments as provided in section 27-118: 
(1)  Customer charge ..... $16.31 per month 
Non-standard electric meter customer charge ..... 21.54 per month 
(2)  Energy charge 
Summer: 
First 300 kwh ..... 7.86 cents per kwh 
Next 450 kwh ..... 10.25 cents per kwh 
Next 1,250 kwh ..... 13.97 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 15.11 cents per kwh 
Non-summer: 
First 300 kwh ..... 7.86 cents per kwh 
Next 450 kwh ..... 10.25 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 11.84 cents per kwh 
Except when the customer has permanently installed in a living area a minimum of five (5) kilowatts of utility-approved electric space heating equipment which is the sole source of comfort heating (except decorative fireplaces) for the area(s) to be heated, the rate per kwh for the non-summer season will be: 
First 300 kwh ..... 7.86 cents per kwh 
Next 450 kwh ..... 10.25 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 9.85 cents per kwh 
(d)  High efficiency heat pumps: For customers having a permanently installed heat pump which is the primary source of comfort heating and which conforms to the special rules and regulations outlined in department rules entitled "Heat Pump Rules and Regulations," the monthly rate per kilowatt hour billed during the non-summer season for energy shall be as follows: 
First 300 kwh ..... 7.86 cents per kwh 
Next 450 kwh ..... 10.25 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 9.34 cents per kwh 
(e)  Minimum: The minimum monthly rate charge shall be sixteen dollars and thirty-one cents ($16.31). The minimum monthly rate charge for customers with a non-standard electric meter shall be twenty-one dollars and fifty-four cents ($21.54). 
(f)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(g)  Standby service for solar assisted residences: Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the electric service rates set forth in this section for residential customers shall be available and apply to all residential customers regardless of the use by that residential customer of solar energy for comfort heating or the use of electric energy as standby and supplementary service to solar energy as the primary source of comfort heating for residential purposes. 
(h)  Load control: Customers under this rate may receive a discount on summer bills if they elect to allow the city to install, operate and maintain load control devices on qualifying cooling equipment (see section 27-129). 
(i)  Net metering credit: Qualified customers under this rate may receive a per kWh discount for the energy supplied by a qualified net metering unit as outlined in section 27-120.1. 
(Code 1964, § 15.550; Ord. No. 9930, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 10167, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 10808, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 11079, § 1, 6-2-86; Ord. No. 11464, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 13491, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 14776, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 18220, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18689, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21432, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22092, § 1, 6-16-14 ; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23639 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 27-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23639 , § 1, adopted September 17, 2018, repealed § 27-113, which pertained to electricity—residential heat pump rate. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 27-114. - Same—Small general service rate. 
(a)  Application: The small general service rate shall apply to any customer, except where service is supplied to a residential dwelling unit for residential purposes, for all electric power and energy requirements. Each premises will be supplied only at one (1) point of delivery and all electric service supplied will be measured through one (1) meter; not available for standby, supplementary or resale service. 
(1)  This rate is not available to customers that exceed twenty-five (25) kw demand during June, July, August or September. 
(2)  For customers that exceed twenty-five (25) kw demand for one (1) month during June, July, August or September due to equipment malfunction or operational issues not typical during normal cooling season operation, the director may allow the customer to remain on the small general service rate after being provided with information that substantiates the cause. 
(b)  Type of service: The type of service shall be single-or three-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at one of the department's standard service voltages. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge: The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustments as provided in section 27-118: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
Single-phase service ..... 16.51 per month 
Three-phase service ..... 27.20 per month 
(2)  Energy charge: 
Summer: 
First 500 kwh ..... 8.47 cents per kwh 
Next 1,000 kwh ..... 10.79 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 14.89 cents per kwh 
Non-summer: 
First 500 kwh ..... 8.47 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 10.79 cents per kwh 
(d)  Space heating: For customers using electric heating as the sole means of comfort heating, the monthly rate per kilowatt hour billed during the non-summer season shall be as follows: 
First 500 kwh ..... 8.47 cents per kwh 
Next 1,000 kwh ..... 10.79 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 9.93 cents per kwh 
(e)  High efficiency heat pumps: For customers having a permanently installed heat pump which is the primary source of comfort heating and which conforms to the special rules and regulations outlined in department rules entitled "Heat Pump Rules and Regulations," the monthly rate per kilowatt hour billed during the non-summer season for energy shall be as follows: 
First 500 kwh ..... 8.47 cents per kwh 
Next 1,000 kwh ..... 10.79 cents per kwh 
All remaining kwh ..... 9.36 cents per kwh 
(f)  Minimum bill: The minimum bill for single-phase service, shall be sixteen dollars and fifty-one cents ($16.51) per month; for three-phase service, twenty-seven dollars and twenty cents ($27.20) per month. 
(g)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(h)  Primary service: When the customer owns and maintains all equipment, except metering equipment, necessary to take service at thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) volts or higher, total rate charges will be reduced by ten cents ($0.10) times the highest thirty-minute kw demand during the billing cycle. 
(i)  Primary metering: If, at the option of the department, service is metered at primary voltage the measured demand and kwh will each be decreased by two (2) percent. 
(j)  Load control: Customers under this rate, and not participating in (e) above, may receive a discount on summer bills if they elect to allow the city to install, operate and maintain load control devices on qualifying cooling equipment (see section 27-129). 
(k)  Net metering credit: Qualified customers under this rate may receive a per kWh discount for the energy supplied by a qualified net metering unit as outlined in section 27-120.1. 
(l)  Optional rate schedule: Customers in this rate class may voluntarily be placed on a demand billing rate as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge ..... $47.05 per month 
(2)  Demand charge: 
Summer ..... All kw at $16.31 per kw 
Non-Summer ..... All kw at $13.07 per kw 
(3)  Energy charge: 
Summer ..... All kwh at 5.88 cents per kwh 
Non-Summer ..... All kwh at 5.13 cents per kwh 
(4)  Minimum demand: The maximum thirty (30) minute kw demand measured during the billing month but not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the maximum demand during the billing months of June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven-month billing period. 
(Code 1964, § 15.560; Ord. No. 9930, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 10167, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 13148, § 1, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 13491, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 14776, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 18220, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18689, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21171, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 21432, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23639 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 27-115. - Same—Interruptible service rate. 
(a)  Available: Customers receiving service on the large general service rate or the industrial service rate and having at least five hundred (500) kw of load that is interruptible are eligible to place a contracted firm demand on the interruptible service rate. Interruptible loads are specific areas of a customer's service that can be identified and metered and can be entirely removed from service during periods requested by the utility. Arrangements for interruptible service require a signed agreement between the customer and the city. The rate is not available for temporary, standby, breakdown, supplementary or resale service. 
(b)  Application: The interruptible service rate shall apply to identifiable load where the service is supplied at one (1) point of delivery and measured through one (1) meter. At the time of interruption the meter reading for that period should register zero. If the customer is unable to interrupt the total load at the utility's request, a charge of thirty-six dollars and forty cents ($36.40) per kilowatt will be charged on the kilowatt load registered on the meter during that period. If the customer continues to violate the terms of the interruptible agreement, the customer will be removed from the interruptible rate and put on a rate based on the customer's loads during the previous summer period. The customer will not be allowed to reapply for the interruptible rate for one (1) year. 
Customers with auxiliary power connected to the interruptible load will be allowed up to one (1) percent of the interruptible kilowatt load on the meter before the charge for the auxiliary load will be billed at thirty-six dollars and forty cents ($36.40) per kilowatt on a monthly basis during the interruptible period. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge: The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustments as provided in section 27-118: 
		Summer 	Non-Summer 
(1) 	Customer charge (per month) ..... 	$ 61.20 	$ 61.20 
(2) 	Demand charge (per kilowatt) ..... 	10.28 	8.23 
(3) 	Energy charge (per kilowatt hour) ..... 	0.0478 	0.0447 
 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge: Customer charge plus the demand charge of kw times billing demand. 
(e)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and in lieu of gross receipts tax payments equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(f)  Billing demand: The maximum thirty-minute kw demand measured during the billing month, but not less than one hundred (100) percent of the maximum billing demand set during the billing months for June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven-month billing period. 
(g)  Primary service: When the customer owns and maintains all equipment except metering equipment, necessary to take service at thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) volts or higher, total rate charges will be reduced by ten cents ($0.10) times the highest thirty-minute kw demand during the billing cycle. 
(h)  Primary metering: If, at the option of the department, service is metered at primary voltage, the measured demand and kwh will be decreased by two (2) percent. 
(i)  Power factor: Customer will at all times maintain a power factor of not less than ninety (90) percent lagging. If power factor is less than ninety (90) percent, the measured kilowatt demand will be multiplied by the ratio of ninety (90) percent divided by the actual power factor to determine the adjusted measured demand to be used for determination of billing demand. The department may, at its option, use for adjustment the power factor determined: 
(1)  By test during periods of maximum demand; or 
(2)  By measurement of the average monthly power factor. 
(Ord. No. 16018, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21432, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-116. - Same—Large general service. 
(a)  Application: The large general service rate shall apply to all electric service for a premises where the service is supplied at one (1) point of delivery and measured through one (1) meter and for a period of not less than one (1) year. This rate is not available for standby, supplementary, or resale service or for services of less than twenty-five (25) kw demand. 
(1)  Customers that exceed twenty-five (25) kw demand during June, July, August or September will automatically be placed on this rate for a period of one (1) year. Reevaluation of application will be performed in October of each year. 
(2)  Customers that exceed seven hundred fifty (750) kw demand during June, July, August or September will automatically be removed from this rate and placed on the industrial service rate for a period of one (1) year. Reevaluation of application will be performed in October of each year. 
(b)  Type of service: The type of service shall be three-phase, sixty-hertz, at one of the department's standard service voltages. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge: The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustments as provided in section 27-118: 
(1) 	Customer charge ..... 	$46.13 per month 
		Summer 	Non-Summer 
(2) 	Demand charge: 		
	Minimum demand charge—25 kw or less ..... 	$369.04 	$276.78 
	All additional kw (per kw) ..... 	15.99 	12.81 
(3) 	Energy charge: 		
	All kwh (per kwh) ..... 	0.0577 	0.0503 
 
(d)  Minimum bill: The minimum bill shall be the demand charge plus the charge for energy used during the month. 
(e)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(f)  Billing demand: The maximum thirty-minute kw demand measured during the billing month but not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the maximum billing demand during the billing months of June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven-month billing period. If there has been a significant change in operation from the previous year, the director may reduce a customer's ratchet amount to fifty (50) percent until a new maximum billing demand is set during the forthcoming June, July, August and September. 
(g)  Primary service: When the customer owns and maintains all equipment except metering equipment, necessary to take service at thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) volts or higher, total rate charges will be reduced by ten cents ($0.10) times the highest thirty-minute kw demand during the billing cycle. 
(h)  Primary metering: If, at the option of the department, service is metered at primary voltage, the measured demand and kwh each will be decreased by two (2) percent. 
(i)  Power factor: The customer will at all times maintain a power factor of not less than eighty-five (85) percent lagging. If the power factor is less than eighty-five (85) percent and the customer does not expeditiously take corrective action, the department can, at its option, discontinue service or can install necessary corrective equipment on its lines to improve the customer's power factor to at least eighty-five (85) percent and will charge the customer for the total installed cost for same (including material, labor and overhead costs) or can make an equal charge (on an estimated basis) as a contribution towards the cost of corrective facilities to be installed elsewhere in its system. 
(j)  Load shedding program: Any large general service customer may elect to reduce electrical consumption when requested to do so by the utility during load shedding periods. Large general service customers who wish to participate in the utility's load shedding program shall inform the utility in writing no later than April 15 of each year. The application of this service will be limited to customers whose billing demand from one (1) account is two hundred fifty (250) kw and above during the summer months of July and August and whose billing demand from multiple accounts is one thousand (1,000) kw and above during the summer months of July and August. Customers participating in this program shall not participate in the load control program. More specific terms of the load shedding program shall be defined in a separate agreement between the customer and the city. 
(1)  Monthly rate: Credit for demand shedding will be computed as follows: 
a.  Performance rate. If the electric utility requests customer to shed load, the performance rate shall be calculated at three dollars ($3.00) per month for each kw shed on average for the load shedding periods during the months of June through September. Customers shall receive a monthly credit based upon the performance rate beginning in October. The performance rate shall be applied to each month's bill for a period of one (1) year. 
b.  If there is no load shedding event in a given year, the credit shall be reduced to fifty (50) percent of the performance rate and shall remain at that level until the customer sheds demand as part of this program in any subsequent year or until the customer's participation in the program ends, whichever occurs first. If the performance rate cannot be determined, the credit shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) each month for a customer with one (1) account in the load shedding program and shall be a total of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) each month for a customer with more than one (1) account in the load shedding program. If a customer with more than one (1) account is participating in this program, the agreement shall specify which account is to receive the credit. 
(2)  Metering: The utility will install all recording demand meters to measure the customer's energy load during the periods the utility requests the customer to reduce the load. The utility shall pay for the first meter installed. Customer shall be responsible for all costs associated with all other recording demand meters installed by the utility for the customer's participation in the program. Customer, at customer's expense, shall also be responsible for installing and maintaining a telephone line connection to each meter for use by the utility. 
(3)  Demand reduction: The customer shall receive a credit on the customer's monthly bill beginning in October of each year based on the customer demand shedding performance (not to exceed fifty (50) percent of customer's load prior to shedding, as defined in the agreement). 
(4)  A customer participating in the load shedding program shall remain in the program for an initial period of one (1) year. 
(k)  Load control: Customers under this rate may receive a discount on summer bills if they elect to allow the city to install, operate and maintain load control devices on qualifying cooling equipment (see section 27-130). 
(l)  Net metering credit: Qualified customers under this rate may receive a per kWh discount for the energy supplied by a qualified net metering unit as outlined in section 27-120.1. 
(m)  Energy storage rider. 
(1)  Available: The energy storage rider is available to any customer receiving electric service under the large general service rate that has installed energy storage facilities approved by the utility as being capable of sustaining at least fifty (50) kw in equivalent energy capacity for continued load reduction for a minimum of four (4) hours. 
(2)  Energy charge: Energy supplied for the period beginning 12:00 midnight and ending at 6:00 a.m. shall be charged at the rate of 4.592 cents per kwh during the summer months and 4.00 cents per kwh during the non-summer months. Energy charged at this rate will be subject to the fuel adjustment allowance in section 27-118. 
(3)  Demand charge: For a period of twenty (20) hours each day the monthly measured demand will be excluded for the purpose of the billing of demand as set forth in subsection (f) while under this rider. The measured demand period will exclude Saturday and Sunday of each week. The four-hour measured demand period will be a continuous four-hour period between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. The demand charge periods, shall be set forth in a written agreement between the utility and the customer as set forth in subsection (7) hereof. 
(4)  Billing demand: The maximum thirty-minute kw demand measured during the billing month, but not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the maximum billing demand during the billing months of June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven (11) months. If there has been a significant change in operation from the previous year, the director may reduce a customer's ratchet amount to fifty (50) percent until a new maximum billing demand is set during the forthcoming June, July, August and September. 
(5)  Metering: The utility will install all recording demand and energy meters necessary to measure the demand period. The customer shall pay the cost of any meter(s) required to be installed to measure the demand for the energy storage rider. The payment of such cost shall be non-refundable once the meter is installed. 
(6)  Load shedding program: The load shedding program does not apply to the energy storage rider. 
(7)  Contract: Customers wishing to receive service on the energy storage rider must first enter into an agreement with the city that includes provisions concerning: emergency use of the system; a description of the energy storage system; listed hours in which demand charges are excluded; and length of the term of the contract. 
(8)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on the rates set forth in this subsection, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(Code 1964, § 15.570; Ord. No. 9930, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 13148, § 1, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 13491, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 14776, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 15978, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 18220, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18689, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 19877, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21432, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21661, § 1, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23189 , § 1, 5-15-17; Ord. No. 23516 , § 1, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 23639 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 27-117. - Same—Industrial service rate. 
(a)  Available: All large commercial customers that exceed seven hundred fifty (750) kw during June, July, August or September shall be placed on the industrial service rate. The rate is not available for temporary, standby, breakdown, supplementary or resale service. 
(b)  Application: The industrial service rate shall apply to all electric service for a premises where the service is supplied at one (1) point of delivery and measured through one (1) meter. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge: The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustments as provided in section 27-118: 
(1) 	Customer charge 	$161.45 per month 
		Summer 	Non-Summer 
(2) 	Demand charge: 		
	a. Minimum demand charge 750 kw or less ..... 	$16,705.93 	$13,316.74 
	b. All additional kw (per kw) ..... 	22.27 	17.76 
(3) 	Energy charge: 		
	All kwh (per kwh) ..... 	0.0509 	0.0435 
 
(d)  Minimum monthly bill: The demand charge plus the charge for energy used during the month 
(e)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(f)  Billing demand: The maximum thirty-minute kw demand measured during the billing month, but not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the maximum billing demand during the billing months of June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven-month billing period. If there has been a significant change in operation from the previous year, the director may reduce a customer's ratchet amount to fifty (50) percent until a new maximum billing demand is set during the forthcoming June, July, August and September. 
(g)  Primary service: When the customer owns and maintains all equipment except metering equipment, necessary to take service at thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) volts or higher, total rate charges will be reduced by ten cents ($0.10) times the highest thirty-minute kw demand during the billing cycle. 
(h)  Primary metering: If, at the option of the department, service is metered at primary voltage, the measured demand and kwh will each be decreased by two (2) percent. 
(i)  Power factor: Customer will at all times maintain a power factor of not less than ninety (90) percent lagging. If power factor is less than ninety (90) percent, the measured kw demand will be multiplied by the ratio of ninety (90) percent divided by the actual power factor to determine the adjusted measured demand to be used for determination of billing demand. The department may, at its option, use for adjustment the power factor determined: 
(1)  By test during periods of maximum demand; or 
(2)  By measurement of the average monthly power factor. 
(j)  Load shedding program: Any industrial service customer may elect to reduce electrical consumption when requested to do so by the utility during load shedding periods. Customers who wish to participate in the utility's load shedding program shall inform the utility in writing no later than April 15 of each year. More specific terms of the load shedding program shall be defined in a separate agreement between the customer and the city. 
(1)  Monthly rate: Credit for demand shedding will be computed as follows: 
a.  Performance rate. If the electric utility requests customer to shed load, the performance rate shall be calculated at three dollars ($3.00) per month for each kw shed on average for the load shedding periods during the months of June through September. Customer shall receive a monthly credit based upon the performance rate beginning in October. The performance rate shall be applied to each month's bill for a period of one (1) year. 
b.  If there is no load shedding event in a given year, the credit shall be reduced to fifty (50) percent of the performance rate and shall remain at that level until the customer sheds demand as part of this program in any subsequent year or until the customer's participation in the program ends, whichever occurs first. If the performance rate cannot be determined, the credit shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) each month. If a customer with more than one (1) account is participating in this program, the agreement shall specify which account is to receive the credit. 
(2)  Metering: The utility will install a recording demand meter to measure the customer's energy load during the periods the utility requests the customer to reduce the load. Customer, at customer's expense, shall be responsible for installing and maintaining a telephone line connection to each meter for use by the utility. 
(3)  Demand reduction: The customer shall receive a credit on the customer's monthly bill beginning in October of each year based on the customer demand shedding performance (not to exceed fifty (50) percent of customer's load prior to shedding, as defined in the agreement). 
(4)  Customer participating in the load shedding program shall remain in the program for an initial period of one (1) year. 
(k)  Energy storage rider. 
(1)  Available: The energy storage rider is available to any customer receiving electric service under the industrial service rate that has installed energy storage facilities approved by the utility as being capable of sustaining at least five hundred (500) kw in equivalent energy capacity for continued load reduction for a minimum of four (4) hours. 
(2)  Energy charge: Energy supplied for the period beginning 12:00 midnight and ending at 6:00 a.m. shall be charged at the rate of 3.76 cents per kwh during the summer months and 3.37 cents per kwh during the non-summer months. Energy charged at this rate will be subject to the fuel adjustment allowance in section 27-118. 
(3)  Demand charge: As set forth in separate agreement between the utility and customer, for a period of twenty (20) hours each day the monthly measured demand will be excluded for the purpose of the billing of demand as set forth in subsection (f) while under this rider. Measured demand period will exclude Saturday and Sunday of each week. 
(4)  Billing demand: The maximum thirty-minute kw demand measured during the billing month, but not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the maximum billing demand during the billing months of June, July, August and September of the preceding eleven (11) months. If there has been a significant change in operation from the previous year, the director may reduce a customer's ratchet amount to fifty (50) percent until a new maximum billing demand is set during the forthcoming June, July, August and September. 
(5)  Metering: The utility will install all recording demand meters necessary to measure the demand period. The customer shall pay a non-refundable fee to cover the actual costs for the metering required for the energy storage rider. 
(6)  Load shedding program: The load shedding program does not apply to the energy storage rider. 
(7)  Contract: Customers wishing to receive service on the energy storage rider must first enter into an agreement with the city that includes provisions concerning: emergency use of the system; a description of the energy storage system; listed hours in which demand charges are excluded; and length of the term of the contract. 
(8)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on the rates set forth in this subsection, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(l)  Off-peak discount. 
(1)  Available: The off-peak discount is available to any customer receiving electric service under the industrial service rate that has a load factor at or in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of their summer peak load. The load factor will be calculated using the customer's highest one-half hour kw demand that is coincident with the annual system peak of the electric utility. Qualifying customers must notify the water and light department, in writing, that the customer wants to receive the off-peak discount. 
(2)  Energy charge: Energy supplied for the period beginning 12:00 midnight and ending at 6:00 a.m. shall be charged at the rate of 3.86 cents per kwh during the summer months and 3.46 cents per kwh during the non-summer months. Energy charged at this rate will be subject to the fuel adjustment allowance in section 27-118. 
(3)  Demand charge: During the hours beginning 10:00 p.m. and ending the following 9:00 a.m., the monthly measured demand will be excluded for the purpose of the billing of demand as set forth in subsection (f) while under this rider. 
(4)  Metering: The customer will provide the city a dedicated private phone line for the installation and operation of remote reading/recording demand and energy meter to measure the time of day readings necessary for monitoring loads and billing. 
(5)  Load shedding program: Customers receiving the off-peak discount are not eligible for the demand discount outlined in subsection (j). 
(6)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax: In addition to the charge based on the rates set forth in this subsection, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(Code 1964, § 15.580; Ord. No. 9930, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 10458, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 13148, § 1, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 13748, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. 14776, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 15572, § 1, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 15978, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17651, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 18220, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18689, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 19877, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 20807, § 1, 12-6-10; Ord. No. 21432, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21661, § 1, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23516 , § 1, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 23639 , § 1, 9-17-18)  
Sec. 27-118. - Same—Fuel adjustment allowance. 
(a)  The monthly rate charge will be average annual cost per kwh above or below three and twenty-five hundredths cents ($.0325) per kilowatt hour. In determining the fuel adjustment allowance under the formula set forth above, the energy cost shall be the sum of the following: 
(1)  Average cost of fuel in the city's generating plant based on the net kilowatt hour generated in the city's plant; 
(2)  Cost of purchased energy based on the net kilowatt hour purchased; 
(3)  The monthly capacity costs (including the demand cost of purchased power) less the amount billed under special contract rates. 
(Code 1964, § 15.585; Ord. No. 9930, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 10459, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. 11925, § 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 14776, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 16185, § 1, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 27-119. - Same—Data transfer and communication equipment structure rate. 
(a)  Availability. Upon application and by approval of the director, the data transfer and communication equipment structure rate is available for limited electrical service to data transfer and communication equipment. To qualify for this rate, the customer shall have at least one (1) metered data transfer and communication equipment shelter of similar size containing similar data transfer and communications equipment and the customer shall agree to allow the director or the director's designee access to the equipment, shelter, and records related to the equipment and shelter for purposes of audits and inspections. The director shall only approve the application of this rate to a customer's data transfer and communication equipment structure when the director, in the director's sole discretion, determines: 
(1)  The electrical service is to be used by data transfer and communication equipment housed within an exterior structure that is no greater than twenty-four (24) cubic feet in size; 
(2)  Based upon metered data of a similarly sized structure with the similar data transfer and communications equipment, the estimated daily electrical usage for each piece of equipment contained within the exterior structure is less than three (3) kWh; 
(3)  That it is a benefit to the utility not to install a meter for the service; and 
(4)  That the service shall not include lighting of the exterior structure or premises. 
(b)  Type of service. The type of service shall be single-or three-phase, sixty-hertz, at one of the department's standard service voltages. 
(c)  Calculation of estimated usage. For each exterior structure containing data transfer and communications equipment, the director or the director's designee shall estimate usage based upon metered usage of similar equipment. 
(d)  Monthly rate charge. The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustment as provided in section 27-118: 
Customer charge, per month ..... $10.85 
Cost per kWh ..... 9.44 cents per kWh 
(e)  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum bill for single- or three-phase service shall be ten dollars and eighty-five cents ($10.85) per month. 
(f)  Payment in lieu of taxes and sales tax. In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and the current in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(Ord. No. 21752, § 1, 7-15-13) 
Note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 21752 states, "Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver or forfeiture of the city's right to regulate the use and occupancy of the right-of-way or imposition and collection of a business license tax or gross receipts tax from any such customer.  
Sec. 27-120. - Same—Small power producer/cogenerator rate. 
(a)  Available to: The small power producer/cogenerator rate schedule is available to any customer who owns and can operate generating equipment of one hundred (100) kw or less in parallel with Columbia Water and Light Department, and having electrical power supply with the city. 
(b)  Applicable to: The small power producer/cogenerator rate is applicable to a residential or general service customer who contracts for service supplied at one (1) point of delivery. Applicable to single- and three-phase customers. 
(c)  Rate payment: In order to qualify for payment of capacity charge to the cogenerator or small power producer facility by the Columbia Water and Light Department, the qualified facility must be on line generating whenever the water and light loads are exceeding ninety (90) percent of the system's peak. Payment to the cogenerator or small power producer will be made monthly based on the following rate schedule: 
(1)  Capacity charge: Four dollars and sixty cents ($4.60) per kW, with a total annual payment of fifty-five dollars and twenty cents ($55.20) per kW. 
(2)  Energy: Two and one-half cents ($0.025) per kWh. 
(d)  Energy adjustments: The energy charge will be adjusted quarterly to reflect changes in the average avoided cost. 
(e)  Interconnection: The customer will normally be required to furnish his own transforming, protective, and other necessary equipment which must comply with specifications of Columbia Water and Light Department. 
(f)  Supplementary service: Service will be available for supplementary power. The rate that will apply is the standard retail rate for the particular class of customer. 
(g)  Power factor: A qualifying facility will be required to maintain a power factor of not less than eighty-five (85) percent lagging. If the power factor is less than eighty-five (85) percent and the qualifying facility does not expeditiously take corrective action, the department can, at its option, discontinue service or can install necessary corrective equipment on its lines to improve the power factor to at least eighty-five (85) percent and will charge the qualifying facility for the total installation cost. 
(h)  Contract period: The contract period shall be automatically renewable annually, with notice to be given one (1) year in advance by either party. 
(Code 1964, § 15.595; Ord. No. 10008, § 1, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-120.1. - Same—Customer-generator rate. 
(a)  Available to: The customer-generator rate is available to any customer that owns and operates a solar, wind, or biomass generating facility or hydrogen fuel cell with a capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kilowatts which is located on the customer's premises, is permanently interconnected and operates in parallel, with the department's existing transmission and distribution facilities, and is intended primarily to offset part or all of the customer's own electrical energy requirements. 
(b)  Applicable to: The customer-generator rate is applicable to a residential, small general service, large general service, or industrial customer who contracts for service supplied at one (1) point of delivery. The rate is applicable to single- and three-phase customers. 
(c)  Rate credit: The customer-generator is eligible for a net metering credit for all energy supplied to the department system from a qualified net metering unit. Any rate credits granted by this section shall expire without any compensation at the earlier of either twelve (12) months after their issuance or when the customer-generator disconnects service or terminates the net metering relationship with the city. Applicable charges will be calculated for all energy supplied to the customer-generator based on the applicable rates for the customer class. All energy supplied by the customer-generator will be credited at the following rate per kWh, based on the size and type of generator: 
(1)  Solar generators. 
a.  For either the purchase of energy and renewable energy credits or the purchase of energy and the customer-generator is retiring the renewable energy credit for customer's own local load as soon as it is generated, solar customer-generators shall receive credit per kWh equal to the customer's current applicable rate schedule. 
b.  For the purchase of energy with the customer-generator retaining the renewable energy credits, the customer-generator shall receive credit per kWh equal to the rate per kWh defined in section 27-120(c)(2). 
(2)  Non-solar renewable generating facilities will receive a rate credit based upon the avoided average energy market price at the Columbia pricing node. This price will be adjusted each fiscal year based on the previous year average. 
a.  For the purchase of energy with the customer-generator retaining the renewable energy credits, the customer-generator shall receive credit per kWh equal to the rate per kWh defined in section 27-120(c)(2). 
(d)  Interconnection: Any customer requesting interconnection to the utility must enter into an interconnection and net metering agreement with the city and receive written approval from the department before construction or installation of interconnecting equipment. The department shall limit the number of interconnections so that the total rated generating capacity of all applications for interconnection already approved to date by the city in a calendar year equals or exceeds one (1) percent of the city's single-hour peak load for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 17894, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 19547, § 1, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 21312, § 1, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23894 , § 1, 6-3-19)  
Sec. 27-121. - Outdoor area lighting (dusk to dawn) rate. 
(a)  Availability. The outdoor area lighting (dusk to dawn) rate is available to any customer within the area served by the city electric system for private street lighting and for outdoor area lighting (dusk to dawn) when such lighting facilities are unmetered and operated as an extension of the city's distribution system. 
(b)  Type of service. The city shall furnish, install, maintain and deliver electric service to automatically controlled lighting fixtures conforming to the department's standards, and subject to the published rules and regulations of the city water and light department. 
(c)  When required for private street lighting or for outdoor area (dusk to dawn) lighting, a pole with one span of #6 aluminum wire, up to one hundred fifty (150) feet, and necessary pole line hardware and accessories, shall be installed. Customer will be charged a one-time pole charge based on the current cost paid, by the department, for the type of pole used. 
(d)  Outdoor area lighting. Underground wire and conduit shall be installed and maintained by the customer for private street lighting for outdoor area (dusk to dawn) lighting. In addition to the one-time pole charge identified in section 27-121(c), the following rates shall apply for each light: 
Lumen Range     Charge per Month 
7,000 to 11,000 ..... $6.00 per light 
25,000 to 30,000 ..... 12.97 per light 
42,000 to 52,000 ..... 15.57 per light 
7,000 to 11,000 Post-top Luminaire ..... 9.72 per light 
(Code 1964, § 15.600; Ord. No. 10276, § 1, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20051, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21076, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-121.1. - Special outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Availability. The special outdoor lighting schedule is available for electrical service to sport field lighting, carnival, circus or holiday decorative lighting or similar temporary or seasonal use. 
(b)  Type of service. The type of service shall be single-or three-phase, sixty-hertz, at one of the department's standard service voltages. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge. The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be as follows, subject to fuel adjustment as provided in section 27-118: 
Customer charge ..... 	$56.10 
Cost per Kwh ..... 	12.74 cents per kwh 
 
(d)  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum bill for single- or three-phase service shall be fifty-six dollars and ten cents ($56.10) per month. 
(e)  Payment in lieu of taxes and sales tax. In addition to the charge based on monthly rates as computed above, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and in lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and be in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(f)  Primary service. When the customer owns and maintains all equipment, except metering equipment, necessary to take service at thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) volts or higher: 
(1)  A five (5) percent reduction in total rate charges shall be made if service is metered at primary voltage. 
(2)  A three (3) percent reduction in total rate charges shall be made if service is metered at secondary voltage. 
(Ord. No. 11975, § 1, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 18220, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18689, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20742, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 22217, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-121.2. - Transmission service rate. 
(a)  Availability. Customers that anticipate usage that will exceed ten (10) megawatts of hourly load and that provide the infrastructure necessary to take service at either sixty-nine (69) kV or one hundred sixty-one (161) kV will be placed on the transmission service rate set forth in this section and will be subject to a contract governing delivery of the requested power that is negotiated by the water and light director with final approval by the city council. 
(b)  Application. The transmission service rate shall apply to all electric service for a premises where the service is supplied at one (1) point of delivery and measured through one (1) meter. 
(c)  Monthly rate charge. The monthly rate per kilowatt hour shall be equal to the actual cost of such energy to the city, based on the following: 
(1)  Five (5) megawatt blocks of power purchased twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week for a minimum period agreed to by the customer and city. 
(2)  Best market energy price as may be available, plus any actual monthly market capacity price that is imposed by any third party energy provider offering energy for sale to the city and customer, plus (or minus) other actual market charges that may apply to transactions in the energy and operating reserve market of the Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO). 
(3)  Customer must pay for the full amount of all energy requested by customer even if not used, however, every effort will be made by the electric utility to sell excess energy back to the market and provide a credit to the customer. 
(d)  In lieu of gross receipts tax payments and sales tax. In addition to the charge based on monthly rates, the total monthly charge for service shall include applicable sales taxes and an lieu of gross receipts tax payment equal to 7.5268 percent of the monthly rate charge. Sales taxes shall be applied to the total of the monthly rate charge and the in lieu of gross receipts tax payment. 
(Ord. No. 12273, § 1, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 19212, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 20570, § 1, 3-1-10)  
Sec. 27-121.3. - Street lighting rate. 
(a)  Availability. The street lighting rate is available to any customer within the area served by the city's electric system for street lighting when such lighting facilities are unmetered and operated as an extension of the city's distribution system. 
(b)  Type of service. The city shall furnish, install, maintain and deliver electric service to automatically controlled lighting fixtures conforming to the department's standards and subject to the published rules and regulations of the city's water and light department. 
(c)  Light and fixture rates per month. Light and fixture rates with lamp size, lamp type, service type, pole type and standard pole-bracket arm mounted are as follows: 
100 watt high pressure sodium post-top-luminaire underground service ..... $11.65 
100 watt high pressure sodium overhead service on existing pole ..... 7.65 
100 watt high pressure sodium overhead service new pole placement ..... 8.65 
100 watt high pressure sodium underground service on existing pole ..... 12.77 
100 watt high pressure sodium underground service new pole placement ..... 13.77 
175 watt high pressure sodium overhead service on existing pole ..... 8.10 
175 watt mercury vapor overhead service new pole placement ..... 9.10 
250 watt high pressure sodium overhead service on existing pole ..... 9.18 
250 watt high pressure sodium underground service on steel pole ..... 30.59 
400 watt high pressure sodium overhead service on existing pole ..... 15.75 
400 watt high pressure sodium overhead service new pole placement ..... 16.75 
400 watt high pressure sodium underground service on existing pole ..... 20.87 
400 watt high pressure sodium on special aluminum pole ..... 24.13 
400 watt high pressure sodium underground service on steel pole ..... 33.57 
400 watt high pressure sodium underground service new pole placement ..... 21.87 
Exception: Dual arm bracket with 400 watt high pressure sodium underground service on steel pole ..... $67.14 per month 
( Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of 22787 states, "The new rates established in this ordinance shall be applied to utility bills beginning with the first complete cycle billed after April 30, 2016."  
Sec. 27-122. - Water rates inside city limits—Residential/commercial multiple-family facilities. 
(a)  The rates to be charged for water furnished to residential customers, commercial multiple family facilities customers, and multiple commercial facilities served with one meter, within the city limits of the city are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf), inside city limits: 
All water, beginning with first one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf) ..... $2.86 
Summer water usage for residential customers, except commercial multiple-family facilities and multiple commercial facilities served through a single meter: 
Usage of zero (0) to seventy (70) percent of winter average consumption ..... 2.86 
Usage of seventy-one (71) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 4.01 
Usage exceeding one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 6.02 
Summer water usage for commercial multiple-family facilities, and multiple commercial facilities served through a single meter: 
Usage of zero (0) to seventy (70) percent of winter average consumption ..... 2.86 
Usage of seventy (70) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 4.01 
Usage exceeding one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 6.02 
(2)  Minimum charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), based on meter size: 
? and ¾-inch ..... 10.00 
1-inch ..... 14.38 
1½-inch ..... 28.96 
2-inch ..... 43.05 
3-inch ..... 150.68 
4-inch ..... 333.13 
6-inch ..... 717.50 
(3)  Fire flow charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1) and the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), based on meter size for portion of system capacity necessary for providing public fire protection: 
? and ¾-inch ..... $1.59 
1-inch ..... 1.69 
1½-inch ..... 2.44 
2-inch ..... 2.63 
3-inch ..... 6.31 
4-inch ..... 9.75 
6-inch ..... 19.51 
(4)  Backflow prevention charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), and the fire flow charge in subsection (a)(3), is charged when a customer is required to install a backflow prevention device as outlined in section 27-57. 
For each backflow device at a customer location ..... $2.00 
(b)  For water service metered separately for lawn irrigation: 
Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf): 
Non-summer water usage ..... $2.86 
Summer water usage ..... 6.02 
(c)  For water service metered separately for a community food garden: Customers shall be charged at rates provided in section 27-122(a), except that rates for summer water usage shall not exceed the established rate for usage of seventy-one (71) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption. 
(Code 1964, § 15-610; Ord. No. 12606, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 12833, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 12947, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 13119, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 13414, § 1, 8-17-92; Ord. No. 14215, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14620, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15352, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15760, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16422, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17022, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17436, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17833, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18219, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18690, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19211, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19680, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20053, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20172, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 20418, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20743, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21077, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21433, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21803, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22218, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22927 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 23873 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 27-122.1. - Same—Commercial. 
(a)  The rates to be charged for water furnished to commercial customers within the city limits who use fifty thousand (50,000) cubic feet (500 ccf) or less per month average during non-summer months are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf), inside city limits: 
All water, beginning with first one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf) ..... $2.70 
Summer water usage: 
Usage of zero (0) to seventy (70) percent of winter average consumption ..... 2.70 
Usage of seventy-one (71) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 4.01 
Usage exceeding one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 6.02 
(2)  Minimum charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), based on meter size: 
? and ¾-inch ..... 10.00 
1-inch ..... 14.38 
1½-inch ..... 28.96 
2-inch ..... 43.05 
3-inch ..... 150.68 
4-inch ..... 333.13 
6-inch ..... 717.50 
(3)  Fire flow charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1) and the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), based on meter size for portion of system capacity necessary for providing public fire protection: 
? and ¾-inch ..... $1.59 
1-inch ..... 1.69 
1½-inch ..... 2.44 
2-inch ..... 2.63 
3-inch ..... 6.31 
4-inch ..... 9.75 
6-inch ..... 19.51 
(4)  Backflow prevention charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), and the fire flow charge in subsection (a)(3), is charged when a customer is required to install a backflow prevention device as outlined in section 27-57. 
For each backflow device at a customer location ..... $2.00 
(b)  For water service metered separately for lawn irrigation: 
Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf): 
Non-summer water usage ..... $2.70 
Summer water usage ..... 6.02 
(c)  For water service metered separately for a community food garden: Customers shall be charged at rates provided in section 27-122.1(a), except that rates for summer water usage shall not exceed the established rate for usage of seventy-one (71) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption. 
(Ord. No. 12833, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 12947, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 13119, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 14215, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14620, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15352, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15760, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16422, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17022, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17436, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17833, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18219, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18690, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19211, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19680, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20053, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20172, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 20418, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20743, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21077, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21433, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21803, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22218, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22927 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 23873 , § 1, 5-20-19)  
Sec. 27-122.2. - Same—Large commercial. 
(a)  The rates to be charged for water furnished to commercial customers within the city limits who use more than fifty thousand (50,000) cubic feet (500 ccf) per month average during non-summer months are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf), inside city limits: 
All water, beginning with first one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf) ..... $2.70 
Summer water usage: 
Usage of zero (0) to seventy (70) percent of winter average consumption ..... 2.70 
Usage of seventy-one (71) to one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 4.01 
Usage exceeding one hundred seventy (170) percent of winter average consumption ..... 6.02 
(2)  Minimum charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), based on meter size: 
1-inch ..... 14.38 
1½-inch ..... 28.96 
2-inch ..... 43.05 
3-inch ..... 150.68 
4-inch ..... 333.13 
6-inch ..... 717.50 
8-inch ..... 1,230.00 
(3)  Fire flow charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1) and the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), based on meter size for portion of system capacity necessary for providing public fire protection: 
1-inch ..... 1.69 
1½-inch ..... 2.44 
2-inch ..... 2.63 
3-inch ..... 6.31 
4-inch ..... 9.75 
6-inch ..... 19.51 
(4)  Backflow prevention charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), and the fire flow charge in subsection (a)(3), is charged when a customer is required to install a backflow prevention device as outlined in section 27-57. 
For each backflow device at a customer location ..... $2.00 
(Ord. No. 12833, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 12947, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 13119, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 14215, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14620, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15352, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15760, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16422, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17022, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17436, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17833, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18219, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18690, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19211, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19680, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20053, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20172, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 20418, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20743, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21077, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21433, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21803, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22218, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22927 , § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 23305 , § 1, 9-18-17, eff. 10-1-17; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 27-122.3. - Water temporarily supplied by adjoining water district. 
(a)  Application: This rate shall apply to water supplied by an adjoining water district, when development occurs in the City of Columbia Water Service Territory, until city water mains have reached the development. Water meters shall be installed and read by city employees. 
(b)  The rates to be charged for water furnished to residential or commercial customers are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf): All water, beginning with first one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf): One hundred ten (110) percent of the applicable rate charged by the water district supplying the water. 
(2)  Minimum charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (b)(1), will be the amount listed in section 27-122(a)(2), based on meter size. 
(c)  Exception: This rate will not apply to existing city customers when a leak, or other disruption of supply, requires that the city temporarily take supply from an adjoining water district. 
(Ord. No. 18827, § 1, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of 22787 states, "The new rates established in this ordinance shall be applied to utility bills beginning with the first complete cycle billed after April 30, 2016."  
Sec. 27-123. - Water rates outside city limits. 
The rates to be charged for all water and all water-related services and fees including, but not limited to, monthly minimum charge, fire flow charge, backflow prevention and lawn irrigation furnished to customers outside the city limits shall be the rate set forth for a similarly situated customer inside the city limits multiplied by 1.33, rounded to the nearest cent. 
(Code 1964, § 15.625; Ord. No. 12606, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 12833, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 12947, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 13119, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 13414, § 1, 8-17-92; Ord. No. 14215, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 14620, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 15352, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15760, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16422, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17022, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17436, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17833, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18219, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18690, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19211, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19680, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20053, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20172, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 20418, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20743, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 21077, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21433, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21803, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22218, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 27-123.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, adopted January 22, 2019, repealed § 27-123.1, which pertained to water rates outside city limits—commercial. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 27-123.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, adopted January 22, 2019, repealed § 27-123.2, which pertained to water rates outside city limits—large commercial. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 27-123.3. - Water rates outside city limits—Columbia Regional Airport. 
(a)  The rates to be charged for water furnished to customers at the Columbia Regional Airport are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf), Columbia Regional Airport: 
All water, beginning with first one hundred (100) cubic feet (1 ccf) ..... $ 4.217 
(2)  Minimum charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1) will be the amount listed in section 27-122.1(a)(2), based on meter size. 
(3)  Backflow prevention charge per month, charged in addition to the volume charge in subsection (a)(1), and the minimum charge in subsection (a)(2), is charged when a customer is required to install a backflow prevention device as outlined in section 27-57. 
Each backflow device at a customer location will be charged the amount defined in section 27-122.1(a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 15009, § 1, 10-7-96; Ord. No. 15261, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 17331, § 1, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 18826, § 1, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 20563, § 1, 2-15-10; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 27-124. - Water rates, within former boundaries of dissolved Public Water Supply Districts No. 1 and No. 2, outside city limits—Residential/commercial multiple-family facilities. 
The rates to be charged for all water and all water-related services and fees including, but not limited to, monthly minimum charge, fire flow charge, backflow prevention and lawn irrigation furnished to customers outside the city limits within the former boundaries of dissolved Public Water Supply Districts No. 1 and No. 2 shall be the rate set forth for a similarly situated customer inside the city limits multiplied by 1.157, rounded to the nearest cent, per ccf. 
(Ord. No. 14905, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 15352, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 15647, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 15760, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 16186, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 16422, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 17022, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 17436, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 17833, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 18219, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 18690, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19211, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 19680, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20053, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20172, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 20418, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 20743, § 1, 9-20-1; Ord. No. 21077, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 21433, § 1, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 21803, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 22218, § 1, 9-15-14 ; Ord. No. 22787, § 1, 4-4-16 ; Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 27-124.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, adopted January 22, 2019, repealed § 27-124.1, which pertained to water rates within former boundaries of dissolved Public Water Supply Districts No. 1 and No. 2, outside city limits—commercial. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 27-124.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23763 , § 1, adopted January 22, 2019, repealed § 27-124.2, which pertained to water rates within former boundaries of dissolved Public Water Supply Districts No. 1 and No. 2, outside city limits—large commercial. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 27-125. - Same—Fire protection. 
No monthly charge for water shall be made for fire protection facilities, sprinkler systems, hose closets, etc.; provided, that any water used by such system is used for the sole purpose of preventing or extinguishing fires. Metered water use from fire hydrants shall be billed at the residential rate in effect for the jurisdiction and the season when used. 
(Code 1964, § 15.640; Ord. No. 18218, § 1, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 27-126. - Sales tax. 
Sales tax, when applicable, shall be added to all charges for water and electric service. 
(Code 1964, § 15.630)  
Sec. 27-127. - Standby service rate. 
None of the rates herein established for water and electric service shall apply to partial or standby service. Service of this type will be available only by contract approved by the city, at a rate to be determined at the time service is desired. 
(Code 1964, § 15.635)  
Sec. 27-128. - In lieu of tax payment. 
(a)  A seven (7) percent in lieu of gross receipts tax payment shall be charged on customer bills for water, electricity and private street and outdoor area lighting. Such in lieu of tax payment shall be applied by the water and light department to monthly bills for the above services as follows: 
(1)  For water, the amount of the customer's bill as determined by the applicable rate, excluding any other taxes, multiplied by 1.075268. 
(2)  For electricity, the amount of the customer's bill as determined by the applicable rate, including all adjustments but excluding any other taxes, multiplied by 1.075268. 
(3)  For private street and outdoor lighting service, the amount of the customer's bill excluding any other taxes, multiplied by 1.075268. 
(b)  Sales tax, when applicable, shall be applied to the entire amounts as computed above. 
(Code 1964, § 15.645)  
Sec. 27-129. - Discount for direct load control—Residential service rate and small general service rate. 
A zero (0) percent discount shall be offered on the customer charge and usage, net of fuel adjustment, and before taxes are applied on service used during summer as defined in section 27-16 for electric service provided under the residential service rate (section 27-112), and the small general service rate (section 27-114) when the customer receiving such service allows the city to install and operate a radio-controlled switching device on the customer's air-conditioning or heat pump equipment, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Load control devices shall be installed only on central air-conditioning and heat pump equipment. 
(2)  The maximum size unit allowed will be five (5) tons, except when the unit has a control system that will accommodate switch installation and the installation has been authorized by the director. 
(3)  The city will install and maintain the radio-control device. 
(4)  A written authorization will be provided by the customer (by the owner for rental property) permitting the city to install, maintain, and operate the switch device. 
(5)  The air-conditioner or heat pump is maintained by the customer and in a manner such that it operates at its highest efficiency. 
(6)  The city shall have the authority to discontinue the discount at any time that the customer violates any provision of this section, and shall not restore the discount until the violation is corrected. 
(7)  If the customer receiving load control service is not satisfied with the service, the customer may request that the city remove the load control switch at which time the discount shall also be terminated. 
(8)  The discount shall be applied for service rendered to any premises after the written authority is received and shall continue thereafter even though the premises are sold or the occupant changes until such time as the current occupant or owner requests that the service be terminated. 
(9)  If more than twenty-five (25) percent of the air-conditioning load is supplied by equipment that does not allow the installation of a load control device, participation in this program and amount of discount shall be determined by the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 11464, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 13491, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 18691, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Sec. 27-130. - Same—Large general service. 
A discount shall be offered on service used during summer as defined in section 27-16 for electric service provided under the large general service (section 27-116) when the customer receiving such service allows the city to install and operate a radio-controlled switching device on the customer's air-conditioning or heat pump equipment, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A zero (0) percent discount shall be offered on the customer charge and usage, net of fuel adjustment, and before taxes. 
(2)  Load control devices shall be installed only on central air-conditioning and heat pump equipment. 
(3)  There shall be no maximum size for air conditioning or heat pump units, provided that the unit has a control system that will accommodate switch installation, and the director has authorized the installation. 
(4)  The city will install and maintain the radio-control device. 
(5)  A written authorization will be provided by the customer (by the owner for rental property) permitting the city to install, maintain and operate the switch device. 
(6)  The air-conditioner or heat pump is maintained by the customer and in a manner such that it operates at its highest efficiency. 
(7)  The city shall have the authority to discontinue the discount at any time that the customer violates any provision of this section, and shall not restore the discount until the violation is corrected. 
(8)  If the customer receiving load control service is not satisfied with the service, the customer may request that the city remove the load control switch at which time the discount shall also be terminated. 
(9)  The discount shall be applied for service rendered to any premises after the written authority is received and shall continue thereafter even though the premises are sold or the occupant changes until such time as the current occupant or owner requests that the service be terminated. 
(10)  If more than twenty-five (25) percent of the air-conditioning load is supplied by equipment which does not allow installation of a load control device, participation in this program and the amount of discount will be at the determination of the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 14051, § 1, 5-16-94; Ord. No. 15619, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 20417, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 22438, § 1, 5-18-15 ; Ord. No. 22928 , § 1, 9-19-16)  
Secs. 27-131—27-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 
 
Sec. 27-136. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Air conditioning system. An installation for maintenance, by heat removal, of temperatures which are not less than sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Air conditioning system and refrigeration system. Any combination of equipment, whether compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air and from which the accumulated or effluent heat is wholly or partially removed by the use of water. 
Refrigeration system. An installation for maintenance, by heat removal, of temperatures which are less than sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit. 
System. Any combination of apparatus, individual unit, group or collection of units supplied with water through any single customer service pipe connected to the public water system. 
(Code 1964, § 15.650) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-137. - Installation. 
No person shall install equipment for an air conditioning system or a refrigeration system which requires a connection to, or which will use water from the water system of the water and light department of the city, unless such equipment includes water conservation equipment such as cooling towers, evaporative condensers or other water cooling equipment which will allow reuse of all water with only the normal evaporative losses. 
(Code 1964, § 15.660)  
Sec. 27-138. - Fees; permits; enforcement. 
The payment of fees and issuing of permits for installation of an air conditioning system or a refrigeration system shall be as provided for in chapter 6, article II, Building Code; article III, Electrical Code, and article IV, Plumbing Code; of this Code of Ordinances. The enforcement of this division and the assessment of penalties, if any, shall be as set forth in such chapter 6, articles II, III and IV. 
(Code 1964, § 15.670)  
Secs. 27-139—27-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STREET LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 27-146. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this division: 
Luminaire. A street light fixture, exclusive of mounting devices. 
Normal street lighting. Street lighting and related accessories of a type, size and kind normally installed by the city as herein provided for. 
Ornamental street lighting. Street lighting and related accessories of a type and kind more aesthetic than normally installed by the city. 
Parties. Any individual citizen, company, corporation or institution, or any group consisting of more than one of the above, acting through a single individual person, for the purpose of requesting and obtaining ornamental street lighting in any given area. 
Refractor. A transparent glass or plastic covering around a light source, designed to direct the light into a given area. 
(Code 1964, § 15.700; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Sec. 27-147. - Installation generally. 
(a)  Street lighting shall be installed on all public streets and alleys within the city limits, except as herein provided. 
(b)  Normally, such lighting shall be installed at the time streets are improved and the adjoining areas are developed. 
(c)  Unimproved streets shall be lighted if they are open to public travel and if they are being used sufficiently, by vehicles or pedestrians, as provided herein, to warrant such lighting. 
(d)  Streets that are dedicated to the public, but not open to public travel, shall not be lighted until such time as they are opened to the public and meet all other requirements set forth herein. 
(e)  Lighting will not be required on streets that are open to public use but which are located in undeveloped areas where the volume of use is less than twelve (12) vehicles or pedestrians during the night hour of maximum travel. 
(f)  Lighting on all state controlled highways or roadways within the city limits, including interchanges, ramps, outer-roadways or any other traveled way within the limits of state highway right-of-way, shall be in accordance with the policy of, and as permitted by the state highway commission. 
(g)  The director of public works, in cooperation with the director of the water and light department, shall determine the need for new or additional lighting on all public streets and alleys. This determination shall consider the number of vehicles and pedestrians using the street during the night hours as herein provided. Priorities, when necessary, shall be given to those streets having the highest volume of use. 
(Code 1964, § 15.710; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Sec. 27-148. - Design—Generally. 
(a)  The type, location, size and general design of all street lights and street light circuits shall be as herein provided and as determined by the director of the water and light department. 
(b)  Street lights may be mounted on wood, metal or concrete poles, or supports of other material specifically designed for such use and street light circuits may be placed overhead or underground. 
(c)  When existing power or telephone poles are in place along a street, such poles shall be utilized for street lighting as much as possible in order to keep the total number of obstructions along the street to a minimum. 
(d)  New street lights shall be of the high pressure sodium or other high-intensity type, generally attractive and modern in appearance, and shall be equipped with a glass or plastic refractor designed to control the light and reduce glare. A full cutoff refractor shall be used on mast-arm mounted luminaires in residential areas. 
(Code 1964, § 15.720; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Sec. 27-149. - Same—Residential streets. 
(a)  Street lights on residential streets shall be placed at each intersection. 
(b)  Where intersections on residential streets are in excess of four hundred (400) feet apart, additional lights shall be placed along the street at intervals not exceeding four hundred (400) feet. These lights shall be comparable in appearance and light output to the lights used at the intersections of residential streets. 
(c)  Where residential streets intersect with streets of a higher classification, the lighting at such intersections shall be that required by such higher classification. 
(d)  On residential streets, the city shall provide, at no cost to others, all poles, wire, fixtures, lamps and other accessories required for street lighting as herein prescribed; provided, however, all poles be treated wood poles and all wiring shall be overhead and all light fixtures shall be of the type normally used and considered standard for such use. 
(e)  On residential streets, ornamental street lighting consisting of metal, concrete or other type ornamental poles and/or underground wiring may be installed if requested and as provided under section 27-151 of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 15.730; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Sec. 27-150. - Same—Other streets. 
(a)  All streets, other than residential streets and limited access state-controlled highways, shall have continuous lighting. 
(b)  All continuous lighting shall meet the requirements of the American National Standards Institute for street and highway lighting, unless otherwise directed by city council. 
(c)  The size, type and kind of poles, luminaires, circuits, etc., for continuous lighting shall be as herein provided and as determined by the director to be most feasible, practical and compatible to the area. 
(Code 1964, § 15.740; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Sec. 27-151. - Ornamental street lighting on residential streets. 
(a)  Ornamental street lighting will be installed on residential streets where electric lines are underground. 
(b)  When ornamental street lighting is installed on residential streets where electric lines are overhead, the parties requesting such ornamental lighting shall pay to the city all costs incurred for such ornamental lighting in excess of the cost of installing or upgrading the normal street lighting which would be provided by the city. 
(c)  When ornamental street lighting is requested and installed on any residential street having an existing lighting system which is adequate and which complies with the requirements of the city as set forth in this division, the parties requesting such lighting shall pay the entire cost, including the cost of removing the existing lighting system, less the value of any salvaged material. 
(d)  Ornamental lighting on residential streets shall extend from one major intersection to another or from a major intersection to the end of the street or throughout an entire subdivision or other area. In no case will spot installations of ornamental lights (one or more ornamental lights located intermediately with normal street lights) be installed on any given street. 
(Code 1964, § 15.750; Ord. No. 16049, § 1, 6-21-99)  
Secs. 27-152—27-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ENERGY EFFICIENCY INCENTIVES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21063, § 1, adopted September 6, 2011, amended division 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 8, §§ 27-161—27-169, pertained to super saver loans, energy conservation loans, energy efficiency and solar rebates, and derived from Code 1964, § 15.900—15.950; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 13794, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 17895, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 19681, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 19919, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 20065, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 20527, § 1, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 20582, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 20808, § 1, 12-6-10. 
 
Sec. 27-161. - Public purpose. 
The public purpose of the energy efficiency incentive programs is hereby defined to be the reduction of energy consumption and electric peak demand in the city, thereby reducing the growth of energy use and demand in the city, providing for more efficient energy use and prolonging the useful life of capital assets of the electric utility, reducing the amount of future market energy purchases or long-term contracted purchases, and providing for the protection of the environment and conservation of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-162. - Energy efficiency incentives authorized. 
The city water and light utility is hereby authorized to institute a program of energy efficiency incentives, subject to the availability of funds for such purposes, for qualified customers of the water and light utility under the terms and conditions hereinafter established. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-163. - Source of funds; how limited. 
The energy efficiency incentive programs shall be instituted and maintained solely from funds within the water and light utility. No general revenue funds, nor any other form of public monies, shall be used by or lent to any private person or business entity under these programs, but rather such funds as are used shall flow from and be guaranteed by the enterprise fund of the water and light utility. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-164. - Energy efficiency reimbursement. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes the reimbursement programs listed in this section, subject to the availability of funds for such purposes, for qualified electric customers of the water and light utility. 
(b)  The following programs are established to encourage the purchase of approved equipment and approved installations: 
(1)  New Home with Energy Star. 
(2)  Residential Energy Efficiency. 
(3)  Renewable Energy Projects. 
(4)  Commercial Energy Efficiency. 
(c)  In order to be eligible for reimbursement, the customer must follow all program guidelines. Projects must be approved by the water and light department before the reimbursement will be awarded. 
(d)  Reimbursements will not be made in excess of documented expenses. 
(e)  For purposes of providing electric customer reimbursements, the water and light department shall establish policy and criteria for each program with regard to proper proof of purchase and installation of equipment to insure the integrity of each project. Each proposed project shall be reviewed by the water and light department to insure that it provides the intended benefits of the program. 
(f)  Reimbursements exceeding the maximum amount normally allowed under program policies will be conditional on a financial assessment by the water and light department and must be pre-approved by the water and light director. Such reimbursements shall be reported to the water and light advisory board. Policies and procedures are subject to change. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-165. - Energy efficiency grants. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes the grant programs listed in this section, subject to the availability of funds for such purposes, for qualified electric customers of the water and light utility. 
(b)  The following programs are established to encourage the purchase of approved equipment and approved installations: 
(1)  Tree Power. 
(2)  Air Conditioner Tune-up. 
(3)  Window Air Conditioner Exchange. 
(4)  Compressed Air Leak Detection Program. 
(5)  Infrared Thermology. 
(c)  For purposes of providing electric customer grants, the water and light department shall establish policy and criteria for each program. Each proposed project shall be reviewed by the water and light department to insure that it provides the intended benefits of the program. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-166. - Energy efficiency performance based incentives. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes the performance based incentives programs listed in this section, subject to the availability of funds for such purposes, for qualified electric customers of the water and light utility. These incentives are quantified and measured with monitoring equipment. 
(b)  The following programs are established to encourage the purchase of approved equipment and approved installations: 
(1)  Residential Performance Based Programs. 
(2)  Commercial Performance Based Programs. 
(c)  For purposes of providing electric customer reimbursements, the water and light department shall establish policy and criteria for each program with regard to proper proof of purchase and installation of equipment to insure the integrity of each project. Each proposed project shall be reviewed by the water and light department to insure that it provides the intended benefits of the program. 
(d)  Reimbursements exceeding the maximum amount normally allowed under program policies will be conditional on a financial assessment by the water and light department and must be pre-approved by the water and light director. Such reimbursements shall be reported to the water and light advisory board. Policies and procedures are subject to change. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-167. - Energy efficiency loans. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes the loan programs listed in this section, subject to the availability of funds for such purposes, for qualified electric customers of the water and light utility. 
(b)  The following programs are established to encourage the purchase of approved equipment and approved installations: 
(1)  Residential Energy Efficiency Loans. 
(2)  Commercial Energy Efficiency Loans. 
(c)  For purposes of providing electric customer loans, the water and light department shall establish policy and criteria for each program with regard to proper proof of purchase and installation of equipment to insure the integrity of each project. Each proposed project shall be reviewed by the water and light department to insure that it provides the intended benefits of the program. 
(d)  Residential loan amounts shall not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) plus applicable filing fees for deed of trust. Loans for multi-family structures shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) plus applicable filing fees for deed of trust. 
(e)  Commercial loans shall be restricted to customers that qualify and shall be up to thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) per electric meter, but shall not exceed ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) per property on which the electric meters are located. 
(f)  ASHRAE Level II Assessments or investment grade audits shall be required for all commercial loans. 
(g)  Home performance with Energy Star assessments shall be required for all residential loans. 
(h)  All loans made under the program shall bear an annual effective interest rate determined by the length of the loan repayment. Interest rate shall be set as follows: 
(1)  Loan of three (3) years or less ..... 1% 
(2)  Loan of greater than three (3) years but not more than five (5) years ..... 3% 
(3)  Loan of greater than five (5) years but not more than ten (10) years ..... 5% 
(i)  All loans shall be secured by a deed of trust for the property to which the improvement purchased with the loan proceeds is affixed or by a deed of trust on an equivalent property. 
(j)  The loan documents, note and security interest or deed of trust evidencing the loan shall be in the form approved by the city counselor. 
(k)  When the owner of property encumbered by a deed of trust securing a loan under this program refinances a loan secured by a first deed of trust on the property, the city manager is authorized to subordinate the city's deed of trust to the deed of trust securing the refinanced loan if the purpose of the loan is: 
(1)  To obtain a lower interest rate, or 
(2)  To secure funding for improvements to the property. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 23433 , § 1, 1-2-18)  
Sec. 27-168. - Loan committee. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint representatives of the water and light and finance departments to administer the program. All loans shall be made based upon the following principles: 
(1)  The program shall be conducted at all times based upon sound business principles and shall in no way be deemed a welfare or social service program of the city. No loan shall be made without having first ascertained the credit worthiness of the loan applicant and without having obtained adequate security for any loan. 
(2)  After having established the credit worthiness of the applicant, the committee shall make its loans in such a manner to reduce, by the greatest amount possible, the consumption of electric energy within the city. This goal shall be attained by consideration of: 
a.  The total energy consumption of the applicant; and 
b.  The results of an energy audit made to determine the potential impact of a loan under the program, along with the ability of that loan to reduce the electric consumption of the applicant. 
(b)  No applicant shall be refused a loan because of sex, race, religion, place of national origin, marital status, age, sexual orientation, handicap, political affiliation or ancestry. 
(c)  The director of water and light is hereby authorized to develop application forms for use in the program. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-169. - Solar one utility program. 
(a)  The Solar One utility program is established to provide utility customers an opportunity to purchase electricity produced from the sun from photovoltaic systems that are interconnected with city's distribution system. 
(b)  Solar One electricity is sold in units of Solar One blocks of energy each representing one hundred (100) kilowatt hours of electricity. All purchases of Solar One blocks of energy are voluntary and initiated by customer request. Customers are not limited in the quantity of Solar One blocks of energy they may request, however, sales are conditional on the utility having adequate solar power available that is uncommitted to previously existing sales. 
(c)  Purchases of Solar One blocks of energy shall not affect customer's billing for metered electric consumption as specified in sections 27-111 through 27-120. Fees for Solar One blocks of energy shall be charged as an addition to the customer's normal electric rate charges and shall be accounted for separately. 
(d)  Solar One blocks of energy shall be available either through one time purchase or annual purchases that are charged to utility customers in twelve (12) monthly increments. Fees for Solar One blocks of energy shall be as follows: 
Solar One Block 	Direct Purchase 	Monthly Billing 
100 kwh 	$40.21 	$3.35 
 
(e)  All solar electricity sold by the utility through the Solar One program shall come from solar production facilities that have signed agreements with the utility and are connected to the utility distribution system, or are utility owned. 
(f)  Credits for any solar electricity sold to customers through the Solar One program will belong to the utility for compliance with the renewable energy standard as specified in section 27-106. 
(Ord. No. 21063, § 1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 27-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21063, § 1, adopted September 6, 2011, repealed § 27-171, which pertained to energy efficiency programs and derived from Ord. No. 18725, § 1, 10-3-05. 
 
Secs. 27-171—27-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RAILWAY TERMINAL SERVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-200. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words or terms are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Customer. The corporation, association or individual receiving rail service supplied by the department. 
Department. The Water and Light Department of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Director. The director of the water and light department of the city, or his authorized representative. 
Lot. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision, or parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision plat of record, survey map, or by metes and bounds description. 
Property. A lot, tract or other parcel of land. 
Property owner. An individual, corporation or association holding legal title or otherwise having legal control of a property. 
Interchange. That location where the tracks and right-of-way of the Columbia Terminal interconnect with any other operating railroad. 
Loading gauge. That amount of space absolutely necessary to be retained by the Columbia Terminal for the safe passage of locomotives and cars free of all projections and encumbrances. In no case shall the loading gauge be defined as less than eight and one-half (8.5) feet horizontally from the centerline of existing track or less than twenty-two (22) feet vertically from the top of rail. 
Operating crew. Any employees of the Columbia Terminal whose duties include the actual operation of locomotives or the movements of rolling stock over the tracks of the line of railroad. 
Right-of-way. Those strips of land shown on the right-of-way maps retained by the department over which the Columbia Terminal operates or has the right to operate whether or not currently occupied by track. 
Street or road. A street or roadway dedicated to public use. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-201. - Authority. 
The City of Columbia shall own, operate and maintain a railway terminal service between the City of Columbia and an interchange point with a Class I railroad in northern Boone County. The terminal operation shall serve the city power plant and any industry, business or customer located along its right-of-way or with access to the right-of-way, whether in Columbia or outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-202. - Name. 
The City of Columbia railway service shall be known as the Columbia Terminal (COLT), with the Association of American Railroads designated reporting marks of CT. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-203. - Class of service. 
The service shall be generally maintained to Class II track standards. 
(1)  All track work, switches and right-of-way shall be maintained at least to the applicable standards set out by the Federal Railroad Administration or any other federal or state agency with jurisdiction over railroads. 
(2)  All operating crew members shall meet the qualifications set for operating crew by the Federal Railroad Administration or any other federal or state agency with jurisdiction over railroads. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-204. - Administration. 
The Columbia Terminal shall be administered as a separate division of the Columbia Water and Light Department. All engineering review, administrative services, liaison between the Columbia Terminal, shippers and connecting Class I railroads, and all marketing promotions for the Columbia Terminal shall be provided by the water and light department. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Secs. 27-205—27-209. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RAILROAD ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 27-210. - Creation, membership. 
There shall be a railroad advisory board composed of seven (7) members appointed by the council, each member to serve without compensation for four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-211. - Qualifications. 
The members of the board shall have a knowledge and interest in either railroad, shipping, transportation or business and shall be sympathetic with the principle of municipal ownership and operation of branch line rail operations to ensure the sound and efficient management of said rail line. One member of the board shall be appointed from those businesses or firms that routinely ship or receive goods or raw materials over said branch line. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-212. - Term of office. 
The seven (7) voting members shall serve staggered four-year terms. Any vacancy occurring on the board shall be filled by appointment of the city council for the remaining portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 16869, § 1, 4-16-01)  
Sec. 27-213. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall meet quarterly, and more often if needed, to discuss the operations and needs of the Columbia Terminal and shippers. The powers of the board shall be solely advisory. In their deliberations and discussions the board shall consider, but is not limited to, the following subjects: 
(1)  The capital improvements or maintenance necessary for the efficient operation of the terminal service. 
(2)  Operating budgets and staffing levels. 
(3)  Service levels now existing and proposed. 
(4)  Rates and tariffs. 
(5)  The marketing of new and existing services. 
(6)  Matters of general railroad policy. 
(7)  Applications for grants for new facilities and maintenance of existing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 16869, § 1, 4-16-01)  
Sec. 27-214. - Meetings; attendance; quorum. 
At the first meeting of each fiscal year, the board shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its voting members. A quorum of four (4) members shall be necessary to conduct business. All business shall be by resolutions or motion with a majority of positive votes from members present necessary to approve any measure. The chair of the board is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a board meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular board meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. The chair shall promptly notify the council of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 16869, § 1, 4-16-01; Ord. No. 17658, § 1, 4-21-03)  
Secs. 27-215—27-219. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 27-220. - Service. 
As a terminal rail service, the Columbia Terminal shall provide regular service to shippers, and will attempt to provide custom switching service whenever such service is consistent with safe operating practice, Federal Railroad Administration rules and hours of service regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-221. - Extension of service. 
(a)  Any potential customer desiring Columbia Terminal rail service to property abutting or with access to the Columbia Terminal right-of-way may make application to the director for such service. 
(b)  The Columbia Terminal shall construct, own and maintain any switch, turnout, track or facility located on Columbia Terminal right-of-way as is necessary to extend service to the applicant. The applicant shall advance the entire cost of the Columbia Terminal facility prior to construction. The applicant shall have the option of installing the facilities, provided they are built in accordance with plans and specifications furnished by the Columbia Terminal and the cost of such installation is approved in advance by the Columbia Terminal. 
(c)  The applicant shall own and maintain all facilities that are located off the Columbia Terminal right-of-way and shall: 
(1)  Construct any switch, turnout, track or facilities necessary for rail service to the property at its own cost, according to standards and specifications provided by the Columbia Terminal and along an alignment approved by the director. 
(2)  Maintain all switches, turnouts, track or facilities constructed by the applicant in a condition acceptable to the director. 
(3)  If any portion of the track must be located upon property not owned by the applicant, the applicant will obtain from the owners of such property a license, in a form acceptable to the director, for the Columbia Terminal to use such land for railway purposes at no cost to the Columbia Terminal. 
(4)  If the track must cross any public road or street, the applicant shall obtain such permits as are necessary and construct such crossing and comply with all the requirements of public authority relating to such crossing at its own expense. 
(5)  The applicant shall purchase such insurance as the director deems necessary to indemnity and hold harmless the Columbia Terminal for any loss, damage or injury as a result of Columbia Terminal operation on track constructed or maintained by the applicant. 
(d)  The director is authorized to require such other conditions as he deems necessary for the safe and economical provision of service. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-222. - Crossings. 
(a)  The director shall be authorized to negotiate the terms of and approve subterranean and aerial utility crossings of the Columbia Terminal right-of-way upon application for such crossing by any person. In no case shall such crossing interfere with the safe and routine operation of Columbia Terminal service. All costs of such crossings, including the city's administrative and site inspection costs, shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  All grade crossings shall be approved by the city council. All costs associated with the construction of such crossing, including the city's plan review, administrative, site inspection and all costs for markings or safety devices, shall be paid by the applicant. It shall be the applicant's duty to obtain any permit necessary from any state or federal agency with jurisdiction over grade crossings. 
(c)  Maintenance costs of any private crossing, whether at grade subterranean or aerial, shall be the responsibility of the applicant. all crossings shall be constructed and maintained to the standards adopted by the director in accordance with Federal Railroad Administration or state division of transportation standards, whichever is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-223. - Rates. 
All fares, rates and tariffs shall be negotiated between the rail customer and the railroad company interchanging with Columbia Terminal. The director shall be authorized to negotiate car handling charges with the interchanging railroad. 
(Ord. No. 12209, § 1, 4-3-89)  
Sec. 27-224. - Excursions. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into agreements allowing the use of Columbia Terminal facilities for rail excursions under such terms and conditions as he shall deem advantageous to the Columbia Terminal and the city. 
(Ord. No. 12825, § 1, 12-17-90)  
Chapter 28 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 24. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR BUSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate, RSMo. § 94.110. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-16. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, "motor bus" shall mean every motor vehicle having a seating capacity for ten (10) or more persons, but shall not include motor buses owned or leased by the city, state, school district or federal government, or any agency or subdivision thereof, buses owned by persons holding a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the Missouri Public Service Commission or Interstate Commerce Commission, when such buses are engaged in carrying persons on routes authorized by those authorities. 
(Code 1964, § 11.162) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 28-17. - Display of rate card. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor bus within the city without at all times displaying in plain view within the motor bus a rate card, appropriately mounted or framed, setting forth the schedule of fares provided to be charged with the person or firm owning or operating such motor bus. Such card shall also contain the statement that a motor bus license does not authorize the transportation of property for hire. 
(Code 1964, § 11.171; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-18. - Condition of bus. 
All motor buses shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and the motor, brakes and other mechanisms shall be kept in good working order. 
(Code 1964, § 11.172; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-19. - Bus drivers. 
(a)  No person shall drive or operate any motor bus unless he is competent to do so. 
(b)  No person shall drive or operate such vehicle who has any infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation thereof. Nor shall any such vehicle be driven or operated by any such person who is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or while intoxicated. All operators of motor buses shall be neat and tidy in appearance. 
(Code 1964, § 11.172; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Secs. 28-20—28-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 28-26. - Required; permit prerequisite. 
No motor bus shall be offered for, or engaged in, carrying passengers for hire, over or upon the public streets or places in the city until a license for each motor bus has been obtained, as herein provided. No such license shall be issued until a permit has been obtained from the city council, permitting the operation of such motor bus, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 11.161)  
Sec. 28-27. - Application. 
The application for license shall be addressed to the business license administrator, upon a form to be furnished by the administrator, and verified by the affidavit of the owner of the vehicle, and shall state the following: 
(1)  That the owner desires to obtain a license from the city to operate the motor bus for the conveyance of passengers, with or without baggage, over and upon the public streets. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner and, if a corporation, in addition to its name and address, the name and addresses of its officers. 
(3)  The name of the manufacturer and factory number of buses to be operated. 
(4)  The state license number. 
(5)  The city license number. 
(6)  That a permit has been obtained from the city council, as required by this article, and that the bond required has been approved and filed. 
(Code 1964, § 11.163)  
Sec. 28-28. - Issuance; contents; duplicate license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the application and the payment of the license tax, the business license administrator shall assign to such motor bus a distinctive number, and the administrator shall issue to the owner thereof a metal plate or license with the number thereon, and a license to operate such bus. 
(b)  The license shall bear the number so assigned and shall set forth the facts stated in the application. The license shall also state whether the motor bus is to be driven or operated by the owner or by an employee. In the event of the loss, mutilation or destruction of such license plate, the owner may obtain from the business license administrator a duplicate thereof upon filing an affidavit that such license plate has been lost, mutilated or destroyed, and upon payment of a fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1964, § 11.164)  
Sec. 28-29. - Restricted to one vehicle; counterfeit licenses. 
The plate, or license issued pursuant to the preceding section shall not be used on any vehicle other than that for which it has been duly issued, nor shall anyone use, or permit to be used, any false or counterfeit plate or license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.165)  
Sec. 28-30. - Annual fee; term; prorated licenses. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay to the business license administrator the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) as an annual license tax for each motor bus of a seating capacity of forty (40) passengers or less, and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each motor bus or combination operated as a unit of a seating capacity of more than forty (40) passengers on the public streets and places of the city. This license tax shall be due and payable on the first day of October of each year, and the license shall expire on the thirtieth day of September the following year. 
(b)  If the application to operate such motor bus is made during the period beginning on the first day of March and ending on the last day of May, only one-half (½) of the license fee shall be charged and collected. If the application is made during the period beginning on the first day of June and ending on the last day of September, only one-fourth (¼) of the license fee shall be charged and collected. 
(Code 1964, § 11.166)  
Sec. 28-31. - Computation of license tax. 
Upon an application for a license by a person who has been engaged in the business sought to be licensed in the city for a period of at least one year next before the date of his application, the license tax of such person shall be computed from the license schedule applicable to such business, and, if necessary, the amount of license tax shall be determined from an affidavit made by the applicant on forms prescribed by the business license administrator, indicating the bracket of the license schedule applicable to such business in which the gross sales within the city for such person fell for the preceding fiscal or annual business year of such business. If the applicant shall not have been engaged, within the city, for at least one year next before his application, the amount of the license tax shall be computed based upon a declaration of the estimate of gross sales, to be made upon forms prescribed by the business license administrator, and sworn to before a notary public, which declaration of estimate shall indicate, where applicable, the bracket in which the applicant's estimate of gross sales within the city for the ensuing licensing year will fall. 
(Code 1964, § 11.173; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-32. - Sale or transfer of bus. 
Upon the sale or transfer of a motor bus for which a license shall have been obtained in accordance with the terms of this article, the vendee shall immediately file with the business license administrator an application to have the license transferred from the vendor to the vendee. This application shall state all the matters required in the original application, and, in addition thereto, the name and address of the vendor and vendee, the number and date of the original license, the date of such sale or transfer, and shall be accompanied by the original license and license plate and a copy of the bill of sale. Such application shall be verified by affidavit. Upon the filing of the application and the payment of one dollar ($1.00) to the business license administrator, the administrator shall transfer the license on the records in his office from the vendor to the vendee, and shall issue a new license plate to the vendee for the unexpired portion of the old license. 
(Code 1964, § 11.168; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-33. - Posting of license. 
The license herein provided for shall at all times be posted in the vehicle to which it applies and within view of the passengers carried therein. The number plate herein provided for shall at all times be conspicuously displayed and securely fastened upon the rear portion of the vehicle to which it applies. 
(Code 1964, § 11.168(1); Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-34. - Construction of license tax. 
The license tax required on each motor bus shall be a tax on the business of conveying passengers over and upon the public streets and places in the city. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as to exempt the owner from the paying of the tax imposed as a registration tax or license by the city in licensing motor vehicles or automobiles to be operated on its streets, or the tax which the city levies on motor vehicles or automobiles as personal property. Nor shall anything herein be construed to exempt the owner or driver of a motor vehicle from the qualifications which the city or the state may require of persons who operate motor vehicles or automobiles upon public streets. 
(Code 1964, § 11.167)  
Secs. 28-35—28-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 28-41. - Required. 
No motor bus may be operated in the city until a permit has been obtained from the city council in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1964, § 11.161)  
Sec. 28-42. - Application. 
Application for a permit to operate a motor bus shall be made to the city council on a form to be prescribed by the city council. The city council shall fix a date upon which the council will have a public hearing to consider the application. 
(Code 1964, § 11.168(2); Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-43. - Qualifications of applicant; liability insurance required. 
Before granting a permit, the city council shall require the applicant to produce, at a public hearing, satisfactory evidence of technical skill and financial responsibility, and shall also require the applicant to file and maintain with the city clerk, for each bus to be operated, a policy of liability insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, written for a policy term of not less than one year, and providing therein that the said company shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to the cancellation of the policy, such policy to be acceptable and approved by the finance director and approved as to form by the city counselor, indemnifying the applicant in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to or death of one person, by reason of the carelessness or negligence of the driver or operator of such bus, and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to or death of more than one person, resulting from a single accident, by reason of the carelessness or negligence of the driver or operator of such bus, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any motor bus upon the streets or public places of the city without such policy of liability insurance being in force and on file in the office of the city clerk, as required by this section. 
(Code 1964, § 11.169; Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Sec. 28-44. - Public convenience and necessity criteria. 
(a)  Routinely scheduled bus routes. An application for a permit to operate motor buses along a route or in a district already served by another person, or by the city, shall not be granted unless the city council shall first find, after investigation, that additional motor buses are needed for the public convenience and necessity and that the current holder of the permit for that route or district is unable or unwilling to add additional buses to the route or district. 
(b)  Charter buses. An application for a permit to operate charter buses within the city limits shall not be granted unless the city council shall first find that the permit is needed for the public convenience and necessity after having considered: 
(1)  The charter transportation service being furnished by other carriers; 
(2)  The permanency and continuity of the proposed service; and 
(3)  The effect which the proposed service may have upon other existing forms of transportation service. 
(Code 1964, § 11. 170(1), (2); Ord. No. 9919, § 1, 8-15-83)  
Secs. 28-45—28-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC TRANSFER BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate, RSMo. § 94.110. 
 
Sec. 28-56. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Public transfer or delivery business. The business offered to the public for the hauling, carriage, drayage, transportation or delivery of property for a charge, fee or commission by means of motor vehicles, but shall not include businesses to which the delivery of property is merely incidental. 
Public transfer vehicle. Any motor vehicle used by a public transfer or delivery business for the purpose of hauling, carrying or transporting property for a charge, fee or commission. 
(Code 1964, § 11.230) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 28-57. - License and tax required. 
No person shall engage in, operate or conduct a public transfer or delivery business within the city without first paying the license tax provided for in this article and obtaining a license therefor as provided by the terms of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 11.240)  
Sec. 28-58. - Amount of license tax. 
Every person engaging in, operating or conducting a public transfer business or delivery business under the terms of this article shall pay an annual license tax of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for one public transfer vehicle used in the business, and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional public transfer vehicle used in the business. 
(Code 1964, § 11.250)  
Sec. 28-59. - Application for license. 
The application for a public transfer or delivery license, and the procedure for the issuance of the such license, and all renewals or duplicates thereof, shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 13-22(a)—(e) of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.260)  
Sec. 28-60. - License stickers. 
(a)  Issuance. After the issuance of such license to an applicant, as required under this article, and after the applicant has filed the required liability insurance policy or bond, the business license administrator shall thereupon, upon the payment of the license tax herein provided, issue and deliver to the applicant such license, together with a sticker for each motor vehicle covered by the license. 
(b)  Display. Such license sticker shall be conspicuously displayed and permanently affixed on the windshield of the motor vehicle for which it is issued. 
(c)  Records. The business license administrator shall keep a record of the number of the license stickers issued to each licensee together with the make, model and motor number of the motor vehicle for which each was issued. 
(d)  Replacements. Upon the licensee signing an affidavit stating that a license sticker, as provided for in the preceding section, issued to him has been lost or destroyed, it shall be the duty of the business license administrator, upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) to the administrator for his use and to cover the cost of such sticker to the city, to issue a substitute license and sticker bearing a new number assigned to the motor vehicle for which issued. 
(Code 1964, §§ 11.270, 11.280)  
Sec. 28-61. - Insurance or bond required. 
No license to engage in a public transfer business shall be issued to the applicant therefor by the business license administrator of the city until and after such applicant has filed with the city clerk, and the same has been approved by the mayor, a liability insurance policy or bond in some insurance company or association or other insurer authorized to transact business in the state, which liability insurance shall bind the obligors thereunder to make compensation for damage to or destruction of any property of one or more persons to a maximum amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by reason of the applicant's legal liability for damages in consequence of any one accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public transfer vehicle used in such public transfer business and which liability insurance shall bind the obligor thereunder to make compensation for bodily injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, to one person to a maximum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) by reason of the applicant's legal liability for damages in consequence of any other accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public transfer vehicle used in such public transfer business, and subject to that limit a maximum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each person, which liability insurance shall bind the obligors thereunder to make compensation for bodily injuries, including death, at any time resulting therefrom to more than one person, to a total maximum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), by reason of the applicant's legal liability for damages in consequence of any one accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public transfer vehicle used in such public transfer business. Such insurance policy or bond shall be and remain in full force and effect during the period of time for which such license is issued. 
(Code 1964, § 11.290)  
Sec. 28-62. - Revocation of license. 
The enforcement of this article shall in all respects be governed by the provisions of section 13-31 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 11.300)  
Secs. 28-63—28-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 12094, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 1988, amended Ch. 28 by repealing Art. IV, Taxicabs and Limousines, substantive provisions of which consisted of §§ 28-76—28-81, 28-91—28-103, and 28-110—28-124, and which derived from Code 1964, §§ 17.010—17.180, 17.185, and 17.190—17.280; Ord. No. 10030, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 1983; and Ord. No. 10222, § 1, July 2, 1984. In addition, Ord. No. 12094 enacted new provisions which have been included herein as a new Art. IV. 
Charter reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate, § 166. 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate, RSMo. § 94.110; definition of "taxicab," § 390.020(17); taxicabs exempted from Motor Carrier Act, § 390.030(1), (3). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-77. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions and rules of construction shall apply: 
Business license administrator. The City of Columbia business license administrator or the administrator's designee. 
Certified mechanic. Any mechanic certified by the State of Missouri to make the vehicle safety inspections required by state statute. 
Conviction. This term shall include a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty followed by a suspended imposition of sentence. 
Director. The City of Columbia director of finance or the director's designee. 
Limousine. Any motor vehicle with driver offered to the public for the purpose of transporting passengers for a fixed charge or fee or a rate based primarily upon the amount of time the vehicle is retained. 
Limousine service. The business of offering to the public motor vehicles for carrying or transportation of passengers between Columbia Regional Airport and points within the city for a fixed charge or fee, or the business of offering a motor vehicle with driver to the public for the transportation of passengers at a rate based primarily upon the amount of time the vehicle is retained. 
Manifest. A daily record prepared by a taxicab or limousine driver showing the starting and ending time and vehicle mileage covered by the daily use of the vehicle and a listing of all trips made by such driver, showing time and place origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Shared ride. The nonexclusive use of a taxicab by two (2) or more unrelated passengers having either a common point of origin or a common destination point and traveling in the same general direction. 
Taxicab. A public passenger motor vehicle with a rated passenger-carrying capacity of eight (8) or less with driver furnished for hire on a call or demand basis to transport persons, packages or messages where route traveled and trip destination are controlled by the passenger and at a charge or fare based upon time and mileage and recorded and indicated on a taximeter. 
Taxicab business. The business of offering taxicabs to the public. 
Taximeter. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
Vehicle for hire. Any privately owned motor vehicle, animal-drawn vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire other than a motorbus or a vehicle governed by the state public service commission or its successor, the charges for the use of which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged. 
Waiting time. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 28-78. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all vehicles which may be used as taxicabs or limousines or otherwise engage in the carriage of passengers as a vehicle for hire within the city limits of Columbia, except that this article shall not apply to any person who shall operate a vehicle for hire within the city limits solely for the purpose of discharging a passenger or a parcel of merchandise which originated outside of the city limits; provided, that the vehicle is not otherwise routinely based, operated or solicited within the city limits. The provisions of this article shall not apply to transportation provided by any person who possesses a permit issued by the State Division of Motor Carrier and Railroad Safety or Missouri Public Service Commission to transport passengers for hire and over whom the city has no authority. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director, with the assistance of the police department, to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt persons governed by its provisions from the license requirements of any other provision of law nor shall payment of any fees required by this article exempt any persons from the payment of any other fee required by law. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 28-79. - Permits, fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to operate or conduct a taxicab business or limousine service or similar business within the city limits without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to operate any vehicle for hire within the city limits of Columbia unless that vehicle has a permit issued to it and the vehicle permit fee has been paid. The permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per annum for each vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 21799, § 3, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 28-80. - Application. 
Any person desiring to secure a permit to engage in, operate or conduct a taxicab business or limousine service or similar business within the city shall file with the business license administrator a written application therefor, in duplicate, verified under oath, giving the following information: 
(1)  The full name, residential and business addresses of the applicant for the past five (5) years; if a partnership, the name and residential and business addresses of all the partners for the past five (5) years; if a corporation, the name and residential address of all of the officers and directors for the past five (5) years. 
(2)  Whether or not the applicant, or any persons listed in subsection (1) above, has been convicted of the violation of any federal or state felony law, or any federal or state misdemeanor involving the use or threat of force or violence or theft or the sale of or possession of illegal drugs or sexual abuse; or, within the previous two (2) years, has been convicted of violating any provision of this Code or has ever had a license or permit issued by the city business license administrator revoked or suspended. 
(3)  Whether or not the applicant or any person listed in subsection (1) above has unpaid claims or unsatisfied judgments against him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a vehicle. 
(4)  The past experience, if any, that the applicant has had in rendering a taxicab, limousine or similar service, including the dates such service was rendered and the city wherein the service was rendered. 
(5)  Whether or not any license or permit to operate a taxicab, limousine or similar service issued to applicant has ever been revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of the revocation or suspension. 
(6)  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated and a complete identification of each, including the make, model, motor number and vehicle identification number of each taxicab or limousine and the registered owner; provided, however that the make, model, motor number and vehicle identification number of each new motor vehicle included in the application may be supplied by the applicant and endorsed on the application at any time prior to the actual issuance of the permit by the director. 
(7)  The arrangements the applicant has made for the public to secure transportation in the applicant's taxicabs or limousines including the manner in which such vehicles will be dispatched. 
(8)  If the application is for a permit to operate a taxicab business, the color scheme, name and characteristic insignia to be used to designate the taxicabs of the applicant. 
(9)  Such further information as the director may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 28-81. - Investigation; granting of application. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application, the business license administrator shall cause an investigation into the facts stated upon the application. The application shall be approved and a permit to operate granted unless the investigation reveals good cause to believe that the public welfare or safety would be adversely affected if the permit were granted. 
(b)  Grounds to deny a permit to operate shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Whenever an applicant files an incomplete application. 
(2)  Whenever an applicant makes a false declaration on the application. 
(3)  Whenever any person required to be listed upon the application has had a permit issued under this article revoked within the past two (2) years. 
(4)  Whenever an applicant has outstanding judgments against him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a vehicle. 
(5)  Whenever the applicant fails to have a current City of Columbia business permit or has not applied for a City of Columbia business permit concurrent with his application for a taxicab or limousine permit. 
(c)  Applicants have the burden of demonstrating good moral character. If an applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years or any misdemeanor involving theft or the sale of or possession of illegal drugs or sexual abuse within the past five (5) years or any municipal ordinance violation of leaving the scene of an accident or failure to report an accident or any violation of this article, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime or ordinance violation committed in relation to the license sought, the conduct of the applicant since the violation, and other evidence as to the applicant's character. 
(d)  Denial of a license by the business license administrator may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31 of the City Code. 
(e)  An applicant who has been denied a permit to operate shall not reapply for a permit to operate for a period of one (1) year following the denial. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 28-82. - Vehicle permits. 
(a)  Before operating any vehicle listed in the application for a permit to operate or any vehicle acquired after the application is approved upon the streets of the city the operator shall obtain a vehicle permit from the business license administrator. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate any vehicle other than a vehicle listed on his application for a permit to operate unless and until an application shall have been made and approved increasing the number of vehicles or substituting for vehicles listed on the application. Such application shall be filed with the business license administrator and shall state the name and address of the permittee, the number of vehicles authorized under his permit, the number of vehicles sought to be permitted together with the make, model, motor number and vehicle identification number of each, and whether the same are owned or leased by the permittee and the reasons for requesting permit for additional or substituted vehicles. 
(c)  No person shall be allowed to operate a vehicle as both a taxicab and a limousine. 
(d)  Every applicant receiving a permit to operate a taxicab business shall be required to have taxicabs operating to the total number specified in the application within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of the permit. Failure to do so will constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-83. - Inspection. 
Vehicle permits shall only be granted after an inspection as set out in this section. In addition to all other vehicle inspections required by law, each vehicle governed by this article shall be subject to an annual inspection. All inspections shall be conducted by persons designated by the city manager and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All taxicabs and limousines shall be inspected for proper markings, display of information, and the following: 
a.  Exterior. Headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield, vent glasses, windshield wipers, all other vehicle glass, glass window raisers, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk hood, and interior door handles, exhaust system, splash shields, hubcaps, bumpers, fenders, body and tires shall be inspected to ascertain that each is functioning properly. Each taxicab shall be maintained in a reasonably clean condition. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces such as fenders, bumpers or trim hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
b.  Interior. The rear view mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, seat belts and air conditioning and heating systems shall be inspected to ascertain that each is functioning properly. The upholstery, floor mats, head lining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to determine whether they are clean, free of tears, and that the trunk has sufficient space for passengers' luggage. The taximeter shall be inspected to determine that it is properly calibrated. 
(2)  Failure to have a vehicle inspected as required herein shall be a ground for suspension of the vehicle permit. If a vehicle for hire fails to pass the requirements of inspection, a correction slip shall be issued to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided, that the business license administrator, in his discretion, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The business license administrator shall forward to the permit holder a copy of the correction slip. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the random inspection of vehicles for hire by the business license administrator or police department where possible violations of this article or other violations of law regarding the condition of vehicles for hire are evidence by visual inspection. 
(4)  Denial or suspension of a vehicle permit may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-84. - Issuance; display of permits. 
(a)  After any applicant has been granted a permit to operate by the business license administrator and after the applicant has filed the required insurance policy or certificate with the business license administrator and the same has been approved, the business license administrator shall endorse upon one copy of the application filed "Permit Approved," together with the date of such approval, and, upon payment of the permit fee, issue and deliver such permit to operate to the applicant, together with a vehicle permit for each taxicab or limousine covered by the permit to operate which has passed inspection. 
(b)  Each vehicle permit shall be numbered with a number referencing the permit to operate and shall be displayed within the vehicle at all times it is operated as a vehicle for hire. 
(c)  The business license administrator shall keep a record of the number of the vehicle permits issued to each permittee together with the make, model and vehicle identification number of the taxicab or limousine for which each was issued. 
(d)  No vested rights shall accrue to the holder of any permit to operate and no permit issued under this article shall be transferred, assigned or delegated to any other party. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-85. - Duration of permit; renewal. 
(a)  All initial permits issued under the provisions of this article shall be in effect from the date of issuance until the following June 30. 
(b)  After any such permit shall have been issued, the permittee shall be entitled to a renewal thereof for the succeeding year; provided, that the permittee makes written application therefor to the business license administrator and pays the required permit fee prior to the expiration of his permit. No renewal permit shall be issued unless the application is made and the fee paid prior to the expiration of the old permit. 
(c)  Denial or suspension of a vehicle permit may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-86. - Responsibility of permit holder. 
(a)  Each permit holder operating a taxicab business with more than one (1) taxicab owned or operated by permit holder or limousine service with more than one (1) limousine owned or operated by permit holder is required to maintain an office within the City of Columbia with regular business hours. A responsible representative of the permit holder shall be available during regular business hours to receive reports of lost articles, complaints, injuries and related matters. Each permit holder shall maintain a listing in all business directories commonly available to the public listing scheduled business hours. Each permit holder shall maintain a business telephone number. 
(b)  Each permit holder shall on or before the fifth day of each month file with the director a verified list of all drivers including drivers entering or leaving his employ during the preceding month. 
(c)  Upon notification from the director, the permit holder shall present any or all of its permitted vehicles for inspection by the city. If any vehicle remains in service and is not presented for inspection within ten (10) days of notification or does not pass inspection or any allowed reinspection and remains in service, such failure to present for inspection or failure to pass inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(d)  No permit holder shall allow a driver who is employed by or contracting with such permit holder to drive a taxicab or limousine or other such vehicle if the holder knows or has reason to know that the driver has failed to comply with this article, the rules and regulations established by the director or other applicable laws. The permit holder shall not permit any vehicle governed by this article to be operated for hire by anyone not registered as a driver pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The permit holder shall establish policy and take action to prevent or correct violations of this article by drivers who are employed by or contracting with such permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 13514, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 22372 , § 2, 2-16-15)  
Sec. 28-87. - Revocation. 
(a)  The business license administrator may seek revocation of a permit to operate on the grounds set forth in subsection (b) by following the procedures set forth in section 13-31 of the City Code. 
(b)  The director may revoke a permit to operate if he finds that any permittee has consistently violated the provisions of this article or any other related city ordinance, state law or federal statute, or is conducting such business in such a manner as to constitute a danger to public safety or that the permittee has become unqualified, unfit or incapable of operating a taxicab business or limousine service. 
(c)  Whenever any permit to operate a vehicle for hire is revoked, suspended or expired it shall be unlawful to display or use that permit as authority for the operation of the vehicle in which it is so used or displayed. 
(d)  Whenever any permit or certificate issued under this article is revoked, no application for a new permit by any party to the revoked permit shall be considered for a period of twelve (12) months from the time of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-88. - Insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab or limousine, or permit the same to be operated, nor shall any permit be issued hereunder until and unless the applicant for such permit, in addition to all other requirements in this article, shall file and maintain with the director for each taxicab or limousine to be operated, a policy or certificate of liability insurance issued by a company authorized and licensed by this state or a certificate of self-insurance issued by this state. 
(b)  The owners or operators of a taxicab business or limousine service shall deliver annually to the business license administrator a policy or policies or certificate or certificates of liability insurance issued by a company authorized and licensed to do insurance business in this state, covering each taxicab or limousine for which a permit is sought or a certificate of self-insurance issued by this state. 
(c)  Each certificate or policy shall be acceptable to and approved by the director. 
(d)  Each certificate or policy shall indemnify the owner or operator in the minimum in those amounts and for those incidences required by the "Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Law" of this state. 
(e)  The policy shall further contain a clause obligating the insurance company to give thirty (30) days' written notice to the business license administrator before cancellation of the policy, the permit to expire upon the lapse of such policy or certificate, or termination of the same by cancellation; unless, within thirty (30) days, in case of notice of cancellation by the insurance company, the holder of a permit shall furnish to the business license administrator another policy acceptance to the director. 
(f)  The permit holder shall maintain records of all claims for bodily injury or property damage, whether covered by insurance or within the allowed self-insured amount, which shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the claimant. 
(2)  The date the permit holder was notified of the claim. 
(3)  The date of the incident giving rise to the claim. 
(4)  The location of the incident. 
(5)  The current status of the claim. 
Such records shall be made available for inspection by the director during regular business hours in the office of the permit holder for a period of one year after final disposition of each claim. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-89. - Accident reports. 
(a)  The permit holder on or before the fifth day of the month shall file with the business license administrator a report showing the number of accidents in which a vehicle permitted to him was involved during the preceding month, the nature of the damage, if any, to persons or property resulting from the accident, the name and address of all persons who have outstanding claims because of any accident and the amount, if any, paid during the preceding month in settlement of claims including those in suit. 
(b)  Failure to file the report required by this section or filing or causing or permitting the filing of a false report is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-90. - Animal-drawn vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire on the streets of Columbia without a permit. 
(b)  Every person desiring to operate an animal-drawn vehicle as set out above shall make application for a permit to the director on forms provided by the director. 
(c)  Animal-drawn vehicles shall be inspected for proper markings and materials, exterior lights, glass (no cracks), license plate and license plate lights (if applicable), doors and door locks, body and interior check for conditions of upholstery and floor, and proper lubrication of body, springs and wheels. In addition, the harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times; and the harness must be properly fitted and maintained and kept free of makeshift materials such as wire, sisal rope and rusty chaining. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Secs. 28-91—28-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 28-96. - Service. 
(a)  Holders of taxicab business, limousine service or other permits under this article shall offer city-wide services. Taxicab business services shall include the transportation of passengers, messages and packages. 
(b)  No driver of a taxicab shall refuse without cause to accept a passenger for transportation from any area of trip origin to any area of trip destination within the city or to respond to a request for passenger service transmitted to such driver through the taxicab dispatch radio. 
(c)  All holders of taxicab business permits shall provide telephone answering and radio dispatching capabilities during scheduled business hours and all taxicabs shall be equipped with radios or phones for two-way communications between driver and dispatcher. 
(d)  All passengers shall be provided with prompt and timely service. Holders of taxicab business permits shall provide each person requesting passenger service an estimated pickup time. Such times shall be logged on the manifest along with the actual pickup time. The passenger pickup shall be within fifteen (15) minutes of the estimated pickup time. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 13514, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 22372 , § 2, 2-16-15)  
Sec. 28-97. - Additional passengers in taxicabs. 
(a)  When a driver is transporting a passenger, no other person shall be received by the driver into such taxicab until the destination is reached without the consent of such passenger. No charge shall be made for any additional passenger except when the passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination, and then only for the additional distance traveled, except for the charge for an extra passenger as posted in the schedule of rates. 
(b)  In cases where more than one passenger enters a taxicab at the same time, bound for different destinations, the fare shall be charged as follows: When a passenger reaches his destination and pays his fare, the meter shall be reset. When a passenger reaches his destination and does not pay the fare or any part of the fare, then the fare or any part of the fare not paid by the passenger shall be paid by the last passenger to reach his destination. However, the last passenger so delivered shall not be liable to pay more than the rate that he would have been obligated to pay if he were the only passenger from point of being taken on as a passenger to his point of destination. 
(c)  Any person operating a taxicab in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-98. - Fares—Establishing, posting. 
(a)  All permit holders shall establish fare schedules. taxicab business permit holders shall establish metered fare schedules. Fare schedules and metered fare schedules shall be filed with the business license administrator at least thirty (30) days before becoming effective. No fare shall be charged which is in excess of the fare computed in accordance with the established fare schedule. 
(b)  For all vehicles operating under this article, the business license administrator shall issue rate cards stating the rate information filed in his office. Such rate cards shall be displayed at all times within the vehicle in full view of any passenger. The card shall also state that upon request the driver will estimate the charge to the passenger's destination. 
(c)  The originating passenger shall be offered the opportunity to read this rate card prior to engaging the services of the taxicab and, whenever possible, prior to entering the taxicab or loading any items of property into the taxicab. 
(d)  Every driver of a vehicle governed by this article shall, when requested by a paying passenger, give a numbered receipt, showing the driver's name, the name of the company, permit number, fleet number of the taxicab, date and amount of fare. 
(e)  Limousine rates: 
(1)  Fixed rates: A limousine operator transporting passengers between the Columbia Regional Airport and points within the city shall charge each passenger a fixed amount between the point from which he departs and the regional airport or vice versa. A passenger may not be charged for the distance traveled between points within, nor may any limousine operator accept passengers who wish to be transported solely between points within the city. 
(2)  Hourly rates: A limousine operator transporting passengers within the city limits to any other place shall charge an hourly rate. The minimum charge shall be an amount equal to the rate charged for one hour. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-99. - Drivers' certificates—Posting. 
Each certified driver shall post his driver's certificate in a conspicuous place in the vehicle he operates so that it can be easily seen by passengers. The driver's certificate shall be illuminated after sundown so that it can be read by passengers. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-100. - Manifests. 
(a)  Every driver of a vehicle governed by this article shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip, amount of fare, number of passengers and start time, mileage and end time and mileage for each driver's daily shift. 
(b)  All completed manifests shall be returned to the permit holder at the end of the shift. Forms for the manifest shall be furnished the driver by the permit holder and shall be of a character approved by the city business license administrator. 
(c)  Every permit holder shall retain and preserve all completed manifests in a safe place for at least one calendar year. Completed manifests shall be available for inspection by the business license administrator or the city police department at all times. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-101. - Equipment—Taxicabs. 
(a)  No taxicab, limousine or other such vehicle shall be operated upon the streets of the city without having an exterior left side rearview mirror affixed to the body of the vehicle so as to enable the operator to observe traffic to the rear of the vehicle. 
(b)  All taxicabs must be equipped with a top light permanently attached to the roof, which may have either the name of the company or the word "taxi" or "cab". The top light must be illuminated whenever the vehicle is in service for hire and headlights are required. 
(c)  All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with taximeter, fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times, and after sundown the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would alter its correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed. The driver shall place the flag of the taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. Taximeters shall be inspected at least annually by the business license administrator or an agency approved by the business license administrator. In addition to this annual inspection, the business license administrator may require the taximeter to be inspected at any time when he may have reason to believe the meter is inaccurate. The business license administrator, upon discovering any inaccuracy in a taximeter, shall notify the person operating the taxicab to cease operation. The taxicab shall not be operated until the taximeter is repaired. 
(d)  No driver shall operate a taxicab within the city limits while carrying a passenger for hire with the flag of the taximeter in such a position as to denote that such taxicab is not engaged. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-102. - Taxicab color schemes and markings. 
(a)  Each taxicab business permit holder shall adopt a distinctive and uniform color scheme and company name, logo or insignia and shall display the same name, logo or insignia and color scheme on each vehicle permitted. Each taxicab shall bear on the outside on each side in letters at least two (2) inches but not greater than six (6) inches high the name of the company, the business phone number of the company, and a number assigned by the company identifying that particular vehicle. Each taxicab operated by the same permit holder must have identical information displayed to the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than one operated pursuant to a valid permit to display any markings suggesting or indicating it is a taxicab or limousine. Whenever a vehicle operated as a taxicab or limousine is removed from service, the permit holder shall remove or obliterate all markings suggesting it is a taxicab or limousine. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-103. - Driver uniforms. 
Each permit holder shall require every driver of a vehicle permitted to him while on duty to wear a shirt, jacket, vest, hat or other clothing article of uniform color and style with the permit holder's company name or logo clearly printed upon it which identifies the driver as a driver for the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-104. - Vehicle and driver appearance. 
(a)  Every permit holder shall maintain his vehicles in a clean serviceable condition and in adequate repair. All permitted vehicles, except minivans, shall have two (2) doors affording direct entrance and exit to and from the passenger compartment. The interior of each vehicle shall be cleaned and vacuumed at the beginning of each driver's shift and shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of foreign matter and offensive odors. There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. The exterior of each vehicle shall be washed at least once each week. 
(b)  While on duty, all drivers governed by this article must be neat and clean in dress and person. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 12238, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28-105. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Drivers shall not sleep in their vehicle or play loud music while awaiting passengers. Drivers shall not permit unauthorized nonpaying passengers to ride in their vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire to solicit business for any hotel, motel, restaurant, bar or grill or to attempt to divert patronage from one such establishment to another. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to engage in selling intoxicating liquor or any unlawful substance or to solicit business for any house of ill repute or to use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers or packages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire to willfully deceive any passenger or potential passenger regarding the vehicle's destination or the rates or charges for a trip. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire to convey a passenger to a place other than that directed by the passenger or by an indirect route. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Secs. 28-106—28-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 
 
Sec. 28-111. - Certificate required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle for hire within the city limits of Columbia without a current driver's certificate. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle for hire to allow any person to operate such vehicle unless the operator has a current driver's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-112. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to drive a vehicle for hire within the Columbia city limits shall make written application to the business license administrator for a driver's certificate. The application shall be verified under oath and shall be on a form supplied by the business license administrator, which contains the following: 
(1)  Name, age, residence address of applicant for the past five (5) years. 
(2)  Color, height, eye and hair color, sex of applicant. 
(3)  Nationality, place of birth, length of time applicant has resided in the city. 
(4)  Statement whether applicant can read, write and speak the English language. 
(5)  Statement whether applicant is addicted to use of drugs or intoxicating liquors. 
(6)  Statement whether applicant was previously licensed as a chauffeur, where and when; whether the license has been revoked and, if so, for what cause. 
(7)  Statement whether applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a federal or state law or of any city ordinance relating to operating a motor vehicle, driving while intoxicated, leaving the scene of an accident or failure to report an accident or any violation of this article. 
(b)  Each applicant shall file with his application four (4) copies of a photograph of himself taken within three (3) months of the date of the application. One (1) photograph shall be firmly affixed to the application and one shall be firmly affixed to the certificate if granted. The size of the photograph shall be determined by the director. 
(c)  An applicant who has been denied a driver's certificate shall not reapply for a driver's certificate for a period of one (1) year following the denial. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 13514, § 1, 11-16-92)  
Sec. 28-113. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Every applicant for a driver's certificate shall: 
(1)  Be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of application. 
(2)  Be able to read and write the English language. 
(3)  Be clean and neat in dress and person, and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(4)  Have a general reputation for integrity, responsibility, good moral character as a law abiding citizen, and shall have a good driving record. 
(5)  Possess a valid Missouri chauffeur's license. The number on the chauffeur's license shall be placed on the Columbia driver's certificate. 
(6)  Have at least one (1) year's experience as a driver of motor vehicles, and at least sixty (60) days' experience operating motor vehicles over the streets of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, drivers of horse-drawn vehicles shall present a written certification of their ability to safely drive horse-drawn vehicles under urban street traffic conditions issued by a recognized trainer of persons for such operations. 
(c)  The driver's certificate provided for herein shall not be issued or renewed until the fee for such certificate shall have been paid. The driver's certificate fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per year. The applicant shall also pay a fee to cover costs incurred by the department of finance in obtaining the criminal record check required in section 28-114. 
(d)  No driver while on duty shall conduct himself in a boisterous, vociferous, belligerent or otherwise offensive manner. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 13514, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 19518, § 3, 5-7-07; Ord. No. 21799, § 3, 9-16-13, eff. 10-1-13)  
Sec. 28-114. - Investigation of applicant. 
The department of finance shall investigate the qualifications and fitness of each applicant for a driver's certificate, including obtaining a criminal record check of each applicant. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 19518, § 3, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 28-115. - Grounds for refusal. 
(a)  The business license administrator shall determine whether to issue a driver's certificate based upon the criminal record check and all other relevant facts and may deny the applicant a certificate when: 
(1)  The applicant filed an incomplete application. 
(2)  The applicant made a false statement on the application. 
(3)  The applicant's state chauffeur's, operator's or driver's license was revoked or suspended within the past two (2) years. 
(4)  A permit or certificate issued to the applicant under this article was revoked within the past two (2) years. 
(5)  The applicant is an habitual drunkard or is addicted to the use of narcotic drugs. 
(b)  Applicants have the burden of demonstrating good moral character. If an applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years, any misdemeanor involving theft or violence or the sale of or possession of illegal drugs or sexual abuse within the past five (5) years or any offense which involves driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or narcotic drugs or driving a motor vehicle with excessive blood alcohol content within the past three (3) years, or leaving the scene of an accident, failure to report an accident or any violation of this article within the past two (2) years, the business license administrator may deny the license after considering the nature of the crime or offense committed in relation to the license sought, the conduct of the applicant since the violation and other evidence as to the applicant's character. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 13514, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 19518, § 3, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 28-116. - Appeal. 
If the business license administrator refuses to issue a certificate, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to the procedure set out in chapter 13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 12238, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28-117. - Duration and renewal. 
(a)  Each driver's certificate shall expire on the thirtieth day of June. 
(b)  Unless sooner revoked, renewals for driver's certificates for further years may be made on the basis of the original application. The director may from time to time require updated information in the event that the information shall appear to be out of date. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 17348, § 1, 6-17-02)  
Sec. 28-118. - Automatic revocation. 
(a)  The driver's certificate shall be automatically revoked, and the driver shall immediately surrender his certificate to the business license administrator: 
(1)  Upon conviction of driving a motor vehicle in a careless and imprudent manner; 
(2)  Upon conviction of any state, county or municipal offense which involves driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or narcotic drugs or driving a motor vehicle with excessive blood alcohol content within the past three (3) years; 
(3)  Upon the second conviction of driving a motor vehicle at an excessive rate of speed in any twelve-month period; or 
(4)  Upon the third conviction involving a traffic violation for which points are assessed against the offender's driver's license in any twelve-month period. 
(b)  If a driver fails to surrender his certificate as required by subsection (a) of this section, the business license administrator shall notify the driver that his certificate has been automatically revoked. The driver may appeal this determination in the manner provided for appeals of license denials in chapter 13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-119. - Administrative revocation. 
The business license administrator may, following the provisions of section 13-31 of the City Code, issue a provisional order or revoke a driver's certificate for any violation of this article or for other cause when he has reason to believe that the driver's actions are a threat to the safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-120. - Alterations of driver's certificate. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely or fraudulently make, alter or counterfeit any driver's certificate or identification card, or to possess, or to pass or use any such instrument to another or to remove, obliterate or deface any official entry made upon a driver's certificate or identification card. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Sec. 28-121. - Compliance under the law. 
Every holder of a driver's certificate issued under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 12094, § 1, 12-12-88)  
Secs. 28-122—28-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23673 , § 1, adopted October 15, 2018, repealed §§ 28-130—28-142, which pertained to transportation network services. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 28-130—28-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL PEDAL TROLLEYS 
 
Sec. 28-150. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions and rules of construction shall apply: 
Commercial pedal trolley. A pedal trolley used or operated in connection with a commercial enterprise. 
Commercial pedal trolley driver or operator. Any person who is responsible for the safe operation of a commercial pedal trolley, including but not limited to steering and braking, and maintaining compliance with state and local traffic regulations. 
Director. The City of Columbia Director of Finance or the director's designee. 
Pedal trolley. A wheeled device designed to be propelled solely by a passenger or passengers via pedaling, with brakes and steering operated by a non-pedaling driver. A pedal trolley may include an assist motor. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-151. - General operating conditions. 
Every commercial pedal trolley must be operated in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Operation must be for the primary purpose of providing guided touring and site-seeing of the city to pedal trolley passengers; 
(2)  Operation of the pedal trolley shall only be permitted on a designated route approved by the city's director of public works. The director of public works may alter the route as needed for construction, traffic control, or to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the city; 
(3)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a person to operate a pedal trolley to provide taxi service; 
(4)  A commercial pedal trolley shall operate for previously-reserved parties only, and shall not solicit or accept substitute or additional passengers at any time; 
(5)  Operation of the commercial pedal trolley must be in compliance with federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations. The owner of the commercial pedal trolley shall annually certify, on a form provided by the city, that the pedal trolley is in compliance with all federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(6)  No person having a license under the provisions of this article shall operate a commercial pedal trolley between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-152. - Operating restrictions and conditions. 
(a)  No person shall operate a commercial pedal trolley upon the streets of the city unless such person shall have a valid Class E driver's license recognized under the laws of the state. 
(b)  A commercial pedal trolley driver shall remain with the pedal trolley at all times while the pedal trolley is operating a tour, including any planned or unplanned stops during the tour. 
(c)  A commercial pedal trolley driver is prohibited from: 
(1)  Operating the pedal trolley on public rights-of-way within the city other than those routes approved by the City's director of public works or the director's designee; 
(2)  Standing or stopping the pedal trolley other than in an area designated for parking, except in case of emergencies or in compliance with traffic laws; 
(3)  Operating the pedal trolley so as to impede the flow of pedestrians, except in case of emergencies; 
(4)  Operating, blocking, or parking on a public sidewalk at any time; 
(5)  Blocking, standing, or parking within intersections, crosswalks, parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities, bus stops, or taxicab stands for any reason, including but not limited to, loading and unloading passengers; 
(6)  Operating the pedal trolley in a manner that results in damage to public property; 
(7)  Operating a pedal trolley on or in any public park or trail; 
(8)  Creating, or materially contributing to, a parking problem or traffic congestion as a result of operation of the pedal trolley; 
(9)  Obstructing other vehicular traffic by unnecessarily weaving or changing lanes of travel; 
(10)  Operating, maneuvering, inclining, spinning, tilting, tipping, sloping, or positioning a pedal trolley in any manner that would unnecessarily place a passenger in any position other than seated upright; 
(11)  Operating the pedal trolley when the pedal trolley does not fully comply with all requirements of this article; 
(12)  Consuming any alcoholic beverages while operating the pedal trolley; 
(13)  Operating a pedal trolley while such driver's ability to operate the pedal trolley is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, the use of any drug or by any other means, or while such pedal trolley driver is in an intoxicated condition; 
(14)  Serving alcohol on a pedal trolley; 
(15)  Allowing a passenger or other individuals to drive the pedal trolley or permitting a pedal trolley to be operated simultaneously by anyone in addition to the pedal trolley driver; 
(16)  Operating a pedal trolley while the number of passengers aboard it exceeds the number for which it was designed; 
(17)  Operating a pedal trolley unless all passengers are seated, or operating a pedal trolley when a passenger is seated anywhere other than in the manufacturer's designed passenger seating; 
(18)  Sleeping or allowing others to sleep within the passenger compartment of the pedal trolley while on the public right-of-way; 
(19)  Engaging in loud or boisterous talking, shouting, or playing loud music, or otherwise acting in a manner as to unreasonably disturb other persons including passengers; and 
(20)  Collecting fares, making change, or taking on or discharging passengers while the pedal trolley is in motion. 
(d)  No glass bottles, receptacles, or glassware are allowed on a pedal trolley being operated on a street or parked on any street, alley, or parking garage or other similar public place in the city. 
(e)  The commercial pedal trolley driver or operator shall provide a refuse container on the pedal trolley for the proper disposal of refuse and garbage. The commercial pedal trolley driver or operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of the container and the proper disposal of refuse and garbage. 
(f)  The commercial pedal trolley driver or operator shall receive and discharge passengers only at such location(s) as approved in writing by the director of public works or on private property with the owner's consent. 
(g)  Only employees of the commercial pedal trolley operator shall steer and brake the pedal trolley. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec 28-153. - Requirements related to the consumption of beer and wine on a commercial pedal trolley. 
The commercial pedal trolley operator or driver may allow passengers to bring their own beer and wine onto the pedal trolley subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The commercial pedal trolley operator is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(2)  The commercial pedal trolley operator does not supply or serve alcoholic beverages to the passengers; 
(3)  The commercial pedal trolley operator checks the passengers' identifications and affixes arm bands to passengers who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older; and 
(4)  The commercial pedal trolley operator shall only permit passengers who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older to bring closed containers of beer and wine in its original packaging onto the pedal trolley. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-154. - License required for transport of passengers for hire on pedal trolley. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry passengers for hire on a pedal trolley or operate or maintain a business which carries passengers for hire on a pedal trolley within the city, unless such person has a valid business license or is employed as an agent or employee of a licensed commercial pedal trolley company. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-155. - Proof of insurance for commercial pedal trolley prerequisite to issuance of license. 
The director shall have the authority to issue or renew a license to operate a commercial pedal trolley company as provided in this article, but no license shall be issued or renewed until the applicant has produced proof of insurance as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-156. - Commercial pedal trolley insurance requirements. 
(a)  Before any license or permit is issued for the operation of a commercial pedal trolley, the commercial pedal trolley company shall file with the director a policy of insurance issued by an insurance company duly licensed to transact business in the state, covering each pedal trolley to be operated under the direction and control of such company. Such policy shall cover legal liability for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance coverage shall meet or exceed the sovereign immunity limits adjusted annually by the State of Missouri pursuant to RSMo. § 537.610 on a per occurrence basis. 
(b)  All such policies shall provide that the policy may not be canceled unless written notice of proposed cancellation is delivered to the office of the director at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed cancellation. If the commercial pedal trolley company licensee or other responsible party fails, within the period specified in such notice of cancellation, to provide proof of insurance as provided in subsection (a) of this section, then the license or permit affected by such cancellation shall be revoked as of the day such insurance ceases to be in force and effect, and thereafter it shall be unlawful for such owner or other responsible party to operate a commercial pedal trolley in the city. If the commercial pedal trolley company or responsible third party shall file a policy of insurance as required by this section within thirty (30) days after the date of such revocation, then such revocation shall be lifted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial pedal trolley and fail to exhibit valid proof of motor vehicle liability insurance on the demand of any peace officer or the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Sec. 28-157. - Commercial pedal trolley permits, fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to operate or conduct a commercial pedal trolley business or service or similar business within the city limits without first obtaining a permit for the trolley. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to operate a commercial pedal trolley within the city limits of Columbia unless the pedal trolley has a permit issued to it and the pedal trolley permit fee has been paid. The permit fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per annum for each pedal trolley. 
(Ord. No. 23698 , § 5, 11-5-18, eff. until 12-31-19)  
Chapter 29 - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Unified Development Code of the city, Ordinance No. 23117 , as adopted by the Council on March 20, 2017. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 29-1.1 - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Columbia Unified Development Code", and may be referred to herein as "this ordinance", "this chapter", or "this UDC".  
Sec. 29-1.2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate land use, site development, and the subdivision of land in Columbia, Missouri, and to implement the vision and recommendations for the city in the comprehensive plan for the city, as that plan may be amended over time. Additional purposes include the coordination of land uses, subdivisions of land, and property development with adequate traffic and infrastructure capacities; providing for the safe, orderly, and economic use of streets and transportation facilities; ensuring adequate movement of emergency vehicles; promoting the orderly use and layout of land; complying with all federal and state laws related to land use; reducing the risks of flooding and flood-related loss and damage; preserve features of historical significance and protecting designated historic resources; ensuring proper legal description and monumenting of subdivided land; protecting stable residential neighborhoods; providing adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; promoting economic development; promoting efficient administration of land use controls; promoting effective public engagement in land use decisions; encouraging efficient patterns of land use; promoting a variety of housing choices; preserving trees and preventing erosion on disturbed areas; controlling storm water drainage and sediments from rainfall on graded areas; requiring adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks, schools, playgrounds, stormwater management facilities, and other services and facilities necessary to serve new development or redevelopment; and otherwise protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.  
Sec. 29-1.3. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to all site development activities, establishment or changes in uses of land, construction or modification of buildings or structures, development and redevelopment of property, and subdivisions of land within the City of Columbia, including land annexed into the city after the effective date of adoption.  
Sec. 29-1.4. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Columbia, Missouri," the original of which is on file with the director, is hereby adopted as the official zoning map of the city and by this reference made a part of this chapter. The zones and boundaries of the zones as set forth on the map, are established and adopted as shown in the map. The official zoning map includes that regulating plan for the M-DT district shown in section 29-4.2. 
(b)  The standards and regulations in this chapter applicable to specific zone districts or overlay zone districts apply to the areas of the city shown with those zone district or overlay zone district designations on the official zoning map. 
(c)  The official zoning map is the latest version of the zoning map approved by the city council, and is maintained in electronic form by the department of community development. 
(d)  Unless otherwise required by law, zoning districts set forth on the official zoning map shall be construed to extend to the centerline of abutting public rights-of-way.  
Sec. 29-1.5. - Compliance required. 
(a)  All site development activities, establishment or changes in uses of land, construction or modification of buildings or structures, development and redevelopment of property, subdivisions of land, and sale of land within the City of Columbia shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All applications under this chapter shall comply with all other applicable provisions of city, state and federal laws and regulations, without limitation. 
(c)  The directors of city department and agencies are hereby authorized to establish design standards and specifications for the construction of public improvements and utilities for development and subdivisions in the city, which shall ensure a high quality construction of such public improvements and utilities such that these public improvements and utilities will serve the public need and be suitable for acceptance and maintenance by the city. The design standards and specifications shall be in substantial conformance with design standards and specifications for construction of similar public improvements and utilities by the city. All established design standards and specifications shall be on file in the office of the director who promulgated them, and all applications under this chapter shall comply with the established standards and specifications. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file or record with the recorder of deeds any instrument of sale, transfer or conveyance of land including a description by metes and bounds when the sale or transfer of that land effects a subdivision of land located within the corporate limits of the city within the meaning of this chapter and before such land has been subdivided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the plat, if required, has been approved by the council and recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds. Any deed or instrument of sale filed with the county recorder before full compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be null and void. 
(e)  The county recorder of deeds shall not file or record a subdivision plat of any land located within the corporate limits of the city unless the plat has endorsed upon it the approval of the council under the hand of the city clerk, and the seal of the city or, in the case of an administrative plat, with the signature of the director. The plat shall show with particularity what part of the land shown thereon is within the corporate limits of the city. The landowner shown on the plat shall cause to be filed with the director a statement by a registered professional land surveyor, set out on the plat and acknowledged by some official authorized by law to take acknowledgments for conveyances of real estate, stating that the land so shown on the plat as being within the corporate limits of the city is in fact within the corporate limits of the city. Any subdivision plat filed with the county recorder of deeds before full compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be null and void. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within the city limits knowingly or with intent to defraud, to transfer or sell, that land by reference to or by other use of a plat or any purported subdivision plat of the land before the plat has been approved by the council and recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within the city, knowingly or with intent to defraud, to directly or indirectly transfer or sell any land by metes and bounds description or otherwise when the sale, transfer or development of that land would effect a subdivision of land within the meaning of this chapter and before such land has been subdivided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the plat has been approved by the council and recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds.  
Sec. 29-1.6. - Relationship to other regulations. 
If there is a conflict between any part of this chapter and any other public law, city code provision, ordinance, or regulation, the provisions that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards or requirements shall govern, unless state or federal law or regulation requires a different outcome, provided, however, that if there is a conflict between the provisions of an overlay zone district and another regulation in this chapter 29, the provisions of the overlay zone district shall govern regardless of whether they are more or less restrictive, unless a state or federal law or regulation requires a different outcome.  
Sec. 29-1.7. - Relationship to third-party private agreements. 
(a)  This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants or other private agreements between parties. However, where this chapter or the decisions of the commission or council under this chapter impose greater restrictions or higher standards or requirements upon the use of land, buildings or premises than those imposed or required by other easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter and related decisions shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not excuse any failure to comply with this chapter. 
(b)  Any restrictions on any of the land contained in a proposed subdivision greater than those required by this chapter or other city ordinances, which in the opinion of the director may affect the division and use of the land, shall be indicated on the subdivision plat by a statement of those restrictions or by reference to the recording of such restrictions in the office of the county recorder of deeds. Any recorded restriction may be removed only by ordinance or resubdivision, and only after the council has determined that removal of the restrictions will not be detrimental to any land in the subdivision or to any neighboring property. 
(c)  The city shall not be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easement, covenant or agreement between private parties.  
Sec. 29-1.8. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, or general welfare. 
(b)  The director is authorized to interpret the provisions of this chapter, unless a different city, public, or quasi-public official or agency is specifically designated in this chapter to make the determination, or unless state or federal law requires a different official or agency to make the determination. The director's determination shall be based on examination of the plain language of the chapter, the need to interpret each section consistently with other related section of the chapter, and any purpose statements related to the chapter provision in question. 
(c)  The director is authorized to make determinations of the location of all zone district or overlay zone district boundary lines, based on examination of the official zoning map, the character of the existing development in relation to the boundary line, the purposes of the zone district or overlay zone district involved, and any available history regarding the adoption of the zone district or overlay zone district boundary.  
Sec. 29-1.9. - Transition to this UDC. 
(a)  Any application for approval of a building permit or subdivision of land governed by this chapter that was filed and determined by city staff to be a complete application before the effective date of this chapter shall be governed by the zoning and subdivision regulations in effect at the time the complete application was filed. 
(b)  Any approval of a structure or land use under the zoning regulations in force prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be governed by the regulations in effect at the time of the preliminary approval, provided that any additional or final approvals of that structure or land are completed within any time required by those regulations, or within any extension of that time approved by the city. 
(c)  Preliminary subdivision plats approved under subdivision regulations in force prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall expire seven (7) years from the date of approval or five (5) years after the effective date, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (c) above, an applicant whose application would otherwise be governed by regulations in effect prior to this chapter may notify the city in writing that the applicant chooses to have the application governed by the provisions of this chapter. The city shall approve the request provided that (i) the application shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter—not just selected provisions, and (ii) if the application has received preliminary approvals, those approvals shall be reviewed and the application shall be required to comply with the standards and provisions for preliminary approval under this chapter. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(f)  All PUD, O-P, C-P, and M-P zone districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter will be shown on the zoning map as PD zone districts, but shall continue to be governed by the approved development plans for those properties and by those portions of the prior zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations necessary to interpret and carry out the intent of the approved development plans for those properties. All construction and land uses that comply with approved development plans for those properties are legal conforming uses. Modifications to PUD, O-P, C-P, and M-P zone districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter must comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Any use of land that was listed as a permitted use of land in the zone district where it is located at the time the use was established, but that is listed as a conditional use in that location in this chapter, shall be deemed to have obtained a conditional use permit; and the city shall provide written confirmation of that status upon request of the owner of the property on which the use is located. 
(h)  Any violations of zoning and subdivision regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue to be violations of city regulations, and the city may enforce and apply penalties to those violations, unless the structure, land use, or action that gave rise to the violation would no longer be a violation under this chapter.  
Sec. 29-1.10. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this chapter or any portion of the official zoning district map shall be held by a state or federal court to be invalid or unconstitutional, such portion is hereby declared to be severable and such invalid or unconstitutional portion shall in no way affect the remainder of this chapter, but shall be in full force and effect and it is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the remainder of this chapter would have been passed notwithstanding the invalidity or unconstitutionality of any section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase thereof.  
Sec. 29-1.11. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Definitions—General. For the purpose of this chapter 29, the following words and terms are defined to mean the following: 
Access. The place, means or way by which pedestrians, bicyclists and/or vehicles have ingress and egress to a property or use. A private access is an access not in public ownership or control by means of deed, dedication or public easement. 
Accessory dwelling unit ("ADU"). A secondary dwelling unit created on a lot with a principal one-family dwelling, and which is subordinate to the principal dwelling. Accessory dwellings may be internal to or attached to the principal dwelling, or built as a detached structure. Principal one-family dwellings shall not include single-family structures that have been devoted to other uses, including, but not limited to, boardinghouses and bed and breakfasts. 
Accessory equipment. For the purposes of wireless telecommunications facilities, any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless communications facility or wireless support structure, including utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
Accessory structure. A structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or use on the property. 
Accessory use. A use of land that is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of land or structure on the property. 
Adult day care center. A group home designed to provide care and supervision to meet the needs of five (5) or more functionally impaired adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours but more than two (2) hours per day in a place other than the adult's home. 
Agent. A person legally authorized to act for another. 
Agriculture. Any use of land consisting of at least two and one-half (2½) acres for the purpose of crops, grazing animals, orchards, trees or forest lands, and any other use pertaining to farming or agricultural research, and including all the types of structures normally associated with these uses, including one dwelling unit, storage bins, barns, sheds, tool houses, garages, and any other use or facility ancillary to farming or open land. This use does not include any activities meeting any definition of a use listed in the industrial use section of Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Airport. The Columbia Regional Airport (COU) and any other place for the take-off and landing of aircraft required to meet any safety and licensing requirements of a state or federal entity with regulatory authority over the facility, including areas used or intended to be used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant airport facility buildings, structures, or uses. 
Alcoholic beverage, retail sale. The retail sale of alcoholic beverages to the public, primarily for consumption off the premises, in accordance with the alcoholic beverage regulations in chapter 4 of the City Code, and other applicable state or local laws and licensing requirements. 
Alley. A public right-of-way that is used for pedestrian or vehicle access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Amusement game machine. A mechanical or electronic machine or device that may be operated by the public to play a game installed in or on the machine or for entertainment or amusement. This use includes but is not limited to pinball machines, video games, motion simulator games, imitation sports activities, and virtual reality games. 
Arterial. A street that provides primarily for through traffic movement between areas and across the city, and has a secondary function of direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curbside use. 
Artisan industry. Small-scale fabrication, preparation, or production of arts, crafts, foods, and beverages by an artist, artisan, craftsperson, or cook, on the premises, by hand or with minimal automation. Examples include but are not limited to small-scale welding and sculpting or arts and crafts, firing of pottery or sculpture in kilns, and local, small-batch bakeries, candy shops, cheese shops, craft breweries, and micro-distilleries. Accessory uses include retail teaching of these skills to others in the course of fabrication, preparation, or production, and outdoor seating areas. 
 
Assembly or lodge hall. A publicly or privately owned facility intended for the gathering of people for social, professional, or recreational activities such as meetings, conferences, weddings, and similar activities. 
Awning. A roof-like cover, made of fabric, or other flexible material, over a door or window and attached to a building. 
Banner. Any piece of cloth or other flexible material used as a sign. 
Bakery. A facility for the production, distribution, or sale of baked goods and confectioneries. 
Balcony. An exterior platform attached to the upper floors of the building façade (forward of the required building line). 
Bar or nightclub. An establishment providing alcoholic beverage sales for consumption on the premises as the principal use, and which may permit dancing and provide entertainment. Food service may be provided as an accessory use. This definition shall not include any adult retail or adult entertainment use. 
Basement. For all purposes, except floodplain regulations, a story that is not a story above grade plane (see "story above grade plane"). 
Bed and breakfast. A residential building containing not more than five (5) guest rooms that provides sleeping units and meals for transient guests, and that is managed and occupied by the owner of the property. 
 
Billboard. An off-premise sign which advertises a product or service. 
Board. The board of adjustment, unless the context clearly indicates that another board is intended. 
Boardinghouse. A building with a single kitchen, occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where lodging and meals or other services are provided for five (5) or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients, where rooms are rented for less than thirty (30) days. This use does not include a group home or residential care facility. 
Buildable area. The area of the lot that building(s) may occupy, which includes the area of the lot behind the required building line as designated by the building form standards. The buildable area sets the limits of the building footprint now and in the future—any additions shall be within the specified buildable area. 
Building. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building official. The director of community development, or designee. 
Bus barn or lot. A facility or lot intended for the maintenance and storage of bus transit vehicles. 
Bus station. A facility or structure where bus transit vehicles stop to provide transportation services to the public. This use may include related ticket sales. Accessory uses may include convenience retail or restaurants. 
Canopy. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that provides weather protection, identity or decoration. A canopy is permitted to be structurally independent or supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides. 
Car wash. A commercial establishment that provides for the self-service or full-service cleaning of automobiles manually or by machine operated equipment. 
CATSO. The Columbia Area Transportation Study Organization, which serves as the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) for the Columbia metropolitan planning area. Transportation jurisdictions which make up the organizational structure of CATSO are Boone County, the City of Columbia, and MoDOT. 
Cemetery or mausoleum. A structure or open area used for the burial or permanent storage of human remains. 
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that confine and conduct the normal continuous or intermittent flow of water. 
City. The City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Clear cutting. The practice of removing over half of the standing climax forest area on a site. 
Climax forest. Any woodland community of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet which is dominated by climax species including but not limited to oak, hickory, walnut, sugar maple or bottomland hardwoods such as river birch, basswood, sycamore and hornbeam and which includes an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a maximum aspect ratio of 4:1. 
Color rendering. General expression for the effect of a light source on the color appearance of objects in conscious or subconscious comparison with their color appearance under a reference light source. 
Commercial or trade school. An establishment offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation, such as beauty, dance, and vocational schools, other than public, private, or parochial primary or secondary schools, colleges, or universities. 
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Columbia, Missouri, unless the context clearly indicates that another commission is intended. 
Common drive. The public or private easement for shared access for vehicles and pedestrians within a block that provides access to the rear or side of properties, vehicle parking (e.g., garages), utility meters, recycling containers, and garbage bins. 
Comprehensive plan. A series of plans for the physical development of the city, consisting of the urban development goals and objectives, the transportation plan, the land use plan, and other elements the council may wish to include. References to the comprehensive plan herein shall be deemed to include Columbia Imagined - The Plan for How We Live & Grow, as approved by the council and amended from time to time. 
Community/Recreation center. A public or not-for-profit facility serving the social, educational, cultural, and recreational needs of a neighborhood or the community as a whole. 
Conservation. The protection of valuable resources, including but not limited to plants and animals, natural areas, and interesting and important structures and buildings, from the damaging effects of human activity 
Conversion. The alteration of a structure to accommodate uses for which it was not originally constructed, but which maintain the structure's general character. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). A large scale facility (or integrated group of facilities) that has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care for retirement-age persons, and that consists of CCRC independent living units, CCRC assisted living facilities and CCRC support facilities. Such facilities may also include a CCRC skilled care nursing facility. "Continuing care" means the provision of lodging, nursing, medical or other health related services at the same community. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) independent living unit. A dwelling unit within a CCRC containing living area(s), bedroom area(s), kitchen area and bathroom(s), including apartments, detached homes, or attached townhomes, that house one or more people in a manner in which they may live independently and may receive one or more meals per day in a congregate setting. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) assisted living facility (also known as an assisted living facility licensed as a residential care facility). A facility located within a CCRC that provides a residential living environment, including congregate meals, housekeeping, and personal services for retirement-age persons and spouses or registered domestic partners, who have temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living, such as feeding, bathing, dressing or mobility, or memory care issues, but do not require services generally offered in a long-term care facility or nursing facility. A CCRC assisted living facility or residential care facility includes dwelling units, dining room(s), bathing area(s), common area(s), offices and other spaces necessary to provide the above services. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) skilled care nursing facility. A facility located within a CCRC that provides board, shelter and twenty-four-hour skilled nursing and medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. A CCRC skilled care nursing facility includes nursing beds or individual rooms, dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above services. Such facilities are accessory to the principal functions of the CCRC and are subordinate in size and area occupied on the site. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) support facilities. Facilities and amenities located within a CCRC intended to support the lifestyles of the residents and their visitors. Such facilities may include arts-and-crafts rooms, automatic teller machines (ATMs), chapels, studios, gardens and wellness clubs, small on-site commercial facilities intended for residents, visitors and staff that are owned or operated by the CCRC owner or operated under direct contract with the owner such as general stores, hair salons, postal centers, medical services that may include therapy, home health care, private duty nursing, hospice care, pharmacies, circuit health and dental care that are intended to provide for continuity of care to CCRC residents (past or current), shuttle bus services, and regular programs that take advantage of local cultural and educational activities. 
Council. The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri. 
Cul-de-sac. A street terminated at one end by a widened pavement for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Customary accessory use and related structures. A detached subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building; or a use clearly subordinate and incidental to the main use of the property. A customary accessory use or related structure is one that is often provided for the use and convenience of the occupants, residents, or patrons of the principal structure on the same lot, or their guests, rather than the general public. For multifamily residential and non-residential uses these include but are not limited to swimming pools, recreation facilities, meeting rooms, laundry facilities, and outdoor seating. This use does not include any accessory use or related structure listed separately in the permitted use table. 
DBH or dbh (diameter breast height). Tree trunk diameter measured four and a half (4.5) feet above the ground. 
Deck. An unroofed platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, which is supported by pillars or posts. 
Decorative lighting. Lights that have an aesthetic purpose to illuminate the architectural features of a building and produce generally low levels of light (one hundred (100) watts, one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens per light), including but not limited to "gooseneck" lights, sconce lights, recessed lighting in roof soffits, spot lighting, and silhouette lights. 
Decibel. The unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity. Commonly abbreviated as dB(A). 
Department. The community development department of the city, unless the context clearly indicates that another department is intended. 
Designation ordinance. The official zoning document which the council enacts specifying a certain area as an urban conservation district. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, excluding routine repair and maintenance. For purposes of any floodplain area, development includes the storage of equipment or materials. 
Developed land. Real estate that has been altered by the addition of impervious surface, the addition of soil or fill material, or by site grading that changes the hydrology of the property from its natural state. 
Director. The Director of the Community Development Department for Columbia, Missouri, or the director's designee, unless the context clearly indicates that another individual is intended. 
Director of public works. The Director of the Department of Public Works for Columbia, Missouri or the director's designee. 
Display area. As it relates to lighting regulations, outdoor locations where nighttime sales occur and where accurate color perception by customers is needed, for example automobile sales. 
Dormers. Roofed ancillary structures with windows providing light and air to habitable space within the roof. 
Dormitory/Fraternity/Sorority. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons not members of the same family group, under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories or fraternity houses, in which each person residing in each living unit shall be a duly registered student in any accredited school, college or university, the spouse of such student, or a management employee. Such living facilities may contain sleeping rooms for use of one or more persons, provided that there is at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. Accessory uses may include food preparation facilities, exercise facilities, and meeting rooms. 
Downtown community improvement district. That area as defined in the petition approved by Ordinance No. 20866, as amended. 
Drive-up facility (also "drive-in" or "drive-through"). A site feature or building feature that by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
Driveway. An area established or used for ingress and egress of vehicles from a street or thoroughfare to any point on private property. 
Dwelling, live-work. A building or space within a building used jointly for residential and non-residential purposes, where non-residential purposes exceed those permitted by a home occupation. 
Dwelling, multi-family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, but not including a structure meeting the definition of dwelling, one-family attached. 
Dwelling, one-family attached (also known as "zero lot line," "single-family attached," "semi-attached," and "semi-detached"). A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, attached side to side at the side lot line, that each have a separate outside entrance, and that share a common party wall on one or more sides that extends from the foundation to the top of the highest habitable story and that meets the fire code requirements for attached individual dwellings. 
Dwelling, one-family detached. A building used primarily as living quarters containing one dwelling unit, including a manufactured home or a modular home. 
Dwelling, two-family (also known as "duplex"). A building used primarily as living quarters containing two (2) dwelling units situated on a single lot. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit consisting of one or more rooms providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another party, for a specified purpose, of any designated part of that property. It shall include but not necessarily be limited to property designated for installation of storm sewers or drainage ditches, or along a natural watercourse, preservation of the channel to provide for flow of water, or installation of streets, sidewalks, sewer, water, gas, electric transmission lines, telephone, wireline-based communication services facilities, regardless of the technology utilized or other utility services necessary or advantageous to properly serve the public. 
Effective date. The effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, or any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Elementary or secondary school. Public schools, elementary and secondary, private schools with curriculum equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school, and related facilities including but not limited to gymnasiums, stadiums, and dormitories if located on the campus. 
Elevation. An exterior wall of a building that faces a public or private street or alley. 
Estate lane. A local residential street designed to carry light volumes of traffic and to provide access to low density single-family residential and attendant uses. 
Expressway. A street designed to provide for the expeditious movement of large volumes of through traffic across the city, which offers no direct land access function, but has some at-grade intersections (see also "freeway"). 
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration. 
Family. 
(1)  An individual, married couple, or registered domestic partnership and the children thereof, including foster children placed in the household by a public agency, and no more than two (2) other persons related directly to the individual, married couple or registered domestic partnership by blood or marriage, occupying a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit basis. A family may include not more than one additional person, not related to the family by blood or marriage; or 
(2)  a.  In zoning districts R-1 and PD (when the PD development density is five (5) or less dwelling units per acre), a group of not more than three (3) persons not related by blood, marriage, or registered domestic partnership, living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit cost-sharing basis; or the use of a dwelling unit by four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage, or registered domestic partnership, living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit cost-sharing basis, prior to February 4, 1991, shall be allowed to continue in districts R-1 and R-1 PUD as a lawful nonconforming use. 
b.  In all other applicable zoning districts, a group of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage, or registered domestic partnership, living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit cost-sharing basis. 
Family day care center (also known as family day care centers, preschool centers, nursery schools, child play centers, child education centers, child experiment stations or child development institutions). A place for reception, care, training or instruction of five (5) or more children, not of common parentage, residing therein, regardless of sex, under the age of eighteen (18) years, for compensation or otherwise, but not including facilities at any regularly established public or parochial schools, colleges, universities, academies or seminaries, or other schools or institutions organized under and by virtue of the laws of the United States or the State of Missouri, and under the supervision of the duly constituted authorities of that school or institution. 
Farm. A tract of land consisting of at least two and one-half (2½) acres used for the growing of agricultural crops or raising livestock. 
Farmer's market. An area, which may or may not be in a completely enclosed building, where, on designated days and times, groups of individual sellers, such as growers of horticultural and agricultural products, artisans of craft products, and food and beverage providers, offer these items for sale, directly to the public, from on-site booths. 
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
Fence. A freestanding structure, not including a hedge or other natural growth, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, used for confinement, screening, enclosure, security, or partition purposes. A railing provided for public safety purposes does not constitute a fence. 
Final plat. The final map or drawing described in these regulations on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the council for approval and which, if approved, is submitted to the county recorder of deeds for filing. 
Flag. A piece of fabric attached to a staff. 
Footcandles. The amount of light falling on a surface. One footcandle is defined as one lumen per square foot. Initial footcandles is the amount of light when fixtures are new. 
Forest land. Forested land area with the aerial canopy dominated by trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter, measured four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. 
Freeway. A street designated to provide for the expeditious movement of large volumes of through traffic across the city, which offers no direct land access function and has grade separated intersections (See also "expressway"). 
Frontage. The length of the property line of any parcel along each street that it borders. 
Frontage road. A street which is parallel and immediately adjacent to an arterial street, expressway or freeway, and which provides a means of access to abutting properties that are separated from through traffic. 
Funeral home or mortuary. An establishment providing services such as preparing the human dead for burial, cremating human remains, and arranging and managing funerals. This use does not include cemeteries and columbaria, but does include a crematorium. 
Game arcade. Any commercial building in which there are more than three (3) amusement game machines on the premises that are available to the public. An arcade may contain commercial recreational machines or games other than amusement game machines. 
Garage sale. The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five (5) items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district, whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school athletic events shall not be deemed to constitute garage sales. 
Glare. Light that causes discomfort, distraction, or temporary impairment of sight because it is not adequately diffused, shielded, or directed away from the viewer. 
Grade plane. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building. 
Greenhouse or plant nursery. An establishment, including a building, part of a building, or open space, and any buildings and structures necessary for the growth, display, and/or retail and wholesale activities of horticultural and floricultural products, used in indoor and outdoor planting, and the sale of related items. 
Greenspace access easement. A perpetual interest in land as described and dedicated by subdivision plat. Designation of a greenspace access easement shall contain the same restrictions on use of property as a greenspace conservation easement, except that it shall give the public the right of entry to the area for pedestrian use only. The greenspace access easement does not confer any rights to the city to either maintain or develop the easement for recreational use. Designation of a greenspace access easement shall restrict the owner of the underlying fee from erecting barricades that interfere with lawful access. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to prevent the city from acquiring other easements in property encumbered with a greenspace access easement. 
Greenspace conservation easement. A perpetual interest in land described and dedicated on a subdivision plat. By designation of a greenspace conservation easement, no right of entry is automatically given to the city or the public; however, public access may be allowed as defined on the subdivision plat. The use of area contained within a greenspace conservation easement shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  No private development of the property shall occur, except for public or private street, driveway, bridge, trails, walkways and utility crossings, where needed. 
(2)  No commercial signs or other advertising material shall be placed within the easement area. 
(3)  There shall be no removal of trees, shrubs or other vegetation on the property except for the performance of acceptable timber stand improvement practices such as selective thinning. Mowing and cutting or removal of brush or trees may continue as necessary to comply with health ordinances, maintain stream beds, banks, existing agricultural, scenic or recreational uses, or eliminate poisonous or noxious plant material. 
(4)  Except as otherwise specifically and expressly authorized on the plat, there shall be no use of the property except for public or private street, driveway, bridge, trails, walkways and utility construction, private noncommercial agricultural, or private noncommercial recreational uses which do not interfere with the growth of the trees and shrubs located on the easement. Uses and activities which are not allowed in district FP-O (floodplain overlay district) shall be prohibited. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to prevent the city from acquiring other easements in property encumbered with a greenspace conservation easement. 
Greenspace trail easement. A perpetual interest in land as described and dedicated by subdivision plat. Designation of a greenspace trail easement shall give the following rights: 
(1)  Constructing or maintaining a permanent hiking or bicycle trail or path with accessory facilities or accommodation. 
(2)  The right of entry of the city to maintain and develop hiking or bicycle trails or paths. 
(3)  The right of entry of the public for pedestrian or bicycle use of the trails or paths which have been constructed within the easement. No right of entry for motor vehicles is granted to the public except for authorized emergency vehicles. 
(4)  The right to construct public street, bridge and utility crossings as needed. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to prevent the city from acquiring other easements in property encumbered with a greenspace trail easement. 
Group home, large. A facility that provides care, treatment or custody for more than eight (8) individuals considered to be disabled or handicapped under the federal Fair Housing Act, as amended or the laws of the State of Missouri, and may include additional persons providing oversight of the facility, none of which need to be related to each other. 
Group home, small. A facility that provides care, treatment or custody for up to eight (8) individuals considered to be disabled or handicapped under the federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, or the laws of the State of Missouri, and may include two (2) additional persons providing oversight of the facility, none of which need to be related to each other. Residences with up to three unrelated residents are not defined as a group home. 
Halfway house. A residential facility primarily for persons who have been institutionalized and released, or who have been assigned to the facility as an alternative to institutionalization, and require the temporary protection of a group setting to facilitate the transition to society. 
Hazardous material. Any material or substance listed in 40 CFR Part 355, Appendix A, as an extremely hazardous substance when that substance is stored, generated, used or released in quantities equal to or greater than the lowest quantity listed for either the threshold planning quantity or reporting quantity for the substance; any materials designated hazardous and subject to special requirements by the federal government or the State of Missouri. 
Heavy commercial services. An establishment that provides semi-industrial, more intrusive types of commercial services, less compatible with common household commercial services; such as laundry services, lumberyards, newspaper publishing plants, printing shops, sign painting shops, equipment rental, and other similar uses. 
Heavy industry. The processing, manufacturing, or storage of products under potentially hazardous conditions, such as the creation of products from extracted raw materials and the use of flammable and explosive materials. This use may include, but is not limited to, concrete plants, electroplating works, forges, galvanizing works, and other similar uses. 
Heavy vehicle and equipment sales, rental, and servicing. The sale, rental, leasing, serving, and repair of heavy vehicles and equipment typically used in agricultural, commercial, or industrial operations, including, but not limited to, trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over ten thousand (10,000) pounds, buses, semi-trucks or trailers, tractors, harvesters, loaders, farm machinery, and tracked vehicles, as well as the sales of parts for heavy vehicles and equipment. 
Height, building. The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. Generally, this means to the roof level (ignoring parapets) of a flat roof or the top of a mansard roof, and to the midpoint between the eave and the ridgeline on a pitched roof. 
Height, sign. The maximum height of a sign shall be measured from the elevation of the point nearest the sign on the center line of the public street or highway nearest the sign upward to the elevation of the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher. Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all signs may have a height of eight (8) feet measured from the ground location of the sign to the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
Higher education institution. A college, university, or other institution of higher education, and related facilities including but not limited to gymnasiums, stadiums, and dormitories if located on the campus, but excluding any institution that is not subject to the terms of this development code under the laws of the State of Missouri. 
Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit, or associated garage, where business activities are conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or garage, by residents of the dwelling unit. This use may permit one full-time (forty hours) or two part-time (twenty (20) hours each) non-resident employees. 
Hospital. An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient or medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, medical or dental clinics, sanitariums, and medical laboratories. 
Hotel. A building occupied or used as a temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals, with or without meals, in which the typical stay is between one and thirty (30) days. Accessory uses may include restaurants, cafes, swimming pools, meeting rooms, or sports/health facilities. The definition of hotel shall exclude bed and breakfast establishments. 
Impervious surface. A surface on real property where infiltration of stormwater into the earth has been virtually eliminated by the works of man. Impervious surfaces shall include, but not be limited to: roofs, paved driveways, patio areas, sidewalks, parking lots, storage areas, and other oil, macadam, or gravel surfaced areas that prevent percolation of stormwater into the earth's surface. 
Indoor entertainment, adult. Entertainment, at a commercial establishment such as a nightclub, theater, bar, juice bar, restaurant, or bottle club, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude, which shall mean the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at such point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This use also includes the showing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration, at a motion picture theater or other similar commercial establishment. This use also includes adult arcades where image-producing devices, whether coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronic, are regularly maintained to show images exhibiting sexual activities or specified anatomical areas to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time. 
Indoor recreation or entertainment. A facility for indoor participation or observation of sports, games, fitness, arts, or culture activities that do not meet the definition for another use in this chapter. This use includes but is not limited to billiard parlors, game arcades, skating rinks, bowling alleys, gymnasiums not accessory to an education institution, racket clubs, sports arenas, and similar uses. Accessory uses include the sales of food, beverages, and items related to or required for participation in the recreation or entertainment activity. This use includes any establishment with more than three (3) amusement game machines on the premises. 
Infill development. New construction in areas where significant development has occurred on more than two (2) sides of the site, or redevelopment of parcels that were previously developed with permanent structures, including replacement of blighted or deteriorated structures. 
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Installed. The attachment, or assembly fixed in place, of any outdoor light fixture whether or not connected to a power source. 
Land disturbance. Any man-made change of the land surface, including mechanized clearing, which removes the vegetative ground cover, excavation, filling and grading, but not including agricultural activities such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops, growing and tending of gardens, and landscape modifications. 
Land disturbance permit. A permit issued by the City of Columbia that authorizes the commencement of land disturbance activities or logging. 
Landscaping. The improvement of a lot, parcel, or tract of land with a combination of at least four (4) of the plant categories found in the planting requirements of the city's guidelines for landscaping and screening as promulgated by the director. 
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Light fixture. An illuminating device, outdoor lighting or reflective surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. 
 
Light fixture, full cutoff. Zero intensity at or above horizontal (ninety (90) degrees above nadir) and limited to a value not exceeding ten (10) percent of lamp lumens at or above eighty (80) degrees. 
Light fixture, cutoff. Intensity at or above ninety (90) degrees (horizontal) no more than two and one-half (2.5) percent of lamp lumens and no more than ten (10) percent of lamp lumens at or above eighty (80) degrees. 
Light fixture, semi-cutoff. Intensity at or above ninety (90) degrees (horizontal) no more than five (5) percent of lamp lumens and no more than twenty (20) percent at or above eighty (80) degrees. 
Light fixture, non-cutoff. No limitations of light distribution at any angle. 
Light industry. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, storage, assembly, treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared materials, sheet metal shops, or servicing or sale of consumer products, which activities are conducted at a minimum of eighty (80) percent or wholly within an enclosed building and that do not emit noxious fumes or odors. 
Light loss ratio. The ratio of the illuminance on a given area after a period of time to the initial illuminance on the same area. Note: The light loss factor is used in lighting calculations as an allowance for the depreciation of lamps, accumulation of dirt on luminaire, light control elements and room surfaces, to values below the initial or design conditions, so that a minimum desired level of illuminance may be maintained in service. 
Light spillage. Lighting that illuminates property adjacent to the property on which the light source is located. 
Lighting engineer. A person having the education and training to design outdoor lighting systems and prepare and interpret lighting plans. 
Light vehicle sales and rental. The sale, display, lease, rental, or storage of light motor vehicles, including automobiles, vans, light trucks, light trailers, boats, and recreational vehicles. This use shall not include salvage operations, scrap operations, vehicle impound yards, or commercial parking lots available for short-term use. 
Light vehicle service and repair. The sale of vehicle fuel from a facility or lot having pumps and underground storage tanks and minor vehicle repair and maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, oil change and lubrication, brake and muffler repair, tire rotation, glass replacement, and other limited repairs customarily done in service stations, but not including vehicle bodywork or painting, or major engine or transmission repairs. 
Logging. The removal of more than three (3) qualifying existing trees, per acre, from a lot, tract, or building site larger than one acre. 
Lot (aka lot of record or legal lot). A tract or parcel of land whose boundaries are shown on a plat recorded with the county recorder of deeds. Tracts or parcels zoned district A, R-1 or R-2 or any combination thereof, and were described by a metes and bounds description accurately describing the location, boundaries and size of the tract or parcel within a recorded instrument prior to annexation into the city or prior to October 5, 1964 shall be considered a lot and entitled to receive permits as though it was shown on a recorded plat. When a portion of a tract of land is acquired for highway or other public purposes, such division of ownership shall not affect the remainder of the tract in meeting the definition of a lot so long as the original tract met the definition of a lot under one of the above provisions. For purposes of this definition, the term "recorded" means recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
Lot, common. A platted lot in a subdivision that is dedicated to the use of more than one lot in the subdivision. 
Lot, corner. A lot in which one side lot line is adjacent to a street, platted street right-of-way, or street-space. Special building placement, fencing and landscape requirements may apply. 
Lot, flag (aka stem lot or tier lot). A parcel of land that is accessible only by a very long narrow strip leading from a main road. 
Lot, interior. A lot whose side lot lines do not abut any streets. 
Lot, through. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
Lot depth. The average horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line, as measured along both side lot lines. 
Lot line. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or any public place. 
Lot line, front. The lot line between a lot and the street on which it fronts, or that lot line of a through lot that the director shall determine to be the front lot line, based on the character of the fronting streets and the location of front, rear, and side lot lines on abutting properties. 
Lot line, rear. The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or that lot line of an irregularly shaped lot that the director shall determine to be the rear lot line, based on its relationship to the street fronting the property and the location of front, rear, and side lot lines on abutting properties. 
Lot line, side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot width. The average horizontal distance between two (2) side lot lines as measured along the front and rear lot lines. 
Lumen. Unit of luminous flux; used to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps. 
Luminaire. The complete lighting assembly, less the support assembly. For purposes of determining total light output from luminaries, lighting assemblies that include multiple unshielded or full cutoff lamps on a single pole or standard shall be considered as a single unit. Two (2) or more units with lamps less than three (3) feet apart shall be considered a single luminaire. 
Machine shop. An establishment where power-driven tools are used for making, finishing, or repairing machines or machine parts. 
Major vehicle repair and service. A vehicle repair facility where major vehicle bodywork or painting, or major engine or transmission repairs of operable or inoperable light motor vehicles is performed. Such facilities may offer other maintenance services such as engine tune-ups, oil change and lubrication, brake and muffler repair, tire rotation, or glass replacement, but are generally characterized by major vehicle repair activities. 
Major roadway plan (MRP). The major roadway plan adopted by council, as amended from time to time, which includes both existing and proposed future major roadways in the Columbia Metropolitan Planning Area. 
Managed lawn areas. Means any area greater than five hundred (500) square feet where the vegetative ground cover is maintained at a uniform height of less than three (3) inches. 
Maintained footcandles. Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for a light loss factor (maintenance factor) accounting for dirt build-up and lamp output depreciation. 
Manufactured home. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, a transportable, factory-built structure that is manufactured in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401) and that is designed to be used as a permanent single dwelling unit. This definition does not include a recreational vehicle or travel trailer or other similar vehicles and does not include a mobile home. 
Manufactured home park. For all purposes other than floodplain regulations, a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for non-transient use. 
Manufactured home space. An area of land within a manufactured home park for the placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home stand. Improvement on a manufactured home lot constructed for the purpose of providing a structural base for the manufactured home. 
Marquee. A roofed structure projecting from and supported by a building, or free-standing when such roofed structure extends beyond the building line, building wall or street lot line. 
Maximum aspect ratio of 4:1. A means of defining the configuration of an area of trees such that the measurement of length of the area shall not be more than four (4) times as long as the measurement of width of the area. 
Maximum-to-minimum ratio. The highest horizontal illuminance point divided by the lowest horizontal illuminance point or area. 
Mechanical and construction contractors. Construction, landscaping, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical construction or repair activities and incidental storage at establishments and on lots other than job sites. This use does not include establishments where the primary activity is retail sale of goods to the general public, but includes related contracting, retail, and wholesale sales and distribution from the premises of materials used in mechanical and construction contract work. 
Mechanized clearing. Clearing of land by tracked or wheeled vehicles which scrape, cultivate or scarify the surface of the ground exposing bare soil and uprooting vegetation. 
Medical marijuana cultivation facility. A facility licensed by the department of health and senior services to acquire, cultivate, process, store, transport, and sell marijuana to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana testing facility, or to a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana dispensary facility. A facility licensed by the department of health and senior services to acquire, store, sell, transport, and deliver marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and drug paraphernalia used to administer marijuana as provided for by state law and regulations to a qualifying patient, a primary caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. A facility licensed by the department of health and senior services to acquire, store, manufacture, transport, and sell marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or to another medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. 
Medical marijuana testing facility. A facility certified by the department of health and senior services to acquire, test, certify, and transport marijuana. 
Mine or quarry. An excavation in the earth for extracting subsurface earthen materials such as limestone. 
Mobile home. A transportable, factory-built structure that is designed to be used as a single dwelling unit that was manufactured before 1976 or otherwise does not comply with the construction standards in the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401). This definition does not include a recreational vehicle or travel trailer or other similar vehicles. 
Modular home. A structure certified by the manufacturer as constructed in accordance with adopted city building codes, that is transportable but is not constructed on a permanent chassis, and that is designed to be used as a dwelling on a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities including plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
Museum or library. A permanent facility that is open to the public, with or without charge, for the collection and display of paintings, sculpture, textiles, historical artifacts, collectibles, or other works of art, or for the storing and loaning books, periodicals, reference materials, audio tapes, video tapes, and other similar media. 
Nadir. For purposes of lighting regulations, a point directly below the light fixture. 
Net developable acreage. The area of a lot or lots that is usable for determining allowable densities after land not suitable or restricted from development (such as road, drainage or preservation areas) have been subtracted from the total acreage. 
Office. A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, government, or service industry. Examples include professional services such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, planners, accountants, insurance agents, brokers, consultants, or real estate agents; data processing; sales offices; artists; writers; physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed medical professionals, including outpatient treatment of alcohol and drug abuse. This use does not include facilities meeting the definition of a research and development laboratory or any facility where display, sales or rental of goods occurs on more than an incidental basis related to the primary office function. 
Outdoor recreation or entertainment. Facilities for outdoor sporting or recreational, activities or performances, and for which an admission fee or membership fee is required to participate in the activity or observe the performance. This use includes but is not limited to amusement parks, commercial baseball or other athletic fields, tennis courts, race tracks, fairgrounds, commercial picnic grounds, commercial fishing lakes, commercial stables, outdoor stage and concert facilities, gun clubs, skeet, trap, or target ranges, commercial golf courses, miniature golf courses, and commercial swimming pools. 
Overlay district. A district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). 
Owner. Any person or other entity having legal title to or a sufficient proprietary interest to legally effectuate transfer of the property sought to be subdivided. Proprietary interest shall include but not be limited to estate administration, trusteeship, guardianship, and actions under a valid power of attorney. Proprietary interest shall not include an agency or a bare employment relation. 
Parapet height. Where used to limit building height in this Code, parapet height is measured at the top of the parapet, including any coping. 
Parking garage. A building designed for storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot, commercial. An area on the surface of the land for parking automobiles and light trucks in return for direct or indirect compensation. This use does not include public parking lots, which are a form of public service facility, and does not include accessory parking lots required for compliance with this chapter. In the M-DT district, areas available for commercial parking lots are designated on the regulating plan. 
Parking space. A space that is designated for the parking or temporary storage of one motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated street right-of-way, vehicular travel way, or parking aisle. 
Parking structure, commercial. An area in an underground or above-ground structure, or an area incorporated into the structural design of a building, for parking automobiles and light trucks in return for direct or indirect compensation. This use does not include public parking lots or structures, which are a form of public service facility, and does not include accessory parking structures required for compliance with this chapter. 
Patio. A hard-surfaced area accessory to the principal structure or use that has a horizontal area at grade level, and that has at least one side open to the weather and essentially unobstructed to the sky, specifically designed and intended for the recreational enjoyment of the occupants and guests of the principal structure or use, and not designed or intended for occupancy by automotive vehicles. 
Paved area. For purposes of landscaping and buffering regulations, "paved area" means open areas used or occupied by motor vehicles including parking areas, loading areas and driveways. "Paved area" does not include areas under the roof of a building, sidewalks or pedways. 
Pedway. A path that is physically separated from the roadway and intended for shared use by pedestrians, joggers, skaters and bicyclists. 
Person. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, shall include a human being, corporation, firm, association, syndicate, trust, a partnership and an unincorporated association such as a club. 
Personal services, general. Establishments that provide individual services related to personal needs directly to customers at the site of the business, or that receives goods from or returns goods to the customer after the goods have been treated or processed at that location or other locations. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage of goods, and assembly, repackaging, or repair of goods for on-site sale, and incidental retail sales of products used on the premises to patrons. This use includes but is not limited to barber and beauty shops; dry cleaning, laundering, pressing, and dyeing establishments; coin-operated laundries; photographic service shops and studios; repair of household appliances; shoe repair shops, garment storage facilities, rental service, and bicycle repair shop and offices as defined within this UDC. Outdoor storage, display, or service areas are not permitted. 
Pet store or pet grooming. A facility where small animals are sold, groomed, or cared for, including but not limited to small animal day care/spas, but not including a veterinary hospital. 
Physical fitness center. An indoor facility where individuals participate in exercise, weight reduction, physical therapy, or similar activities designed to improve and preserve physical fitness, but not including any use that meets the definition of a community center or another use in this chapter. 
Preliminary plat. The preliminary map or drawing described in and meeting the requirements of these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of a subdivision to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation and to the council for approval. 
Primary non-residential buildings. Buildings occupied by public and institutional uses identified in the permitted use table (Table 29-3.1). 
Private club. An organized group of people not open to or intended for, or controlled by the public, or for the use of the public. 
Private drive. An entrance to a lot, or an interior circulation driveway within a lot, or a driveway giving access to no more than four (4) lots, that is not itself a public right-of-way. 
Property line. The legally described boundary line that indicates the limits of a parcel, tract, lot, or block for the purpose of delineating ownership and setback requirements. 
Public improvements. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water main, electric facility, sidewalk, walkway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may constitute an improvement for which city responsibility is subsequently established by the council. 
Public park, playground, or golf course. Outdoor recreation areas owned or operated by a public or non-profit entity for public use, including related public recreation, clubhouse, and service buildings. 
Public service facility. Facilities necessary for delivering public services that do not meet the definitions of any other use in the public and institutional uses category. This use does not include facilities containing only administrative offices for public services, which are included in the definition of offices. 
Public utility service, minor. Buildings and facilities for the distribution of public utilities, including without limitation water, sewer, storm drainage, electric, and gas service, by the city, a regulated utility or a public or quasi-public entity, of a size and scale commonly found in all areas of the city. This use includes buildings or facilities for public service corporations but does not include telecommunications antennas or towers. 
Public utility services, major. Buildings and facilities for the provision and distribution of public utilities, including without limitation water, sewer, storm drainage, electric, and gas services, by the city, a regulated utility or a public or quasi-public entity, of a size and scale found only in scattered sites throughout the city. This use includes but is not limited to electric transmission lines over one hundred (100) kV, electric power substations, gas substations, regional stormwater drainage facilities, water treatment plants, sewer treatment plants, and public utility service centers. 
Rail or truck freight terminal. An area and related structures where goods shipped by train or truck are loaded, unloaded, or transferred between trains and trucks, and where the goods may be stored for a limited period of time before and after transfer to other sites. This use may also include incidental train and truck storage, maintenance, and administrative terminal offices. 
Recorder of deeds. The recorder of deeds for Boone County, Missouri. 
Registered professional land surveyor. A person licensed to practice surveying in the State of Missouri. 
Registered professional engineer. A person licensed to practice engineering in the State of Missouri. 
Rehabilitation. The process of returning a structure to a state of efficiency or soundness by repair or alteration designed to encourage its continued use but without noticeably changing the exterior appearance of the resource. 
Religious institution. A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held, including a church, temple, mosque, synagogue, covenant, monastery, or other structure, together with its accessory buildings and uses, such as educational facilities, athletic/recreation fields, pastor's and caretaker's housing, and parking. This use is operated, maintained, and controlled under the direction of a religious group. 
Renovation. The process of altering or repairing a structure and its facilities so it conforms to minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety. 
Research and development laboratory. A facility primarily engaged in conducting scientific research, experimental design, and prototype development of devices or products in the physical, engineering, or life sciences, such as agriculture, electronics, biology, biotechnology, chemistry, geology, medicine, pharmacy, veterinary, and other allied subjects; does not include the manufacturing, servicing or sale of consumer products. This use includes facilities primarily engaged in providing analytic or diagnostic services on human specimens, including body fluid or body tissue, or performing diagnostic imaging. This use includes the fabrication of prototype goods, materials and equipment not intended for sale directly to the public, but may include incidental sales of goods produced on site to the public. 
Residential care facility. A residential institution, whether operated for profit or not, that provides personal care, custody, or treatment for five (5) or more individuals not related to the operator who, for reasons of illness, advanced age, or mental or physical disability, are unable to care for themselves, or are in a treatment program administered by or through the residential care facility for alcohol or drug abuse, or are considered to be disabled or handicapped under the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended or the laws of the State of Missouri. This use does not include a continuing care retirement community (CRCC). 
Restaurant. An establishment, including cafes and cafeterias, where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed, primarily within the principal building. 
Retail, adult. A commercial establishment such as an adult bookstore, video store, or arcade which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Retail, general. An establishment selling goods at retail. This use does not include the sales of light or heavy motor vehicles or any other goods listed as a separate use in the permitted use table, and does not include any activity meeting the definition of an adult retail use. 
Reuse of place of public assembly. The reuse of a property originally used as a religious institution, or any property originally used primarily for public assembly, for another temporary or permanent use that has no or minimal impacts on the surrounding community, or for which any significant impacts on the surrounding community have been mitigated to the maximum degree practicable. 
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary sewer main, or for other similar uses. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat to be separate and distinct from lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Sale. Any transfer of fee ownership, or any transfer of use rights conferring exclusive possession for purpose of building development whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map or other written instrument. 
Sanitary landfill. A permanent facility either publicly or privately owned and operated for the purpose of disposing solid waste in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local solid waste management laws and licensing requirements. 
Scenic roadway. A street designated by the council as a scenic roadway following the procedure outlined in section 29-2.3 (scenic roadway overlay district). 
Self-service storage facility. A building, or group of buildings, with controlled access containing separate storage spaces or compartmentalized units of varying sizes, with no unit exceeding six hundred (600) square feet, that are rented or leased to tenants, with no tenant leasing more than two thousand (2,000) square feet, for the storage of goods. 
Setback or building line. A line specifically established upon the plat or established by this Code that identifies an area into which no part of a building shall project except as provided by this Code. A setback or building line is generally measured from the property line. 
Shared access. A joint use access easement for the parking lots and/or driveways of adjacent properties that is recorded as an irrevocable easement in favor of the properties to which it serves. Such shared access may or may not be shown on a subdivision plat. 
Shared parking. Automobile parking that is visible and accessible to the public, with at least twelve (12) hours of public parking provided in any twenty-four (24) hour period, and that at least eight (8) of those hours provided during business or nighttime hours depending on whether the director determines that the primary use will be for commercial or residential uses. 
Shopping center. A separate and distinct commercially used area in single ownership or under unified control, including more than one separate business establishment. 
Shopping center master sign (and industrial park master sign). A sign indicating the name of the shopping center or industrial park and/or names of businesses in the shopping center or industrial park. 
Sidewalk. A constructed, dedicated and accepted pedestrian way for public use, generally to provide for pedestrian circulation along streets and highways. 
Sign. A structure that is arranged, intended, designed or used as an advertisement, announcement or direction; and includes a sign, sign screen, billboard, poster panel and advertising devices of every kind, but does not include signs placed on the inside of display cases or show windows fronted with glass which do not project more than six (6) inches from the outside surface of the building wall unless the sign is a digital sign or animated sign as defined in this section. 
 
Sign, animated. A sign with action or motion, flashing or color changes, requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items (not to include time and temperature signs, or revolving barber poles). 
Sign, awning. Any sign or graphic attached to, painted on or applied to an awning or awning canopy. 
Sign, civic. A sign that describes services available, function of, activities conducted upon, use of premises or facilities used, maintained, or owned by any government entity. 
Sign, commercial. A sign containing copy that relates primarily to, and is intended to promote interest in and patronage of, a business, industry, profession or commodity, product, or service offered for sale. 
 
Sign, digital. Any video, computer generated, holographic or electronic images that are arranged, intended, designed or used as an advertisement, announcement or direction, or advertising devices of every kind. A digital sign shall not include electronically operated changing numeric message signs. 
Sign, directional. A sign designed to guide pedestrians or vehicular traffic. A directional sign shall not include advertising material. 
 
Sign, freestanding. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground, and that are independent from any building or any other structure. 
Sign, illuminated. A sign that is artificially lighted either internally or externally from a source of light connected with such sign. 
Sign, marquee. A sign attached to or hung from a marquee. 
 
 
Sign, mobile. A sign which is not designed or manufactured to be permanently anchored or affixed to the ground, building or other structure, but rather is designed or primarily used as a sign which is movable from place to place, without involving any structural support or changes. Mobile signs include but are not limited to signs affixed to a trailer or other portable structure and "A" frame or sandwich signs. 
 
Sign, monument. A freestanding sign where the entire bottom of the sign is generally in contact with or in close proximity to the ground, and where the base of the sign is at least as wide as the sign. A monument sign shall not include a pylon sign. 
Sign, noncommercial. A sign containing copy that is not intended to promote interest in or patronage of, a business, industry, profession or commodity, product, or service offered for sale, included but not limited to a sign expressing an opinion regarding a political campaign, religious matter, or public policy issue. 
 
Sign, off-premises. A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Sign, on-premises. A sign directly pertaining to an existing permitted use on the property upon which said sign is located. 
Sign, projecting. Any sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building with the display surface of the sign perpendicular to the building wall. 
 
Sign, pylon. A freestanding sign of which the entire bottom of the sign is generally in contact with or in close proximity to the ground and which has a width of two (2) feet or a height at least three (3) times the width. 
Sign, roof. A sign that is erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of the building. 
 
Sign, temporary. A commercial sign promoting or providing information concerning a sale, event or activity that is occurring or shall occur on the property where the sign is displayed. 
Sign, wall. A sign attached to the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of said wall, not extending more than twenty-five (25) percent above the roof line or parapet of the building, nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall surface. It shall also include a painted wall surface sign which is a sign painted directly on the surface of buildings, walls or fences is a wall sign. 
 
Sign, wind. A display of pennants, streamers, whirligigs or similar devices strung together and activated by wind. 
Sign, window. Any sign printed, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to the outside glass of a window. 
Sign surface area. Total area of that part of a sign structure that carries any sort of written or graphic materials or in any way conveys a message as seen from any one direction at any one time; except when cut-out letters and/or graphics only are used for wall signs or only lettering and/or graphics are used on awning signs in which cases the surface area is measured as the area of the basic geometric shape that would enclose the message and/or graphics. When individual cut out letters or graphics are installed on a wall, whether that wall be a part of a building or other structure, the area of the basic geometric shape that encloses the message is the surface area of the sign. The definition shall not apply to section 29-4.8. 
 
Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activity. Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described herein. 
Storage and wholesale distribution. The bulk short-term or long-term storage of commercial goods in facilities that may also provide for the shipping or trans-shipping of those goods to and from commercial buyers. 
Storm drainage system. All drainage facilities used for collecting and conducting stormwater to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet including, but not limited to, the following: Conduits and appurtenant features, canals, ditches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, streets, gutters, and pump stations. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation including snowmelt. 
Stormwater management plan. A detailed design in conformance with the standards on file with the public works department signed and sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Missouri. 
Story (story height). That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. The useable floor area of any vertical level within a building must consist of at least fifty-one (51) percent of a building's ground footprint in order to qualify as a separate story. 
Story above grade plane. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished surface of the floor next above is: 
(1)  More than six (6) feet above grade plane; or 
(2)  More than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at any point. 
Streams. Perennial and intermittent watercourses identified through site inspection and United States Geological Survey (USGS) maps and further defined and categorized as follows: 
(1)  Type I streams are defined as perennial streams shown as solid blue lines on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map. 
(2)  Type II streams are defined as intermittent streams shown as dashed blue lines on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map. 
(3)  Type III streams are defined as waterways or natural channels which are not shown on the United States Geological Survey seven and one-half (7.5) minutes series topographical map as either blue or dashed blue lines which have drainage areas of greater than fifty (50) acres. 
Stream buffer. A vegetated area including trees, shrubs, managed lawn areas, and herbaceous vegetation which exists or is established to protect a stream system, lake or reservoir. 
Stream channel. A naturally or artificially created watercourse with definite bed and banks which conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Street. A dedicated and accepted thoroughfare for public use which affords principal means of access, directly or indirectly, to abutting properties. 
Street, collector. A street that provides for traffic movement between arterials and local streets. 
Street, local. A street designed to provide direct access to abutting properties and to provide for local traffic movement within small areas. 
Street, perimeter. An existing street, one side of which abuts a parcel of land to be subdivided. 
Street, private. A thoroughfare designed to provide vehicular access to five (5) or more lots or parcels which is not dedicated for public use. 
Street, terminal. A street that does not provide through access to another street, alley, or private drive, including, but not limited to a cul-de-sac. 
Street, through. A public street which is not a cul-de-sac street and which provides vehicular access from an area internal to a subdivision, to the city's major roadway system as shown on the major roadway plan. 
Structure. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground, or that is attached to something having a location on the ground; including but not limited to advertising signs, billboards, poster panels, decks, patios, and paved areas, fences, walls, and retaining walls. 
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Subdivider. Any owner, or the authorized agent or employee of an owner or group of owners, who commences proceedings to effectuate a subdivision of property under this chapter. 
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels for sale or development or, if a new street is involved, any division of a lot, or a tract or parcel of land. When appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" may refer to the land subdivided. 
Subdivision, administrative. Any resubdivision of previously subdivided nonresidential land, and any resubdivision of previously divided residential land that meets the criteria for an administrative plat. 
Subdivision, major. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision or tract split. 
Subdivision, minor. Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing state, county or city street or highway, and not requiring extension or improvement of any street or municipal service. 
Subdivision, tract split. Any subdivision which involves division of a tract of land for sale or transfer, but not for development, into no more than five (5) tracts, each of which fronts on an existing state, county or city street or highway. 
Substantial improvement. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, any repair, reconstruction, or other change of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and was being restored, before the damage occurred. 
In the case of a nonconforming structure, restoration of damage is considered a "substantial improvement" which the cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the structure's market value. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations. 
Swale. A wide shallow ditch used to carry storm runoff. 
Temporary construction office or yard. A facility or area used as a temporary field construction office or temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials associated with an active permit to demolish or construct buildings, structures, or infrastructure. 
Temporary parking lot. A lot established to accommodate the temporary parking of vehicles for construction related activities and temporary events or gatherings such as carnivals, fairs, and concerts. 
Temporary shelter. A residential facility that primarily provides temporary housing with accommodations for five (5) or more people for little or no financial compensation and that is operated in a manner that provides staff supervision and other support services. The length of time that such persons may stay at the shelter may be indefinite but is not intended to be permanent. 
Terrace. An open, raised bank or banks of earth having a vertical or sloping side and a horizontal top. 
Theater, drive-in. An open lot, with its appurtenant facilities, such as concession stands and restrooms, where patrons view movies from inside their vehicles. 
Total suspended solids. Matter suspended in stormwater excluding litter, debris, and other gross solids exceeding one millimeter in diameter. 
Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two (2) sides. 
Tract. An area, parcel, site, piece of land, lot, or property. 
Transportation plan. An element of the comprehensive plan for the city describing transportation policies for all modes of travel. The major roadway plan, a part of the transportation plan, shows the approximate location of existing and proposed collector streets, arterial streets, expressways and freeways throughout the city. 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually with one main stem or trunk. 
Tree, existing. A tree which meets or exceeds the following size standards: Deciduous shade trees shall have a four-inch diameter, measured four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground and ornamental and evergreen species shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
Tree or landscaping service. The business activities and equipment storage requirements associated with landscaping design, installation, and maintenance services, including landscape design and contractor offices, landscaping materials stores, and related tool and equipment rentals. 
Tree preservation easement. An irrevocable easement, in a form approved by the city counselor, which encompasses all or a portion, when permitted, of the required climax forest that must be saved on a site. 
Tree, significant. A tree that is at least twenty (20) inches diameter at breast height (DBH), is not diseased, dying, or of a noxious invasive species, and is located outside of required tree preservation and stream buffer areas. 
Travel trailer. 
(1)  A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; and when factory-equipped for the road, being of any weight, provided its overall length is less than forty (40) feet or is less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet in floor area; 
(2)  A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation; 
(3)  A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreational and vacation purposes, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelling vehicle; or 
(4)  A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. 
Travel trailer park. A parcel of land that has been improved for the placement of travel trailers. 
Underground space. The entire cavern resulting from the extraction of subsurface-located material in such a manner that the surface area of the property is not disturbed except in the vicinity of the entrances and easements servicing the development. 
Urban agriculture. The raising, keeping or production of fruit, vegetable, flower, and other crops, poultry, or bees as a primary (not accessory) use of land on sites of two and one-half (2.5) acres or less. This uses includes the ordinary accessory uses and structures for preparing, treating, and storing agricultural products, equipment and machinery, but does not include raising, storing, or processing of any animals other than poultry and bees. 
Urban conservation. Public and private efforts to maintain and enhance older urban areas through stabilization, rehabilitation, protection, revitalization, conversion, infill development or redevelopment. 
Variance. For all purposes except floodplain regulations, a modification or variation of the zoning regulations contained in this chapter 29, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning. 
Vehicle wrecking or junkyard. A structure or parcel of land where goods, equipment, or materials, or ten or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building, and including any equipment or structure used for crushing or dismantling or storing of any of those items. 
Veterinary hospital. A hospital or facility where domesticated animals or fowl are treated, kept, cared for, bred or boarded (daytime only or overnight), including but not limited to animal pounds, animal shelters, and kennels. 
Walkway. A pedestrian way designed to provide pedestrian access to abutting properties, deemed to be a public walkway if located within a dedicated right-of-way and accepted for public maintenance. Walkways located adjacent to public streets are sidewalks. 
Water quality volume. The storage needed to capture and treat ninety (90) percent of an average annual stormwater runoff volume. It is calculated by multiplying the water quality storm times the volumetric runoff coefficient and site area. 
Watercourse. A stream, usually flowing in a particular direction (though it need not flow continuously in a definite channel), having a bed or banks and usually discharging into some other stream or body of water. 
Watercourse. A natural running stream of water flowing in a particular direction and having a definite channel with a bed or banks. A watercourse may be intermittent, but shall be considered more than mere surface drainage over the entire fall of a tract of land. 
Waterways. Natural or manmade lakes, natural channels, rivers, streams, and creeks which store or convey stormwater runoff. 
Wetlands. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at frequency and duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Wholesale sales office or sample room. A sales office or showroom associated with establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retail, industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or other wholesalers, but not to the public-at-large; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandize for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. This use does not include the storage and distribution of this wholesale merchandise. 
Yard. An open space unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this Code, on the lot on which a building is situated. 
Yard, corner. An open space between a building and a street right-of-way adjacent to the side of a building located on the lot that extends from the front property line to the rear property line. 
 
Yard, front. An open space between a building and the street fronting the lot on which the building is located, and extending from side lot line to side lot line. 
Yard, rear. An open space between a building and the rear lot line of the lot on which the building is located, and extending from side lot line to side lot line. 
Yard, side. An open space between a building and the side lot line closest to that side of the building, but not including any area included in the front yard or rear yard. 
Zoning regulations. The provisions of this Code adopted pursuant to RSMo §§ 89.010 to 89.140. 
(b)  Communication antennas and tower. For the purpose of chapter 29, article 3, section 29-3.3(n), the following words and terms as used are defined to mean the following: 
Antenna support structure. Any building or other structure such as a water tower, other than a tower or a disguised support structure as herein defined, which can be used for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
Collocation. The placement or installation of a new wireless facility on a structure that already has an existing wireless facility, including electrical transmission towers, water towers, buildings, and other structures capable of structurally supporting the attachment of wireless facilities. 
Communications antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Communications equipment cabinet. A structure for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more antennas where direct access to equipment is provided from the exterior. 
Communications equipment shelter. A building for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more antennas and where access to equipment is gained from the interior of the building. 
Communications tower. A wireless support structure, such as a monopole, slick stick, stealth, lattice, or guyed tower, designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting wireless facilities. This definition does not include utility poles or any support structure owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
Disguised support structure. Any freestanding, manmade structure used for the support of communications antennas, the presence of which is camouflaged or concealed as an architectural or natural feature. Such structures may include but are not limited to clock towers, campaniles, observation towers, light standards, flag poles and artificial trees. 
Height, communications antenna or tower. The vertical distance measured from the base of the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the main structure and all attachments thereto. Height shall also include any ground artificially built up around the base of the structure to increase the ultimate elevation of the highest point of a communications antenna or tower. 
Replacement. For purposes of wireless telecommunications facilities includes constructing a new wireless support structure of equal proportions and of equal height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial modification to an existing structure in order to support wireless facilities or to accommodate collocation and includes the associated removal of the preexisting wireless facilities or wireless support structure. 
Substantial modification. For the purposes of wireless telecommunications facilities means the mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a wireless support structure which, as applied to the structure as it was originally constructed: 
(1)  Increases the existing vertical height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; or 
(2)  Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure more than twenty (20) feet or more than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater (except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable); or 
(3)  Involves the installation of more than the standard number of new outdoor equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4) new equipment cabinets; or 
(4)  Increases the square footage of the existing equipment compound by more than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
(c)  Floodplain and floodplain overlay (FP-O). For the purpose of chapter 29, article 2, section 29-2.3(d) the following words and terms as used are defined to mean the following: 
1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). See "base flood." 
100-year flood. See "base flood." 
Actuarial or risk premium rates. Those rates established by the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the act and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
Administrator. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the director of public works. 
Agency. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Appeal. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a request for a review of the interpretation of the director of public works of any provision of section 29-2.3(d) or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding or sheet flow area. A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood. The flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (sometimes referred to as a "100-year flood"). 
Basement. For purposes of floodplain regulations, any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Structure, for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
Chief executive officer or chief elected official. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the city manager is the chief executive officer and the mayor is the chief elected official and shall be the official(s) of the community who are charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances and regulations for the community. 
Elevated building. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a non-basement building, (a) built, in the case of a building in zones AE, A, A99, AO, AH, X shaded, other flood areas, X un-shaded, other areas, or D to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of water; and (b) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. This also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Eligible community or participating community. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a community for which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Existing construction. For purposes of floodplain regulations, and for the purposes of determining rates, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was complete before October 1, 1973. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of a stream, or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood boundary floodway map (FBFM). An official map delineating the floodway, floodway fringe, one hundred-year floodplain, and five hundred-year floodplain. The FBFW is prepared in conjunction with the flood insurance study (FIS). 
Flood drainage areas (less than one square mile). Areas designated within the 1% annual chance floodplain by the most recent flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map, but containing a drainage area less than one square mile. The December 1, 1981 flood insurance study did not establish the base flood elevation or delineate the floodway and flood fringe for these areas; rather the base flood elevation and 1% annual chance floodplain were and are established by the January 16, 1976 flood insurance study and amendments thereto. The flood drainage areas generally include small streams or the upper reaches of major streams. 
Flood elevation determination. A determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
Flood fringe. That area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year. 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two (2) areas: 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the city's flood hazard boundary map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency containing the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), the surface elevation of the base flood, and supporting technical data. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
Floodplain management. The operation of an overlay program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway. The channel of the river, creek or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floodway encroachment lines. The lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
Floor area, gross. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts. 
Floor level. The level of habitable space in a building. "Street level" shall be the lowest floor level in a building in which no less than fifty-one (51) percent of the interior side of the business adjacent to a street or alley is above the adjacent grade. "Lower level" shall be a level below the street level; "second level" shall be the first level above the main street level; and "upper level" shall be any level above the second. Floor level shall be determined for each elevation. Where buildings are situated on sloping lots and are adjacent to more than one street or alley, the level of a business may differ from one elevation to another. 
Functionally dependent use. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Grade, highest adjacent. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Lowest floor. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the floodplain regulations. 
Manufactured home. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, mobile homes, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include recreational vehicles, travel trailers, mobile homes, and other similar vehicles. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Map. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the agency. 
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction. For purposes of floodplain regulations, and for the purpose of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 31, 1974 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 1, 1973 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after October 1, 1973. 
Person. For purposes of floodplain regulations, any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including federal, state and local governments and agencies. 
Principally above ground. For purposes of floodplain regulations, means that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
Recreational vehicle. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Regulatory flood. See "base flood." 
Remedy a violation. For purposes of floodplain regulations, means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations. 
Special hazard area. For purposes of floodplain regulations, an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, AE, A99, AH, A1-30, AR, V, VO, VE, V1-30 or other flood areas. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)). For purposes of floodplain regulations, any substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State coordinating agency. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the agency of the state, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program in that state. 
Structure. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Structure, for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
Substantial damage. For purposes of floodplain regulations, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. For purposes of floodplain regulations, any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance. For purposes of floodplain regulations, a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Floodplain insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
Violation. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation. For purposes of floodplain regulations, the height in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine area. 
(d)  Historic preservation. For the purpose of chapter 29, article 2, section 29-2.3(c) the following words and terms as used are defined to mean the following: 
Alteration. For purposes of historic preservation regulations, any act that changes one or more of the historic or architectural features identified in an ordinance placing property in the HP-O district. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate issued by the historic preservation commission indicating its approval of the architectural appropriateness of plans for construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within a historic district. 
Construction. For purposes of historic preservation regulations, the act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure. 
Historic district. An area designated as a historic district by ordinance, and included in the HP-O district, which may contain one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties or structures which, while not of such historic or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics and historical significance of the historic district. 
Historic resource. Any structure that: 1) is fifty (50) years old or older; or 2) is located in a historic resources survey area; or 3) is within an actual or proposed National Register of Historic Places district; or 4) has been recognized or nominated by the historic preservation commission as a "most notable property". 
Historic structure. For purposes of floodplain regulations or applicability of parking regulations, any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (a) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or (b) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Landmark. A property or structure placed in the HP-O district and designated as a landmark by ordinance, which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic or architectural significance. 
Removal. For purposes of historic preservation regulations, any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
Repair. For purposes of historic preservation regulations, any change that is not construction, removal or alteration. 
Stabilization. For purposes of historic preservation regulations, the process of applying measures designed to halt deterioration and to establish the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated resource while maintaining the essential form as it presently exists without noticeably changing the exterior appearance of the resource. 
(e)  Mixed-use downtown (M-DT). For the purpose of chapter 29, article 4, subsections 29-4.2(a) to (f) the following words and terms as used are defined to mean the following: 
Alley/Alley access easement. The public right-of-way or easement for vehicles and pedestrians within a block that provides access to the rear or side of properties, vehicle parking (e.g., garages), utility meters, recycling containers, and garbage bins. 
Attic story. Habitable space situated within the structure of a pitched roof and above the uppermost story. An attic story is permitted for all building form standard sites and does not count against the maximum story height or height limits of the building form standards. 
Bay window. A composite of two or more windows, or rounded windows (generally, a U-shaped enclosure), projecting (cantilevered) from the outer wall of a building. 
 
Block. An increment of land comprised of lots, alleys and tracts circumscribed and not traversed by streets (pedestrian pathways excepted). In the M-DT district, blocks shall be measured at the required building line (RBL). 
Block corner. For purposes of form-based zoning standards, the outside corner of a block at the intersection of any two street-spaces (the required building lines). Inside corners, where the resulting angle formed by the block face is less than one hundred eighty (180) degrees (concave) are not considered block corners for the purposes of the M-DT district. 
Block face. The required building line frontage between block corners. 
Building corner. The outside corner of a building where the primary building mass is within an angle less than one hundred eighty (180) degrees. Inside corners, where the exterior space of the building mass forms an angle of more than one hundred eighty (180) degrees are not considered building corners for the purposes of the M-DT district. 
Building form standards (BFS). The part of this chapter that establishes basic parameters regulating building form, including the envelope (in three dimensions), placement and certain permitted/required building elements, such as shopfronts, balconies, and street walls. The building form standards establish both the boundaries within which things may be done and specific things that must be done. The applicable building form standards(s) for a site is determined by its street frontage as per the regulating plan. This produces a coherent street-space and allows the building owner greater freedom behind the façade. 
Building face. See "façade." 
Civic buildings. For purposes of form-based zoning, those buildings that house strictly civic uses or historically and culturally significant structures designated on the mixed-use downtown (M-DT) regulating plan. A civic structure is one in which buildings are customarily designed to meet the needs of assembly for civic affairs, religious worship, or education, and therefore include perimeter greenspace and characteristic building forms that are governed by civic or religious traditions. 
Clear height. Within a structure, the distance between the floor and ceiling. For entrances and other external building features, the unobstructed distance from the ground to the bottom of the lowest element above. 
Clear walkway. The portion of the sidewalk within a street-space that shall remain clear of obstructions and allow public passage. The clear walkway width is specified in the street type specifications. 
Comparative pedestrian crossing. The measured distance, shown on the street type specifications, that a pedestrian would be within an automobile travel lane (or turning movement) while crossing a street. A crossing time is calculated based on a pedestrian speed of 3.7 feet per second (a generally accepted urban average). This distance/time is calculated in order to provide a relative gauge of the comfort level for pedestrians crossing the street. 
Complete and discrete façade composition. The façade articulation that breaks down the apparent scale of a large building into smaller apparent pieces. The intent of such a façade composition is to provide "human scale" for the street-space. The objective requirements of the complete and discrete façade composition section of the building form standards regulate and ensure such scalar break-down. 
Covered sidewalk. A roofed or built structure attached to the façade and extending beyond the required building line and over the sidewalk or square, open to the street-space except for supporting columns, piers, or arches. (See building form standards for complete specifications.) 
Dooryard. In the context of M-DT district building form standards, the area within the street-space between the façade of the building (generally the required building line) and the clear walkway area of the sidewalk. The dooryard area is designated in the street type specifications. 
Eave height. Eave height shall be measured at the bottom of the top layer of roofing material at its outermost point from the building wall. 
English basement. A habitable floor level below the first floor that is partially above and below grade, with direct street-space access. 
Equivalent or better. A building material or construction technique that has been determined, by the director, to be at least equal to, in appearance, durability, etc., or surpassing those expressly permitted herein. 
Façade (building face). The building elevation facing the street-space or required building line. Building walls facing private interior courts, common lot lines, alleys, and common drives are not façade. 
Façade composition. The arrangement and proportion of materials and building elements (windows, doors, columns, pilasters, bays, etc.) on a given façade. 
Fenestration. The design of openings in a building, including skylights, roof windows, vertical windows (whether fixed or moveable); opaque doors; glazed doors; glass block; and combination opaque/glazed doors. 
First floor. See "ground story." 
Floor plate. The footprint of a building, including exterior walls. 
Forecourt. The semi-public space created when a façade is stepped back near its midpoint. Forecourts are surrounded on three sides by building fronts and are un-roofed. A forecourt is similar to a courtyard, except that one side is open to the street-space. 
Front porch. The ground floor area consisting of an impervious surface attached to the façade or required building line side of the main building, which is delineated by a change in elevation, surface type or surface texture or combination thereof. 
Front yard fence. The wood (picket), wrought iron fence, or masonry wall located along and surrounding the front yard. (For placement, height and gate specifications, see the building form standards.) 
Garden wall. A masonry wall defining a property line or delineating a private area. (For placement, height and gate specifications, see the building form standards.) A garden wall may serve as a front yard fence. 
Gas station/fueling center. The sale of vehicle fuel from a facility or lot having pumps and underground storage tanks. Such facility may also include a convenience store which sells convenience-related items to the general public. 
Ground story. The first habitable level of a building at or above grade. The next story above the ground story is the second floor or story. 
Lot building limit (LBL). For purposes of M-DT district building form standards, a line indicating the outer edge of the buildable area, generally to the rear of a lot away from the required building line. A lot building limit may be used, for example, to establish an edge toward a conservation area, or within a workplace area to establish a common mid-block working courtyard. Where designated on the regulating plan, this shall supersede the building form standard minimum setback. 
Lot line, common. A lot line shared by adjacent lots. 
Open area. See "private or public open area." 
Parking setback line. A line or plane indicated on the regulating plan that extends vertically up from the ground story floor level (unless otherwise noted on the regulating plan or BFS) and is generally parallel to the required building line. The parking setback line is a permissive minimum distance from the required building line and parking may be placed anywhere within the lot behind this line, except where otherwise specified in the M-DT district standards. 
Pedestrian pathway. An interconnecting paved way providing pedestrian and bicycle passage through blocks running from a street-space to another street-space, an alley or an interior block parking area. The area within a pedestrian pathway shall be a public access easement or public right-of-way. 
Privacy fence. An opaque fence made of wood or masonry (not chain link or any other type of rolled fence) along alleys, common drives, pedestrian pathways, and common lot lines (where behind the required building line). See the building form standards for height specifications. 
Private or public open area. For purposes of form-based zoning standards, an occupied area within or adjoining the building area that is accessible to occupants of the particular building or site, which may also be accessible to the public, and functions as an amenity space for gathering, access to air and light, and recreation. Examples include courtyards, forecourts, active rooftops, plazas, balconies, patios, pet exercise areas, recreation or meeting rooms, gardens, atria, light courts, lobbies or private outdoor seating areas. Utilitarian functions such as mechanical equipment, storage space, parking, unfinished basement, corridors and landings shall not qualify as private or public open area. 
Regulating plan. The implementing plan for the development of the M-DT district under this Code. Regulating plans allocate the building form standards and street types and provide specific information for the disposition of each building site. The regulating plan also shows how each site relates to adjacent street-spaces, the overall district, and the surrounding neighborhoods. 
Required building line (RBL). A line or plane indicated on the regulating plan, in the M-DT district, defining the street frontage which extends vertically and generally parallel to the street, at which the building facade shall be placed. This is a requirement, not a permissive minimum. The minimum length and height of facade that is required at the RBL is shown on the appropriate building form standard. 
Shopfront (storefront). That portion of the ground story façade fenestration intended for marketing or merchandising of commerce uses and allowing visibility between the sidewalk and the interior space. 
Sidewing. The portion of a building extending along a common lot line toward the alley or rear of the lot. 
Small apartment building. See "townhouse/small apartment frontage building." 
Stoop. The ground floor area consisting of an impervious surface attached to the façade or required building line side of the main building, which is delineated by a change in elevation, surface type or surface texture or combination thereof (see the building form standards for specifications). 
Street frontage. That portion of the lot or building that is coincident with the required building line as required by this Code. 
Street-Space. All space between fronting required building lines (streets, squares, plazas, pedestrian pathways, civic greens, sidewalks, parks)—including any transit service operator passenger platform—but not garage entries or alleys. 
Street tree. A tree required per this Code and listed in the street tree list located in the urban space standards that is of a proven hardy and drought tolerant species and large enough to form a canopy with sufficient clear trunk to allow traffic to pass under unimpeded. 
Street tree alignment line. A line along which street trees shall be planted and streetlights and other such infrastructure are to be placed. It is generally parallel with the street-space. 
Street wall. For purposes of form-based zoning, a wall or fence that is located at the required building line in the M-DT mixed-use downtown district that is either required to perform a screening function, such as defining the edge of a parking area or refuse storage area, or is proposed by a property owner to define the edge of the public and private space for security or aesthetic purposes. 
Streetlight. A luminaire installed on both sides of the street-space, along the street tree alignment line or median centerline, unless otherwise designated in this Code, with the design criteria in the form district giving equal weight to the lighting of the pedestrian areas and the automobile areas. 
Townhouse/Small apartment frontage building. Building form and functions resulting from/as determined by the townhouse/small apartment building form standard indicated on the regulating plan. 
Tree lawn (tree trench). A continuous strip of soil area—typically covered with grass, other vegetation, bridging pavement, or sometimes porous pavers—located between the back of curb and the clear sidewalk area, and used for planting street trees and configured to foster healthy street tree root systems. Tree lawn dimensions are specified in the street type specifications. 
Urban general frontage building. Building form and functions resulting from/as determined by the urban general building form standard as indicated on the regulating plan. 
Urban storefront frontage building. Building form and functions resulting from/as determined by the urban storefront building form standard as indicated on the regulating plan. 
Use, civic. For the purpose of the M-DT district form-based regulations, the uses in the public and institutional use (except those in the utilities and communications category) of Table 29-3.1 that are allowed in the M-DT district as permitted or conditional uses. A "civic use" may or may not occupy a "civic building" (see definition, "civic building"). 
Use, commerce. For the purpose of the M-DT form-based regulations, the uses in the public and institutional use category (except those in the utilities and communications subcategory) and those uses in the commercial and industrial use category (except those in the agriculture & animal-related subcategory and the vehicles & equipment subcategory) of Table 29-3.1 that are allowed in the M-DT district as permitted or conditional uses. 
Use, residential. For purposes of the M-DT form-based regulations, the uses in the residential use category of Table 29-3.1 that are allowed in the M-DT district as permitted or conditional uses. 
Use, retail. Includes the following: 
(1)  Retail service. Establishments providing services, as opposed to products, to the general public, including restaurants, finance, real estate and insurance, travel agencies, health and educational services, and galleries; as well as personal services, general. 
(2)  Retail sales. Establishments in which the primary use is the sale of merchandise for use or consumption by the immediate purchaser. 
Where clearly visible from the street-space. Some requirements of the M-DT district apply only where the subject is "clearly visible from the street-space." (Note that the definition of street-space includes squares, civic greens, pedestrian pathways, parks, and all public space except alleys.) A building element more than forty (40) feet from a required building line or street-space is by definition not clearly visible from the street-space (such as elements facing a common lot line). Also, common or party walls are by definition not clearly visible from the street-space. This does not exempt vehicle parking lots or parking structures from any building form standard requirements. 
(f)  Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). For the purpose of chapter 29, article 3, section 29-3.3(o) the following words and terms as used are defined to mean the following: 
Ambient sound level. For purposes of WECS regulations, the sound pressure level exceeded ninety (90) percent of the time, or L90, at a given location. Also, the amount of background noise at a given location prior to the installation of a WECS, which may include, but is not limited to, traffic, machinery, general human activity, and the interaction of the wind with the landscape. Ambient sound level is measured on the decibel dB(A) weighted scale as defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
Axis. For purposes of WECS regulations, the plane on which a rotor or other wind-harnessing mechanism rotates. City regulations do not differentiate between horizontal- and vertical-axis WECS. 
Cutoff angle. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source above from which no light is emitted. 
Fall zone. For purposes of WECS regulations, the hypothetical area into which a tower and wind turbine could collapse in the event of a structural failure. 
Feeder line. For purposes of WECS regulations, any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with an individual wind turbine to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid. In the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems, the point of interconnection shall be the substation serving the WECS. 
Generator nameplate capacity/nameplate generating capacity (installed). For purposes of WECS regulations, the maximum rated output of a generator, prime mover, or other electric power production equipment under specific conditions designated by the manufacturer. Installed generator nameplate capacity is commonly expressed in kilowatts (kW) or megawatts (MW) and is usually indicated on a nameplate physically attached to the generator. 
Height, WECS system. The height above grade of the WECS, including the generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors. 
Interconnection. For purposes of WECS regulations, sharing energy through the local utility grid system. This requires an approved interconnection agreement with the pertinent utility provider serving the site, e.g. City of Columbia Water and Light, Boone Electric Cooperative, or Central Electric Power Cooperative. 
Off-grid. For purposes of WECS regulations, an electrical system that is not connected, or is not permitted to be connected, to any utility distribution and transmission facility or to any building or structure that is connected. 
Property line. For purposes of WECS regulations, the boundary line of the area over which the entity applying for WECS permit has legal control for the purposes of installation of a WECS. This control may be attained through fee title ownership, easement, or other appropriate contractual relationship between landowners. 
Rotor. For purposes of WECS regulations, an element of a WECS that acts as a multi-bladed airfoil assembly, thereby directly extracting through rotation the kinetic energy of wind. 
Rotor diameter. For purposes of WECS regulations, the diameter of the circle described by the rotor blades. See also "swept area." 
Shadow flicker. For purposes of WECS regulations, alternating changes in light intensity, caused by the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system, that casts moving shadows on the ground and stationary objects. 
Solar energy system. A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy. 
Sound pressure level. The sound measurement commonly reported in decibels (dB(A)). 
Swept area. For purposes of WECS regulations, the diameter of the least circle encompassing all blades for a WECS. Also any and all portions of overhanging blades, turbines, or attachments that oscillate, rotate or otherwise move, which are not part of the fixed structural elements of the wind energy conversion system, including those on vertical axis WECS. See also the definition for "rotor diameter." 
Tower. For purposes of WECS regulations, the vertical component of a WECS that elevates and supports the wind turbine generator, rotor blades, and other equipment above the ground. 
Wind energy conversion system (also referred to as "WECS"). The configuration of components including the base, tower, generator, rotor blades and related equipment to convert the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy (e.g. windmill or wind turbine). A wind energy conversion system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to one hundred (100) kilowatts and is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. 
Wind energy conversion system, building-mounted. A WECS that is securely fastened to any portion of a principal structure in order to achieve desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal structure or attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the principal structure. A building-mounted WECS is not a minor projection, as defined in section 29-4.1(c)(2). 
Wind energy conversion system, co-located. A WECS that is mounted on a tower or pole structure which serves another primary purpose, such as a flagpole. Co-located systems are permitted per the rules of this chapter, so long as a principal use or structure is located on the subject parcel. 
Wind energy conversion system, commercial. A WECS that is intended to produce electricity for sale to a rate-regulated or non-regulated utility or for use off site. For the purpose of this section, a commercial WECS has a total nameplate generating capacity equal to or greater than one hundred (100) kW. 
Wind energy conversion system, freestanding. A WECS that is elevated by means of a monopole tower and is not located on another supporting structure. Guyed, lattice, or other non-monopole style towers shall not meet this definition. 
Wind energy conversion system, noncommercial. A WECS of less than one hundred (100) kW in total nameplate generating capacity that is not operated on a for-profit basis. A WECS that is interconnected with the pertinent electric utility or that receives credits or rebates for energy transmitted to the power grid is not by that reason alone operated on a for-profit basis. 
Wind energy conversion system, small. A WECS of less than ten (10) kW in total nameplate generating capacity. 
Wind turbine. A piece of electrical generating equipment that aids in the conversion of the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. 
(g)  Rules of construction. This chapter shall be construed and interpreted as stated in the rules below: 
(1)  Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. 
(2)  Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. 
(3)  The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine. 
(4)  The words "must," "shall," and "may not" are mandatory. 
(5)  The words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
(6)  The terms "standards," "regulations," and "requirements" indicated specific items that the applicant or property owner must comply with. Compliance with standards, regulations, and requirements is mandatory. 
(7)  The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, and any other similar entities, including governmental agencies. 
(8)  The words "used" or "occupied", whether used separately or together, shall be construed to include the facilities that were intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied for that purpose." 
(9)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(Ord. No. 23895 , § 1, 6-3-19)  
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 29-2.1. - Establishment and conversion of districts. 
Section 29-2.1(a) - The Base and Overlay zoning districts listed in the New Zoning District column of Table 29-2.1 are hereby established and the zoning district classifications in effect before the effective date of this chapter shall be converted to the Base and Overlay zoning districts as set forth in Table 29-2.1 with the exception of the C-2 District located outside the boundaries of the M-DT Regulating Plan. The Base and Overlay districts shall be grouped into three types - Residential, Mixed Use, and Special Purpose districts and shall have the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
Table 29-2.1: Columbia, Missouri, Zoning Districts 
Previous Zoning Districts 	New Zoning districts 
Base Zoning Districts 	Base Zoning Districts 
Residential 	Residential 
R-1 One-Family Dwelling 	R-1 One-Family Dwelling 
R-2 Two-Family Dwelling 	R-2 Two-Family Dwelling 
R-3 Medium Density Multiple-Family Dwelling 	R-MF Multiple-Family Dwelling 
R-4 High Density Multiple-Family Dwelling 	R-MF Multiple-Family Dwelling 
R-MH Residential Manufactured Home 	R-MH Residential Manufactured Home 
PUD Planned Unit Development* 	PD-* 
Office 	Mixed Use 
O-1 Office 	M-OF Mixed Use - Office 
O-2 Special Office 	M-OF Mixed Use - Office 
O-P Planned Office* 	PD-* 
Commercial 	
C-1 Intermediate Business District 	M-N Mixed Use - Neighborhood (See Section 29-2.1(b)) 
M-C Mixed Use - Corridor (See Section 29-2.1(b)) 
C-3 General Business District 	M-C Mixed Use - Corridor 
C-2 Central Business District 	M-DT Mixed Use - Downtown (inside Regulating Plan boundary) 
C-2 Central Business District (outside Regulating Plan boundary) 
C-P Planned Business District* 	PD-* 
Industrial 	
M-R Research, Development and Office Park 	M-BP Business/Industrial Park 
	Special Purpose 
M-C Controlled Industrial District 	IG Industrial 
M-1 General Industrial District 	IG Industrial 
M-U Underground Space 	IG Industrial 
M-P Planned General Industrial District* 	PD-* 
Agricultural 	
A-1 Agricultural 	A Agricultural 
n/a 	O Open Space 
n/a 	PD Planned Development 
Overlay Districts 	Overlay Districts 
UC Urban Conservation 	UC-O Urban Conservation Overlay 
S-R Scenic Roadway Area 	SR-O Scenic Roadway Area 
HP Historic Preservation 	HP-O Historic Preservation 
F-1 Floodplain 	FP-O Floodplain 
* Planned districts (PUD, O-P, C-P, and M-P) convert to a planned district (PD) counterpart. For example, PUD and C-P will convert to district PD-[insert approved Ordinance number]. 
 
(b)  The previous base zoning district C-1 shall convert to the M-N District with the exception of shopping center properties meeting all of the following conditions on the effective date, which shall be converted to the M-C district: 
(1)  The shopping center contains or includes an existing structure with a single unit in excess of forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet, or the shopping center contains or includes an existing multi-unit building in excess of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet containing at least one unit occupying in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet; 
(2)  The property does not share a common lot line with property zoned R-1; and 
(3)  The property has one or more frontage(s) on a collector or arterial street.  
Sec. 29-2.2. - Base zoning districts. 
(a)  Residential zone districts. 
(1)  R-1: One-family dwelling district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to promote and preserve safe and attractive urban one-family residential neighborhoods. The principal land use is a one-family dwelling unit per lot. Some public recreational uses, religious facilities, educational facilities, and uses incidental or accessory to dwellings are included, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-2
R-1 District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	7,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area if no public or community sewer available 	15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width at building line 	60 ft. 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard 	6 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard 	Lesser of 30% lot depth or 25 ft. 
Maximum height of primary residential building 	35 ft. 
Maximum height of primary residential building if 2 side setbacks of at least 15 ft. each 	45 ft. 
Maximum height of primary nonresidential building, provided all setbacks increased 1 ft. for each additional 1 ft. of height over 35 ft. 	75 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the R-1 district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. All development shall comply with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4. 
(2)  R-2 Two-family dwelling district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for a blend of one-and two-family residential developments that will promote strong neighborhoods. The district is intended to accommodate both standard residential development and small pockets of affordable small lot infill "cottage" residential development. The "cottage" standards require approval by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 29-6.4(j). The principal land use is one-family or duplex residential dwellings, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). One principal structure is allowed per lot; two or more single-family detached dwellings are not permitted on a single lot. 
Table 29-2-3
R-2 District Dimensional Standard Summary 
	Current 	Cottage 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area - one-family 	5,000 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area - one-family attached 	3,500 sq. ft. 	N/A 
Minimum lot area - two-family 	7,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 
Minimum lot area if no public or community sewer available 	15,000 sq. ft 
Minimum lot width at building line 	60 ft. 	30 ft. 
Minimum lot width at building line -single-family attached 	30 ft. 	N/A 
Maximum size of contiguous area that may be replatted to permit "cottage" lots without such lots being within a "cottage" subdivision 	N/A 	1 ac. 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 
Minimum depth from front lot line to garage (if applicable) 	25 ft. 	20 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard 	Lesser of 25% lot depth or 25 ft. 	10 ft. 
Maximum height of primary residential building 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 
Maximum height of primary residential building if 2 side setbacks of at least 15 ft. each 	45 ft. 	35 ft. 
Maximum height of nonresidential building 	75 ft. 	N/A 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the R-2 district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. All development shall comply with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4. 
(3)  R-MF multiple-family dwelling district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for a mix of one-family, two-family, and medium density multi-family residential development. It may include a range of residential uses from one-family to medium and high density multi-family apartments and condominiums and fraternity and sorority houses. The scale of development is regulated to ensure that new development is not out-of-scale with the character and density of currently existing adjacent uses or zoning. The principal uses are residential, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-4
R-MF District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area - one-family 	5,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area - one-family attached 	3,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area - two-family 	7,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area - multi-family 	2,500 sq. ft. per du 
Minimum lot area - sorority or fraternity 	7,500 
Minimum lot area - CRCC 	N/A, but max. density is 17 du/ac 
Minimum lot width at building line 	60 ft. 
Minimum lot width at building line -single-family attached 	30 ft. 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - all other 	10 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot street side 	15 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard 	25 ft. 
Maximum height of primary residential building 	35 ft. 
This table is a summary of selected standards; refer to chapter 29-4.1 dimension standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the R-MF district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. All development shall comply with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4. 
(4)  R-MH residential manufactured home district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for the development and operation of residential manufactured home parks. The standards are intended to provide for diverse housing opportunities and promote innovative and land-efficient sources of affordable housing while promoting neighborhood enhancement and minimizing conflicts with other zoning districts. A residential manufactured home park may provide manufactured home spaces available for lease or rent; or the property may be subdivided in accordance with the requirements of section 29-2.2(a)(4)c. and article 5 (subdivision standards). 
Table 29-2-5
R-MH District Dimensional Standards 
Sites and Structures 
Minimum area of each home site 	3,750 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width 	45 ft. 
Maximum building height 	35 ft. 
Minimum front setback of homes from abutting public street in the park 	20 ft. 
Minimum side and rear setback sites from other mobile home site boundaries 	10 ft. 
Minimum distance between dwelling units 	20 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the R-MH district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the R-MH district shall comply with the following standards: 
(A)  Required park boundary setback areas along the side and rear property boundaries shall be landscaped and shall not contain parking areas, streets, drives, or accessory structures or storage areas. A permanent screen consisting of a masonry wall, wood fence, landscaping material, or combination thereof, at least eight (8) feet in height and, when a fence is used, not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height, shall be required around the perimeter of the site. The required screening shall have an opacity of at least eighty (80) percent year around and, if landscaping is used, the eighty (80) percent opacity shall be achieved within four (4) full growing seasons. If a masonry wall or wood fence is used, landscaping shall be placed between the wall or fence and the property line to form an ornamental screen. The required screening shall be maintained in good order and not allowed to exist in a state of disrepair or death. If wood fencing is used, it shall be durable in nature or treated to prevent rapid deterioration. Failure to maintain the required screening shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(B)  Carports, patios, decks and accessory buildings may be located in side and rear setback areas of individual manufactured home sites that are not part of the required park perimeter buffer area. 
(C)  A private outdoor living area, such as a patio or deck, of at least forty (40) square feet shall be provided on each manufactured home space or lot adjoining the manufactured home. 
(D)  A stormwater management system shall be designed to minimize the possibility of soil erosion and flood damage on site and downstream. 
(E)  Interior access shall be provided by public or private streets. Public streets shall be built to city standards and shall have sidewalks on both sides. Private streets shall require private street maintenance. 
(F)  Manufactured home parks shall have their only access on perimeter streets unless the director determines that street connections to adjacent properties are necessary to protect public safety and reduce traffic congestion at access points. 
(G)  Street connections to adjacent properties may be required when deemed appropriate by the director; however, at least one access point onto a public street shall be provided for each one hundred (100) manufactured home spaces or lots. 
(H)  Paved parking shall be provided on each manufactured home space or lot at the rate of one parking space per manufactured home. 
(I)  An on-ground or in-ground stand constructed to comply with the building code shall be provided to provide support and leveling for each manufactured home. 
(J)  Anchorage and tie-down constructed to comply with the building code shall be provided on each manufactured home space or lot to prevent overturning or uplift of the manufactured home. 
(K)  Skirting shall be installed for each manufactured home. Skirting material shall be visually compatible with the manufactured home unit's materials and shall have a visually finished appearance. Composition building board and raw wood shall not be used as skirting unless finished with a weatherproof and termite proof material. 
(L)  A map of the layout of the manufactured home park, of a scale not greater than 1:50, showing the location of individual manufactured home spaces by number, shall be displayed on the park office building, or on the identification sign at the entrance to the manufactured home park. 
(M)  Each space for a manufactured home shall be provided with a sewer outlet not less than four (4) inches in diameter, connected to the main sewer system. 
(N)  In addition to required automobile parking spaces, the manufactured home park shall provide at least one accessory vehicle storage area for each ten (10) manufactured homes, to provide storage for trucks, boats, and similar vehicles. 
(O)  If storage facilities for tenants are provided on the manufactured home space or lot or elsewhere in the manufactured home park, they shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant materials. 
(P)  All yard areas and other open spaces not otherwise paved or occupied by structures shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(Q)  Any enclosed structure attached to a manufactured home shall be constructed of compatible or similar exterior materials and in conformance with the building code. 
(R)  R-MH developments consisting of twenty-five (25) or more manufactured homes shall contain playground facilities. The playground facilities shall be at least one-fourth (¼) acre in size for each twenty-five (25) manufactured homes proposed. 
(S)  No mobile home (as opposed to a manufactured home) shall be placed within any R-MH district established after January 17, 1995, unless a seal issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission is attached to the mobile home certifying that the mobile home was brought up to or otherwise meets the requirements of the code of standards relating to manufactured homes adopted by the public service commission. 
(b)  Mixed use districts. 
(1)  M-OF mixed use - office district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for professional, administrative, corporate, and other offices and similar low-impact non-residential uses. It may serve as a buffer area between residential and more intense nonresidential uses. It is intended to allow innovative design approaches that reflect and respect the character of nearby residential areas without the need for rezoning to a planned development district. The principal uses are small-scale office, personal service, and residential uses, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-6
M-OF District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	N/A 
Minimum lot width at building line 	N/A 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - general 	0 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot street side 	15 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - adjacent to R district 	10 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard 	25 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	45 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the M-OF district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. All development shall comply with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4. 
(2)  M-N mixed use - neighborhood district. 
(i)  Purpose. The mixed use-neighborhood district is intended to provide commercial shopping and service facilities in or near a residential neighborhood. The principal land use is a small shopping area with sales and services oriented to the needs of a local population. The district is intended to accommodate both pedestrian-oriented shopping areas with walkable connections to surrounding neighborhoods and small auto-oriented shopping centers convenient to lower density residential areas, through the use of two different sets of development standards without the need for rezoning to a planned development district. The "pedestrian" standards require approval by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 29-6.4(j). The principle uses are small-scale commercial and residential, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-7
M-N District Dimensional Standard Summary 
	Current 	Pedestrian 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	N/A 	N/A 
Minimum lot width at building line 	N/A 	N/A 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth of front yard 	25 ft. 	O ft. 
Maximum depth of front yard 	N/A 	10 ft. 
Percent of building front width that must be between min. and max. setback lines 	N/A 	75% 
Minimum width of side yard - general 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot street side 	15 ft. 	0 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - adjacent to R district 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - general 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - adjacent to R district 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the M-N district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the M-N district shall comply with the following when the applicant requests that the M-N "pedestrian" standards apply: 
(A)  All property frontages must have sidewalks constructed to city standards. 
(B)  The primary building must have at least one operable pedestrian door leading directly from the primary building onto a sidewalk. For primary buildings located on corner lots, the required pedestrian entrance may be located on the primary street façade or at the corner where the two streets intersect. 
(C)  Ground floor street frontages on each primary building may not be occupied by residential uses but may be occupied by a lobby or entrance to residential portions of the building. 
(D)  At least fifty (50) percent of the building front façade area between three (3) and eight (8) feet above grade shall be of windows or other transparent materials allowing views into the building. 
(E)  At the applicant's option, minimum on-site parking requirements may be reduced up to thirty (30) percent as described in section 29-4.3 (parking and loading). 
(F)  No on-site loading requirements shall be required. 
(G)  Curb cuts shall only be permitted if access cannot be provided from an alley. Where curb cuts are permitted, they shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width. 
(3)  M-C mixed use - corridor district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to allow for a broad range of commercial activities that may often be oriented toward automobile access and visibility, as well as multi-family residential uses without the need for rezoning to a planned development district. Larger buildings are permitted and less parking is required near the intersections of arterial-arterial, and arterial-collector corners to promote higher bus transit ridership at these nodes where current bus lines exist or future bus service is anticipated. The "transit" standards require approval by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 29-6.4(j). The principal land uses are sales and service activities, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-8
M-C District Dimensional Standard Summary 
	Current 	Transit 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 		
Minimum lot width at building line 	N/A 	N/A 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth of front yard 	25 ft. 	0 ft. 
Maximum depth of front yard 	N/A 	10 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - general 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot street side 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - adjacent to R district 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - general 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - adjacent to R district 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	45 ft. 	55 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the M-C district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the M-C district shall comply with the following when the applicant requests that the M-C "transit" standards apply: 
(A)  The property shall be located at an arterial street/arterial street or an arterial street/collector street intersection where current bus lines exist or future bus service is anticipated. 
(B)  All property frontages must have sidewalks constructed to city standards. 
(C)  The primary building must have at least one operable pedestrian door leading directly from the primary building onto a sidewalk. For primary buildings located on corner lots, the required pedestrian entrance may be located on the primary street façade or at the corner where the two (2) streets intersect. 
(D)  At least sixty-five (65) percent of the primary building frontage must be built no further than fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line. 
(E)  If the building is located on a corner lot, at least forty (40) percent of the secondary building frontage must be built no further than twenty (20) feet from the side lot line adjacent to the secondary street. 
(F)  At the applicant's option, minimum on-site parking requirements may be reduced up to thirty (30) percent as described in section 29-4.3 (parking and loading). 
(4)  M-DT mixed use - downtown form district (inside regulating plan boundary). 
(i)  Purpose. The M-DT district is intended to encourage investment and reinvestment that reinforces the diverse pedestrian-oriented and walkable street environment in downtown Columbia within the regulating plan boundary. Form-based controls are tailored to ensure that the specific characters of different street frontages and subareas is preserved and strengthened, that automobile traffic does not interfere with the primarily pedestrian character of the area, and that areas adjacent to downtown are not adversely affected by buildings of dramatically different scale or character. Form-based controls are tied to a specific regulating plan governing what building form and function can be built in different portions of downtown, how those buildings relate to the street, and where accessory parking areas may be located. Almost all uses are permitted except for low density residential and heavier industrial uses, as listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
 
Figure 29-2-9: M-DT Regulating Plan
Examples: 
 
(ii)  Additional regulations. Development and redevelopment in the M-DT district shall comply with those building form standards in section 29-4.2 (M-DT building form standards), and shall also comply with all other standards in this chapter unless those standards contain an exception for the M-DT district or the type of use, building, or development proposed. 
(5)  M-BP business/industrial park district. 
(i)  Purpose. The purpose of the M-BP district is to accommodate a mix of light industrial, institutional, and supporting commercial uses in close proximity through the use of innovative and flexible designs that buffer potential impacts of each use from surrounding uses and adjacent areas, and to promote environmentally sound and efficient use of land without the need for rezoning to a planned development district. A wide variety of commercial, research, development, office, distribution, processing, and institutional uses are permitted, as listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-10
M-BP District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	N/A 
Minimum lot width at building line 	N/A 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard - from arterial and collector streets 	25 ft. 
Minimum depth front yard - from other streets 	15 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - general 	0 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot frontage on arterial or collector street 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - corner lot frontage on other streets 	20 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - adjacent to residential district 	20 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - general 	0 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - adjacent to residential district 	20 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	45 ft. 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the M-BP district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the M-BP district shall comply with the following additional standards: 
(A)  In addition to the standards of section 29-4.4 (landscaping and screening), the following shall be required: 
1)  A permanent screen consisting of a masonry wall, wood fence, landscaping material, or combination thereof, at least eight (8) feet in height and, when a fence is used, not to exceed eight (8) feet in height, shall be required where a lot in this district abuts residentially zoned land. The required screening shall have an opacity of at least eighty (80) percent year around and, if landscaping is used, the eighty (80) percent opacity and eight-foot minimum height shall be achieved within four (4) full growing seasons. In the event a masonry wall or wood fence is used, landscaping shall be placed between the wall or fence and the property line to form an ornamental screen. The required screening and landscaping shall be maintained in good order and not allowed to exist in a state of disrepair or death. If wood fencing is used, it shall be durable in nature and treated to prevent rapid deterioration. 
2)  All exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by a permanent screen at least eight (8) feet in height above the ground surface of the storage area. In the event that an eight (8) foot screen is inadequate to screen such an area, additional screening may be required in such a manner and of such materials as necessary to adequately screen such from public view. However, in no event shall the screen exceed twelve (12) feet in height, except for landscape materials. In no event shall the stored or stacked materials or finished products exceed the height of the required screening. The required screening shall have an opacity of at least eighty (80) percent year around, and if landscaping is used, the eighty (80) percent opacity shall be achieved within four (4) full growing seasons. When a solid wall, or any solid fence is used for screening, ornamental landscaping shall be placed between the fence and the adjacent property lines. The required screening shall be maintained in good order and not allowed to exist in a state of disrepair or death. If wood fencing is used, it shall be durable in nature or treated to prevent rapid deterioration. Failure to maintain the required screening shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
3)  Exterior storage areas shall have a permanently dust-free surface. 
(B)  The traffic circulation system shall provide for the safe, convenient and efficient movement of goods and people with a minimum of conflict between various modes of travel. The streets within the proposed development shall be public and within a public right-of-way, except private streets may be permitted under the following conditions: 
1)  The streets shall be designed, constructed, and maintained according to any applicable minimum city standards for private streets; 
2)  The streets will serve two (2) or more lots or property in multiple ownership; 
The private streets do not provide the only vehicular access to public streets from other property located outside the development; 
3)  The streets shall be located in designated common areas which shall be platted as a separate lot or lots; 
4)  A notation shall be written on the approved plan and recorded plat which reads: "All maintenance of the private streets shown on this plat shall be the responsibility of the owners association or abutting property owners. No private streets shall be dedicated to nor accepted by the city for maintenance until they have been improved to minimum city standards for public streets."; and 
5)  The street signs for private streets shall indicate "private street" so as to distinguish them from public streets. 
(C)  A system of pedestrian walkways and/or sidewalks meeting city standards shall be provided and shall connect with existing sidewalk systems or allow for future extensions to activity centers outside the development (i.e., schools, parks, shopping areas, etc.). Sidewalks shall be required along private streets as they would be required for public streets, except that no sidewalks shall be required on the side of a street without any buildings or driveways. 
(D)  The provisions of section 29-4.8 (signs) shall apply. Modification of such requirements including, but not limited to, sign area, height, placement and number of freestanding signs and on premise wall, canopy and awning signs may be granted by the board of adjustment in accordance with provisions of section 29-6.4(g) (sign plan approval). 
(6)  C-2 central business district (outside M-DT regulating plan boundary). 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for commercial facilities not located within the boundaries of the M-DT regulating plan that were previously considered part of downtown Columbia. C-2 district parcels lying outside the boundaries of the M-DT regulating plan shall appear on the official zoning map upon the adoption of this Code; however, the C-2 district shall not be expanded to include additional parcels after the effective date. The principal land uses are retail sales, services, offices, mixed-use including housing and public facilities. 
(ii)  Other standards. Permitted uses and dimensional standards applicable to the C-2 district are defined within section 29-3.4 and shall be subject to the form and development regulations in article 4, with the exception of those standards listed in section 29-4.1(a). 
(c)  Special purpose districts. 
(1)  IG industrial - general district. 
(i)  Purpose. The IG district is intended to allow for manufacturing, warehousing, office activities, general industrial uses, and access to underground mining, resource, and storage activities, while protecting surrounding areas from any adverse impacts of those activities without the need for rezoning to a planned development district. Development may be organized in a planned business or industrial park, or may be in individual buildings on individual lots in older parts of the city. The principal land uses are heavy commercial and industrial uses, as listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). 
Table 29-2-11
IG District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	N/A 
Minimum lot width at building line 	N/A 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - general 	0 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard - adjacent to R district 	20 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard 	10 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear yard - if adjacent to R district 	20 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	N/A 
This Table is a summary of selected standards; refer to Chapter 29-4.1 Dimension Standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the IG district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the IG district shall comply with the following: 
(A)  No use shall be permitted or so operated as to produce or emit: 
1)  Smoke or particulate matter in violation of the standards of the ordinances of the city. 
2)  Dust, fly ash, radiation, gases, heat, glare, or other effects which are obviously injurious to humans at the property line. 
3)  Vibration or concussion perceptible without instruments at the property line. 
The noise level at any point along the property line shall not exceed: 
Octave Band 	Decibels 
0—75 CPS 	55 
75—1,200 CPS 	40 
1,200—4,800 CPS 	25 
Above 4,800 CPS 	22 
 
4)  Industrial wastes of such quantity and nature as to overburden the public sewage disposal facilities or to cause odor and unsanitary effects beyond the property line. 
(B)  Access to all underground development activities such as commercial mining and storage shall be through property owned or controlled by the owners of the underground space within the IG district. 
(C)  Where applicable, underground space must have a building permit to develop a habitable underground areas and to qualify for a certificate of occupancy. 
(D)  The owners or operators of underground space shall file with the department a certificate by a registered professional engineer as to the structural integrity of the underground space. Such certificate may provide for exceptions or conditions for building permit approval. The certificate shall be valid for newly added or mined-out areas, if it is so described in the certificate and must have been dated within the past ten (10) years to be valid for its application to new areas. 
(E)  Penetrations from underground space to the surface property above it shall be permitted without regard to the provisions of the IG zoning district, provided that such penetrations are for the purpose of connecting utilities or to contain safety, relief or life-support systems to the underground. All penetrations must be contained within a public easement to assure perpetuity and continued service to the underground development. 
(2)  A agricultural district. 
(i)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for large-scale agricultural uses contained within the city, certain public uses, and facilities or activities best located in a more isolated area. The principal land use is an agricultural area or public facility. Only one principal dwelling and one second principal dwelling are allowed on each lot. 
Table 29-2-12
A District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	2.5 acres 
Minimum lot width at building line 	60 ft. 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side yard 	25 ft. 
Minimum depth rear yard 	25 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	35 ft. 
This table is a summary of selected standards; refer to chapter 29-4.1 dimension standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the A district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. In addition to compliance with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4, development in the A district shall comply with the following requirement: 
(A)  No more than two (2) contiguous residential lots may be created in this district. The creation of additional lots requires rezoning to the R-1 district and approval of a subdivision. 
(3)  O open space district. 
(i)  Purpose. The O district is intended to ensure and regulate the use of publicly owned parks, open space, and nature reserves, as well as designated private open spaces within master planned developments or subdivisions with the consent of the property owner. 
Table 29-2-13
O District Dimensional Standard Summary 
Lot Standards 
Minimum lot area 	2.5 acres 
Minimum lot area for Private Open Space 	7,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width at building line 	60 ft. 
Building Standards 
Minimum depth front building setback 	25 ft. 
Minimum width of side building setback 	25 ft. 
Minimum depth of rear building setback 	25 ft. 
Maximum height of primary building 	35 ft. 
This table is a summary of selected standards; refer to chapter 29-4.1 dimension standards, for additional regulations. 
 
(ii)  Illustration. The following diagram is a graphical depiction of the O district to be used for illustration purposes only. 
 
(iii)  Other standards. All development shall comply with all other applicable regulations in this chapter, including without limitation the permitted use regulations in article 3 and the form and development regulations in article 4. 
(4)  PD planned development. 
(i)  Purpose. The purpose of the planned development (PD) district is to allow for innovation and flexibility in design, to encourage creative mixes of complementary uses, and to promote environmentally sound and efficient use of land. The major objectives of a planned development are: 
(A)  To allow for a mixture of housing types and densities located in proximity to each other. 
(B)  To allow for mixtures of residential and non-residential uses located in proximity to each other when any potential adverse impacts have been minimized, mitigated, screened or buffered. 
(C)  To provide for more usable and suitably-located common open space and amenities, including but not limited to clustered patterns of development and open space than would otherwise be provided under the city's base zone districts. 
(D)  To require that planned developments provide to the city amenities or benefits that help achieve the goals of the Columbia Imagined comprehensive plan (as amended) and that are not otherwise required by the base zoning districts in return for the added flexibility in uses and design offered by the PD district. 
(E)  To ensure that approved planned developments are efficient to administer over time. 
(ii)  Eligibility. Any property in the city, except property located in the M-DT zone district, may be rezoned to a PD zone district. 
(iii)  Permitted uses. 
(A)  An application for rezoning to a PD district shall identify which of the uses (permitted, conditional, accessory, conditional accessory, or temporary), listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table), will be permitted allowed uses in all or specific portions of the PD district listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table) will be permitted uses in all or specific portions of the PD district. 
(B)  The application may include some of the general uses listed in Table 29-3.1 and state that some of the specific uses included in the definition will not be included in the PD, or that some of the included uses will be subject to different or additional use-specific standards than those listed in section 29-3.3 (use-specific standards). If not modified by the PD application, all of the use-specific standards listed in section 29-3.3 will apply. 
(C)  The application for rezoning to a PD district may not include any use that is not listed in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table). Uses not listed in Table 29-3.1 are only available through an amendment to that table approved by council in a separate action. 
(iv)  Development and form standards. 
(A)  The PD application may include variations in any development or form standard in chapter 29, article 4 that would otherwise be applicable in the PD district. Unless varied by the terms of the PD application, the provisions of chapter 29, article 4 (development and form standards) otherwise applicable to the same type of development will apply. 
(B)  If the PD application would permit buildings within one hundred (100) feet of the edges of the PD property that are more than one story taller than the tallest building permitted in the adjacent zone district, the PD application shall include provisions to mitigate, screen, or buffer the visual, lighting, and traffic impacts of that taller development on the adjacent zoning district. 
(C)  If the PD application includes non-residential uses within one hundred (100) feet of the edges of the PD property abutting any R-1, R-2, R-MF, or R-MH district, the PD shall include provisions to mitigate the traffic, lighting, noise, or hour-of-operation impacts of that non-residential development on the adjacent R-1, R-2, R-MF, or R-MH district. 
(v)  Procedures for approval and administration. The procedures for approval of a zoning map change to a PD district, are set forth in section 29-6.4(n)(2).  
Sec. 29-2.3. - Overlay zoning districts. 
The following overlay zones are hereby adopted, and each shall have the boundaries shown on the official zoning map maintained by the department. The provisions of each overlay zone district supplement or modify the standards and requirements of the underlying base zone district. In case of a conflict between the provisions of the overlay zone district and an underlying base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay zoning district shall apply. In case a property is included in two (2) or more overlay districts, and the provisions of one or more overlay districts conflict, the more restrictive overlay district provision shall apply. 
(a)  UC-O urban conservation overlay. 
(1)  Purpose. The UC urban conservation district is intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by encouraging the conservation and enhancement of the urban environment. The purposes of the district are: 
(i)  To maintain neighborhood character and integrity by focusing special attention on the maintenance of the physical environment; the enhancement of physical, social and economic resources and the accommodation of desirable change; 
(ii)  To promote the efficient use of urban lands including the encouragement of compatible infill development on vacant and passed-over parcels; 
(iii)  To encourage and to support rehabilitation of the physical environment and programs for the conservation of urban areas; and 
(iv)  To foster the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth, development, and redevelopment of Columbia. 
(v)  To recognize and protect specific property, neighborhoods and roadway corridors of special historic, architectural or scenic qualities. 
(2)  Description. Urban conservation district overlay zoning may be used with any zoning district if approved pursuant to this section 29-2.30. All regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply to property within the urban conservation district except where modified by the designation ordinance. Areas, tracts, or sites within the UC district shall be identified on the official zoning map and in other official writings by the suffix "UC." Once approved, all development and redevelopment in the UC-O area shall be required to comply with the provisions of the UC-O designating ordinance, and the provisions of that ordinance shall be applied in review of all applications by the department and the commission. 
(3)  Approved UC-O districts. The following UC-O districts have been approved by the council, and the regulations applicable in each district are provided below. The provisions of each UC-O affect the areas shown for that district below. 
(i)  Benton-Stephens Neighborhood UC-O. 
 
(A)  Establishment of Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District. The land within the following boundaries shall constitute district UC-O (urban conservation overlay district) and shall be known as the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District: 
The north side of East Walnut Street between Old 63 and North College Avenue, the east side of North College Avenue between East Walnut Street and the COLT railroad right-of-way, the southeast side of the COLT railroad right-of-way between North College Avenue and Business Loop 70, the west side of Paris Road between Business Loop 70 and Ammonette Street, the south side of Ammonette Street between Paris Road and Old 63, and the west side of Old 63 between Ammonette Street and East Walnut Street. 
The provisions of this section 29-2.3(a)(3)(i) and all subsections thereof shall apply only to the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District. All regulations of chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia, Missouri, including regulations pertaining to the underlying zoning districts shall apply to property within the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District except where modified by this section 29-2.3(a)(3)(i) or any subsection thereof. 
(B)  Exemptions. 
1)  The regulations in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District shall not apply to any land in zoning districts PD. 
2)  The regulations in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District shall not apply to any land in zoning districts M-OF, MN, MC, IG except that any new construction within those districts shall comply with the screening requirements of section 29-4.5. 
3)  The regulations in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District shall not apply to mosques, synagogues, public schools, private colleges, churches, or homeless shelters operated by religious institutions. 
(C)  Home occupations in district R-1. 
1)  Home occupations within the R-1 district shall be permitted within the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District subject to the provisions of section 29-3.3(kk) except that the provisions limiting the total floor area of the dwelling unit devoted to the home occupation shall be no more forty (40) percent. 
2)  Home occupations with non-resident employees may be permitted within the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District subject to the standards of section 29-3.3(ll) and upon issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provision of section 29-6.4(m). 
(D)  Standards and criteria. The following criteria apply to all new development in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District. Except where otherwise specifically provided, structures existing before passage of this ordinance may be structurally altered but not enlarged without conforming to the requirements of this section. Additional dwelling units shall not be added to a structure without conforming to the requirements of this section. 
1)  Lot size. 
(a)  R-1 district: 7,000 square feet. 
(b)  R-2 district: 
(i)  Single-family 5,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Duplex, 10,000 square feet. 
(c)  R-MF district: 
(i)  Single-family, 5,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Duplex, 7,000 square feet. 
(iii)  Multi-family, 7,500 square feet; 2,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2)  Height and area. The intent of yard requirements in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District is to promote development that is compatible with surrounding residential property. For the purposes of applying setback regulations, the following shall be applied: the front shall be toward the street or access corridor from which the lot is addressed; the rear is opposite to the front or as nearly so as the lot shape permits; and the sides are ninety degrees to the front or as nearly so as the lot shape permits. 
(a)  Front - Not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth, except when the median setback of all buildings on the same side of the street, within the same block, is greater than twenty-five (25) feet such median setback shall become the setback for the lot. Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the front elevation measured along the adjacent street front may project a maximum of two (2) feet into the required front yard, if such yard is greater than twenty-five (25) feet in depth, in order to encourage reasonable variety of front facades. 
(b)  Rear - Not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side - No modification of the standards for the R-1 and R-2 districts. No less than ten (10) feet in the R-MF District. 
All corner lots in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District shall provide a side yard adjacent to the side street of not less than twenty-five (25) feet, provided this regulation shall not reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of passage of this ordinance to less than sixty-five (65) percent of the total width of such lot, and provided further that the minimum side yard regulations of the underlying zoning district must be observed. 
(d)  Building Spacing - 
(i)  In addition to the rear and side yard requirements of the underlying zoning district all structures used as a principle or accessory structure shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet to another structure on the same lot. This provision shall not apply to single-family detached dwellings and their accessory structures provided such accessory structures do not contain additional dwelling units. 
(ii)  The connection of two buildings by a lightly constructed, covered passage, open on each side, shall not be permitted such that the minimum building separation of this section is reduced to less than thirty (30) feet. This provision shall not apply to a single-family detached dwelling being connected to a customary accessory structure that does not contain additional dwelling units. 
(iii)  No building shall be constructed across an existing lot line. 
(e)  Building height - Building height shall be restricted to a maximum of two stories, not to exceed a maximum building height of thirty (30) feet. This height restriction shall not apply to a single-family detached dwelling. 
(E)  Parking. 
1)  For all uses other than a single-family detached dwelling, off-street parking shall be provided as follows: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit containing up to two (2) bedrooms; two and one-half (2.5) spaces per dwelling unit containing three (3) or more bedrooms. One additional space for every four (4) bedrooms shall be provided for guest parking. 
2)  Off-street parking facilities associated with the construction of a new structure, the alteration of a structure, or the change of use of an existing structure shall not be located forward of the any structure on the subject lot or parcel. This provision shall not apply to a single-family detached dwelling. 
3)  For all uses other than a single-family detached dwelling, parking may be located to the side of a structure if parking to the rear is unavailable. In such instances, parking to the side of a structure shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in length and shall be screened from adjacent property in accordance with section 29-4.4(e) (property edge buffering) or by a landscape strip no less than six (6) feet wide containing a six-foot tall screening device and no less than four (4) categories of planting materials listed in section 29-4.4(c)(6), whichever is most restrictive. 
(F)  Screening and landscaping requirements. No modification to the underlying zoning district; except for the following: 
1)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total land area of any tract, parcel or lot shall be retained as green space (non-pervious areas - use of pervious pavement shall not be considered green space). Required screening, buffers, and stormwater management areas may be counted toward meeting this requirement. 
2)  Parking areas containing more than two (2) spaces within twenty-five (25) feet of a street right-of-way or alley shall be screened from view as required by section 29-4.4(d) or by the installation of a six (6) feet wide landscaping strip located within the private yard area (street yard) separating the parking area from the abutting street right-of-way or alley that contains no less than four (4) of the categories of planting materials listed in section 29-4.4(c)(6), whichever is most restrictive. The street yard landscaping strip shall be further improved with street trees in accordance with the section 29-4.4(d)(ii). 
3)  In addition to the above, paved areas developed after August 19, 1991, exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet in area, and additions exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet in area to paved areas that were developed prior to August 19, 1991, shall contain a minimum of one tree within a growspace/island of at least one hundred seventy (170) square feet within the interior for every four thousand (4,000) square feet of paved area. 
4)  Parking areas containing more than two (2) spaces or loading/unloading areas within fifty (50) feet of a single-family detached dwelling or R-1 or R-2 district, not separated by street right-of-way, shall be screened from view of the adjoining use or district in accordance with the standards of section 29-4.4(e) (property edge buffering). 
(G)  Pedestrian circulation. The traffic circulation system shall provide for the safe, convenient and efficient movement of goods and people with a minimum of conflict between various modes of travel. Provisions shall be made for pedestrian travel within the development and shall connect with existing pedestrian systems and allow for future extensions to activity centers outside the development. 
(H)  Porches. Covered porches facing the front yard are required to be constructed on all newly constructed non-accessory structures in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District. The front-facing covered porch shall be a minimum length of forty (40) percent of the front width of each dwelling unit with a minimum depth of six (6) feet, and shall have a railing. 
(I)  Roof type and pitch. All newly constructed non-accessory structures shall have gabled or hip roofs with pitches having a minimum slope of four units vertical in twelve units horizontal. 
(J)  Orientation to the street. All newly constructed non-accessory structures erected in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District shall provide front entrances, windows and porches oriented to the street from which it is addressed. 
(K)  Garages. Attached garages with garage doors facing the front lot line shall not be more than ten (10) feet in width, nor shall the garage extend forward of the front building wall face. 
(L)  Side porches, entrances or balconies. Side porches or balconies should not extend into side yards. For all uses other than detached single-family uses, side entrances are allowed only if the side yard building setback is increased to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
(M)  Air conditioning units and heat pumps. Air conditioning (A/C) units and heat pumps shall not be located forward of the front building wall face. All A/C units or heat pumps located in a side yard shall be screened from front and side yard view with an appropriate permanent yard structure or evergreen plantings. 
(N)  Building face design. Every building face shall contain a minimum ten (10) percent of the total face square footage in glazing and at least one of the following design features shall be incorporated within each twenty-five (25) feet of horizontal primary façade length: (1) roof dormers; (2) gables; (3) recessed entries; (4) covered porches; (5) pillars, pilasters or posts; or (6) bay windows. 
(O)  Building face articulation. Any building face, or screening or fencing greater than thirty (30) feet in length shall be constructed with a differing projection at least once every thirty (30) linear feet. 
(P)  Prohibited elements. The following are prohibited fencing and screening materials: chicken wire, hardware cloth (of any size) and pallets. All fencing in disrepair shall be removed or repaired appropriately. 
(Q)  Stormwater management. 
1)  A stormwater management plan shall be required for any lot that undergoes redevelopment or enlarges an existing building (principle or accessory) footprint by more than twenty-five (25) percent or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less. Such management plan, when required, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12A of the City Code. Single-family detached dwellings, on individual lots, shall be exempt from the preparation of a stormwater management plan. 
2)  Facilities required to manage stormwater impacts created by redevelopment or alteration of existing structures may be included within a site's required fifty (50) percent green space per section 29-2.3(a)(3)(i)(F)(1) provided such facility is not also used as sidewalk or parking surface. Facilities that may be included in the fifty (50) percent green space calculation could include, but are not limited to, a rain garden, bio-swale, or other site feature capable of fulfilling the intended stormwater management function required that is approved by the director. 
(R)  Procedure for review and approval of development plans. 
1)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any uses other than a detached single-family use in the Benton Stephens Urban Conservation District, the applicant shall submit a development plan for review and approval by the director. Upon receiving the development plan, within two (2) business days, the director shall notify the Benton-Stephens Neighborhood Association in writing and send a copy of the development plan for review. 
2)  The development plan submittal shall be clearly drawn in ink on eight and one-half-inch by eleven-inch or eighteen-inch by twenty-four-inch sheets of single or double matted polyester film or an approved equivalent, at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty (20) feet. 
3)  The development plan submittal shall include the following: 
(i)  A legal description of the property to be developed; 
(ii)  The boundaries and dimensions of the lot or lots to be developed and the boundaries and dimensions of all adjacent lots; 
(iii)  The location of all lot setback lines along street rights-of-way; 
(iv)  The location and designation of all easements on the lot to be developed; 
(v)  The location of all existing buildings on, and adjacent to, the lot or lots to be developed; 
(vi)  The proposed location of all new structures including the location and dimensions of entrances, windows, porches, balconies and attached garages; 
(vii)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed parking areas; 
(viii)  The location and dimensions of all proposed sidewalks and pedestrian systems; 
(ix)  The landscaping plan showing compliance with paragraph (d), above; 
(x)  The stormwater management plan, when required by these provisions; 
(xi)  Other information deemed necessary to show compliance with this section. 
4)  The director shall approve a development plan that complies with the items in subparagraph (R)(3) of this subsection within ten (10) working days of receiving the plan. A copy of the approved plan shall then be sent to the building regulations supervisor. 
(ii)  East Campus UC-O. 
 
(A)  Establishment of East Campus Urban Conservation District. The land within the following boundaries shall constitute district UC-O (urban conservation overlay) and shall be known as the East Campus Urban Conservation District: 
A tract of land in the north half of Section 18 and the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 7, both in Township 48 North, Range 12 West in the City of Columbia, Boone County, Missouri; said tract being described as follows: 
BEGINNING at the center of the intersection of Lee Street and Wilson Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Lee Street and the southerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Rollins Street; thence easterly along said centerline and the easterly prolongation thereof to the center of Hinkson Creek; thence upstream along said creek centerline to the centerline of Old 63; thence northerly and northwesterly along said street centerline to its intersection with the easterly prolongation of the north line of Lot 10 of McNab Subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 4 at page 42; thence westerly along said prolongation and north line and the north lines of Lots 11 and 12 of said subdivision to the northeast corner of Lot 18 of East Highlands Addition as recorded in Plat Book 1 at page 11; thence westerly along the north line of said Lot 18 and the north lines of Lots 17, 16, 15 and the westerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of vacated Rockhill Road; thence westerly along the easterly prolongation of the north line of Lot 22 of Block 4 of Fyfer's Subdivision of Fyfer's Addition as recorded in Plat Book 1 at page 42 to the northeast corner of said Lot 22; thence continuing westerly and northwesterly along the north lines of said Lot 22 and Lots 21, 20, 19, 18, 17 and 16 of said Block 4 to the southeast corner of Lot 5 of said Block 4; thence northerly along the east lines of said Lot 5 and Lot 4 of said Block 4 to the southeast corner of Lot 1 of Block 2 of said plat; thence easterly to the southeast corner of Lot 2; thence northerly to northeast corner of Lot 2; thence westerly along the north line of said Lot 1 and the westerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Ann Street; thence southerly along said street centerline to the centerline of Anthony Street; thence westerly along the last said centerline to the centerline of William Street; thence northerly along the last said centerline to the easterly prolongation of the north line of Lot 5 of Cole and Ingels' Subdivision of Lots in Shields Eastern Addition as recorded in Plat Book 3 at page 31; thence westerly along said prolongation and north line to the northwest corner of said Lot 5; thence southerly to the southwest corner of said Lot 5; thence easterly to the northwest corner of Lot B of said subdivision; thence southerly along the west lines of said Lot B and Lot A and the southerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Bass Avenue; thence westerly along said centerline to the southerly prolongation of the east line of Lot 11 of Shields Eastern Addition as recorded in Book 45 at page 212; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said Lot 11; thence westerly along the north lines of said Lot 11 and Lots 10, 9 and 8 and the westerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Dorsey Street; thence southerly along said centerline to the centerline of said Bass Avenue; thence westerly along last said centerline to the northerly prolongation of Lee Street; thence southerly to the POINT OF BEGINNING and excepting therefrom Lots 7, 8, 10 and 11 of Anthony's Addition as recorded in Book 80 at page 14, said lots currently being zoned O-MF. 
The provisions of this section 29-2.3(a)(3)(ii) and all subsections thereof shall apply only to the East Campus Urban Conservation District. All regulations of Chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbia, Missouri, including regulations pertaining to the underlying zoning districts shall apply to property within the East Campus Urban Conservation District except where modified by this Section 29-2.3(a)(3)(ii) or all subsections thereof. 
(B)  Exemptions. 
1)  The regulations in the East Campus Urban Conservation District shall not apply to any land in district PD or M-OF. 
2)  The regulations in the East Campus Urban Conservation District shall not apply to the following uses: hospitals, mosques, synagogues, public schools, private colleges or churches. 
(C)  Uses. Rooming houses, boardinghouses or lodging houses. One-family dwellings may not be converted to rooming houses as defined in the Rental Unit Conservation Law (chapter 22, article V of the City Code) or to boardinghouses or lodging houses after September 17, 2005. 
(D)  Standards and criteria. The following criteria apply in the East Campus Urban Conservation District: 
1)  Building height. If a building that does not conform to the building height requirement of the underlying zoning district is damaged by fire or natural disaster, it may be rebuilt to its previous lawful nonconforming height, plus three feet but shall not be rebuilt to exceed the previous number of stories. 
2)  Roof pitch. Seventy-five (75) percent of the roof area on newly constructed non-accessory structures shall have a minimum slope of four units vertical in twelve units horizontal. 
3)  Windows. A replacement window that faces a street shall reasonably match the appearance of remaining windows and shall be at least seventy-five (75) percent of the size of the original window. Infill material for removed or replaced windows shall reasonably match the exterior wall material. This section shall not apply to windows that are part of a porch that has been converted to habitable space before passage of the East Campus Urban Conservation District. 
4)  Trash. A dumpster, other than a temporary dumpster, shall not be located in a required front yard. A dumpster located between the midpoint of a building and the required front yard shall be screened on the street side with a wooden fence. A dumpster installed after the passage of the East Campus Urban Conservation District shall be located on a hard surface at or behind the midpoint of the building. Roll carts must be located on the side or in the back of the building unless driveways, stairs, landscaping, proximity to another person's living area or other circumstances make back or side placement impractical. 
5)  New duplexes and apartments on legal lots at least sixty (60) feet wide. Duplexes (in district R-2 or R-MF) and multiple-family structures (in district R-MF) built after passage of the East Campus Urban Conservation District on legal lots established before January 1, 2002 that are at least sixty (60) feet wide at the building line may be constructed either in accordance with the standards of chapter 29 of the City Code or in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  The total number of bedrooms in the building shall not exceed four (4) for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of the legal lot. A studio is considered one bedroom. 
(ii)  A total of four (4) people are allowed in any combination of dwelling units for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of the legal lot. 
(iii)  One parking space is required for each two (2) bedrooms in the structure. 
6)  New two (2) or more story structures on small R-MF legal lots. Two (2) or more story (excluding basement) duplex and multiple-family structures built after passage of the East Campus Urban Conservation District on legal lots, established before January 1, 2002, less than sixty (60) feet wide at the building line in district R-MF may be constructed either in accordance with the standards of chapter 29 of the City Code or in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  The structure shall contain no more than four (4) bedrooms and no more than four (4) dwelling units. 
(ii)  The total number of persons over the age of seventeen (17) residing in the structure shall not exceed the number of bedrooms in the structure. A studio is considered one bedroom. 
(iii)  The number of required parking spaces shall equal the number of bedrooms in the structure. 
7)  Lot size and parking waiver. The lot size and required parking requirements of chapter 29 of the City Code shall not apply to any property in district R-MF that has a change of use to duplex or multiple dwelling units provided that: 
(i)  There is no increase in the number of bedrooms, 
(ii)  The width of the property is forty-five (45) feet or more, 
(iii)  The exterior architectural features of the structure are not modified, 
(iv)  The footprint of the structure is not enlarged more than one foot in any direction. 
(E)  Violations and penalties. The violations and penalties provisions of section 29-6.6 of the City Code of the City of Columbia, Missouri shall apply to the provisions of any regulation contained within the East Campus Urban Conservation District so that a violation of any provision contained within the East Campus Urban Conservation District shall be the same as a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(F)  Amendments. At least fifteen (15) days prior to consideration by the city council, the director shall notify any neighborhood association of which the director is aware, in writing, at the last known address of the president of such association on file with the department, of a request to amend the East Campus Urban Conservation District. In addition, the director shall make a good faith effort to notify the property owner of each tract located within the district by sending a notice to the last known address on file with the office of neighborhood services or the Boone County Assessor. The notice shall include a copy of the amendment proposed within the East Campus Urban Conservation District for review and comment by the neighborhood association. 
(4)  Designation procedure. The city may designate areas, tracts or sites for inclusion in an urban conservation district pursuant to section 29-6.4(n) (ordinance text and zoning map amendments) subject to compliance with this section. 
(i)  A proposal to designate a UC-O district may be made by the council, or by council recognized neighborhood organizations of the area to be designated, or by property owners in the area to be designated. If not initiated by council, the application requires (a) a petition signed by the owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the parcels of land within the boundaries of the proposed district or property owners representing fifty (50) percent or more of the area of land to be designated and (b) a statement documenting the conditions justifying a UC-O district designation and the purposes and intent of the designation. 
(ii)  If the director confirms that the application meets the requirements of subsection (i) above, the city shall work with the applicant(s) to prepare a draft ordinance reflecting the intent of the application, and the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and notice shall be given to all owners of affected property in accordance with the requirements of section 29-6.3(c) (notice of public hearing). 
(iii)  The commission may solicit and present expert testimony or documented evidence regarding the importance and effects of urban conservation within the proposed district. Testimony from neighborhood organizations affected shall be directly solicited and considered by the commission. 
(iv)  Following a public hearing and recommendation from the commission, council shall take action on the application pursuant to section 29-6.4(n) (ordinance text and zoning map amendments). 
(v)  An application to amend an approved UC-O district designation may be initiated and shall be reviewed and may be approved using the same procedures used for designation of the UC-O district. 
(5)  Designation ordinance. The ordinance designating the UC-O district shall identify the district boundaries, which shall be compact, contiguous and uniform, and may also include provisions governing: 
(i)  Permitted, conditional, or prohibited use of land; 
(ii)  Use-specific standards for particular uses of land; 
(iii)  Density or intensity of land use such as minimum lot size, maximum floor area, floor area ratios, number of dwelling units per acre, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, or other related provisions; 
(iv)  Area and bulk restrictions including setbacks, maximum lot coverage, height controls, open space requirements and other related provisions; 
(v)  Parking regulations such as the number of required spaces per type of use, the location and design of parking areas, lighting, and other related provisions; 
(vi)  Landscaping and screening; and 
(vii)  Sign regulations. 
(6)  Designation criteria. The commission may recommend approval of a UC-O district, and council may approve a UC-O district, if it determines that the following criteria are satisfied: 
(i)  A substantial portion of the property owners, residents or tenants of the proposed UC-O district area desire and support urban conservation efforts; 
(ii)  District designation conforms to adopted city plans and policies; and 
(iii)  UC-O district designation would be an appropriate and effective method for conserving the existing area and preventing development that would erode that character. 
(b)  SR-O scenic roadway overlay. 
(1)  Purposes. The SR-O district is intended to promote the conservation, preservation and enhancement of the scenic, natural and historic qualities and landscape of scenic roadway areas as well as promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The purposes of the district are: 
(i)  To preserve the scenic character of designated roadways and, where possible, preserve scenic views from the roadways; 
(ii)  To maintain the natural beauty of the landscape as it currently exists along designated roadways; 
(iii)  To encourage development that is compatible with and, where possible, enhances such natural beauty; and 
(iv)  To encourage safe and efficient traffic flow along designated scenic roadways for all modes of travel. 
(2)  Minimum width of SR-O district. The minimum lot width at the right-of-way line of a designated scenic road for R-MF district and nonresidential zoning districts shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
(3)  Approved SR-O districts. The following SR-O districts have been approved by the council, and the regulations applicable in each district are on file with the department. The provisions of each SR-O district affect the areas shown for that district below. 
(i)  Rock Quarry Road. 
 
(4)  Site development regulations. All land and buildings within an approved SR-O district shall comply with all regulations of the underlying zoning district and applicable sign regulations, unless modified by one of the following, in which case the standards in this subsection shall apply: 
(i)  Underground utilities. All on-site utilities shall be located underground unless required by the utility to be otherwise located. 
(ii)  Vegetative buffer. The existing vegetative buffer shall be maintained on any part of the property that is located (a) within seventy-five (75) feet of the centerline of a local residential street, or (b) within eighty-three (83) feet of the centerline of a collector street, or (c) within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of an arterial street. Installed landscaping may be added to the vegetative buffer area to meet screening requirements defined elsewhere in this Code. 
(iii)  Addressing. Where building addressing requirements of chapter 24 cannot be met due to the vegetative buffer or a building's distance from the roadway, the address or addresses shall be clearly marked at the roadway's edge by the property owner in a manner acceptable to the director. 
(iv)  Signs. The sign regulations of section 29-4.8 shall apply, except where modified in this subsection. Only monument signs are allowed. A monument sign is a sign attached directly to the ground or a base attached directly to the ground and not supported by poles, uprights or braces. Internal lighting of signs, neon or flashing signs, and roof signs shall not be permitted. All spotlights and exterior lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and the scenic roadways. 
(v)  Building floodlighting. Building floodlighting is not permitted in nonresidential zoning districts within the scenic roadway area. 
(vi)  Minimum driveway spacing. The minimum distance between the center of driveways onto a designated scenic roadway shall be two hundred twenty (220) feet for any tract, lot or parcel. No tract, lot or parcel shall have more than two (2) driveways. 
(5)  Designation procedure. The following procedure shall be followed in designating scenic roadways: 
(i)  A proposal to designate a scenic roadway may be made by (a) the council, or (b) an application by interested citizens, citizen groups or a recognized neighborhood organization, or (c) an application signed by owners of fifty (50) percent or more of all parcels of land with frontage along the proposed scenic roadway segment. 
(ii)  The application must include a statement identifying the criteria set forth herein that support the scenic roadway designation and shall state the purposes and intent of the designation. 
(iii)  City staff shall prepare a report for the commission, and the commission shall hold a public hearing on the SR-O district designation request. The staff report and the recommendations of the commission shall be forwarded to the council, which will conduct a public hearing to take action on the proposed designation. 
(6)  Designation criteria. The commission may recommend approval of an SR-O district, and council may approve an SR-O district, if it determines that the following criteria are satisfied: 
(i)  The street affords the opportunity for the public to enjoy the natural beauty of hills, valleys, creek bottoms or vegetation; 
(ii)  The street is adjacent to significant natural landscape elements such as undisturbed native tree associations, rock formations and old growth trees; 
(iii)  The street offers scenic views or vistas from the roadway; 
(iv)  The street traverses or is adjacent to environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, woodlands, park land or private conservation areas; and 
(v)  In all instances, the proposed scenic roadway shall be comprised of contiguous roadway sections and have readily identifiable termini such as creeks, bridges, arterial streets or other prominent physical landmarks. 
(7)  Plan, design, and management. 
(i)  Within ninety (90) days after designation of a SR-O district by council, the public works department shall initiate a corridor study and planning process, to identify existing conditions, estimate future land use and transportation infrastructure needs, and work with an appointed stakeholder advisory group to determine values and preferences regarding scenic preservation and roadway design within and along the corridor. The corridor plan shall result in the development of goals, objectives, policies and recommendations to guide future land use, transportation planning, and design decisions. 
(ii)  The council shall appoint a corridor plan stakeholder advisory group of up to fifteen (15) members with the following composition: one-third (?) shall be residents who live along the affected scenic road corridor, including at least one resident property owner; one-third (?) shall be representatives of the general public, who may be from various interested citizen groups; and one-third (?) shall be officials, including members of the commission, the environment and energy commission, the parks and recreation commission, the bicycle and pedestrian commission, and the council member from the affected ward. 
(iii)  With input from the advisory group, the public works department staff shall prepare the corridor plan. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the scenic roadway corridor plan, and the staff report and the recommendations of the commission shall be forwarded to the council. The council will conduct a public hearing to take action on the proposed corridor plan. 
(8)  Roadway design. Roadway design, including the design of proposed alterations and improvements, shall be coordinated with the city's capital improvement project schedule and shall substantially conform to the adopted corridor plan. Public input shall be collected by the public works department during the design phase. 
(i)  Timing. Any improvements recommended by the corridor plan should be considered for inclusion in the city's capital improvement program, which is used to coordinate scheduling, funding, design, and construction of future capital projects, and is subject to council approval. 
(ii)  Consistency with corridor plan. The design of any roadway improvements shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the corridor plan. Pedestrian and bicyclist facilities and access management shall also be considered in the roadway design, understanding that design options that are away from the road may need to be designed to preserve and enhance the scenic quality of the road. 
(iii)  Stakeholder advisory group. The stakeholder advisory group shall weigh the level of service needs of all intended roadway users against S-R district preservation goals in proposing specific design options for the roadway. 
(iv)  Modifications to city roadway design standards. Modifications to the applicable city roadway design standards should be considered to aid in preserving scenic characteristics of the roadway. The use of materials that blend into and complement the scenic characteristics of the roadway, including, but not limited to, stone and timber, should be used for bridges, guard rails, guideposts and other engineered structures, provided that they meet safety standards set forth in The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials Roadside Design Guide. Scenic road curves should be retained as much as possible, speed limited, and no curve banking. 
(v)  Public involvement process. Public involvement during the scenic roadway design phase shall consist of regular pre-design stakeholder input meetings, as needed, to fully address design issues, followed by at least one additional stakeholder input meeting once a preliminary design has been completed by the public works department. Upon completion of a preliminary roadway design, city staff shall prepare a report for the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed design. The recommendations of the planning and zoning commission and the staff report shall be forwarded to the council, which will conduct a public hearing in accordance with the standard public improvement process set forth in chapter 22 of the City Code and take action on the proposed roadway design. 
(9)  Routine maintenance. The city shall maintain scenic roadways in good repair and in passable condition by routine maintenance. However, such routine maintenance shall be performed in a manner to protect and maintain the scenic characteristics of the roadway to the extent feasible. For the purposes of this section, the term "routine maintenance" shall include: 
(i)  Road cleaning, including removal of snow or other debris from the road surface. 
(ii)  Removal of dead, seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches that pose a threat to public safety; trimming branches to allow school buses, emergency vehicles, and other vehicles to pass; (the corridor plan may prohibit larger vehicles from using the road or they may be limited by the council to preserve the scenic quality of the road); trimming and removal of brush and removal of boulders and other obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion of the road or obstruct established sight lines required for safety; necessary cutting and trimming of brush or trees for utility lines (as established in the corridor plan); and trimming of brush to enhance and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees, and other scenic characteristics of the scenic road as set forth in its designation. 
(iii)  The correction of road drainage problems, including, but not limited to, the removal of trees, shrubs, silt and other material from existing drainage structures, and the replacement of cross culverts, drains and cross culvert drainage pipes. If correction of the problem involves removing the vegetative buffer, then this must come before the stakeholder advisory group for the group's input and approval. 
(iv)  Graveling (or its equivalent) and grading to smooth the surface of unpaved roads, provided that the nature and characteristics of the material used on the road surface remains the same or the surface is restored to a prior passable condition using natural materials such as crushed rock or native stone or the equivalent. 
(v)  Repaving, retreatment, or repair of existing paved surfaces, curbs and gutters, that does not require the widening of the traveled path or the removal of trees or stone walls or changing the grade or configuration. For purposes of this subsection, "widening of the traveled path" means extending the traveled path beyond its width prior to repaving. Periodic edging out to maintain unpaved shoulders shall be considered routine maintenance if it does not remove the existing vegetative buffer. 
(vi)  Repair or replacement of existing bridges, guard posts, rails and other engineered structures, in accordance with the corridor plan. 
(vii)  Installation of signs, including reflectors, warning, speed limit, and other roadway signs that are installed in accordance with standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, or any successor publication used for the same purpose by the public works department. 
(10)  Alterations and improvements. Any proposed alteration or improvement to a scenic roadway shall follow the public involvement process for roadway design above. For the purposes of this section, the terms "alteration" and "improvement" are defined as any change to the roadway, other than routine maintenance, including the following: 
(i)  Any change to the width of the traveled path of the right-of-way; 
(ii)  Any change to the alignment, grade or elevation of the roadway; 
(iii)  Any change to the nature and characteristics of the material used on the road surface; 
(iv)  The removal of visible boulders that do not pose a safety hazard; 
(v)  The removal or cutting of trees, shrubs, or other vegetation within the un-traveled portion of the road; 
(vi)  The installation of new bridges, guard posts, rails and other engineered structures where no such structure currently exists; and 
(vii)  The installation of sidewalks, pedways, bike paths, or nature trails. 
(c)  HP-O historic preservation overlay. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the city by: 
(i)  Conserving and improving the value of property within the HP-O district; 
(ii)  Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to home buyers, home owners, residents, tourists, visitors, and shoppers, thereby supporting and promoting business, commerce, industry, and providing economic benefit to the city; 
(iii)  Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive historic and architectural characteristics of the city; 
(iv)  Fostering civic pride in the aesthetics and cultural accomplishments of the past as represented in the city's landmarks and historic areas; 
(v)  Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of structures, areas, and neighborhoods; and 
(vi)  Promoting the use of landmarks and historic areas for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  Historic preservation commission. 
(i)  The historic preservation commission is hereby established, and shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the council each of whom shall serve without compensation. Every attempt should be made to establish a balance of representation among members, and all members should have a demonstrated interest in historic preservation. Of the seven (7) members, there should be one with background and expertise in historic preservation and one with background and expertise as a real estate investor. The other five (5) members should include representatives from such disciplines as: architecture, design, law, real estate appraisal, and construction/general contracting, as well as a lay person active in historic preservation. 
(ii)  Two (2) of the initial members shall serve terms of one year, two (2) shall serve terms of two (2) years and three (3) shall serve terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, the terms of office for members of the historic preservation commission shall be three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms only. 
(iii)  The historic preservation commission shall elect from its members a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary. Officers shall serve for one year and shall be eligible for reelection. The chair shall preside over all meetings. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall preside. The secretary shall prepare minutes and other necessary records of historic preservation commission meetings. 
(iv)  The historic preservation commission shall meet regularly and at the call of the chair. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from twenty-five (25) percent of the regular commission meetings held in a calendar year shall automatically forfeit the office. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall automatically forfeit the office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the council of the vacancy. The commission shall act upon all completed applications for certificates of appropriateness and economic hardship at the meeting. 
(3)  Powers and duties. The historic preservation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(i)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its business that are consistent with the purposes of the commission and the requirements of the City Code, which shall be approved by council ordinance; 
(ii)  To conduct an ongoing survey for the identification of historically, archaeologically and architecturally significant properties, structures, sites and areas that exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the nation, state or city; and to maintain the research information in an inventory accessible to the public (except for archaeological site locations, which shall be restricted); 
(iii)  To investigate and recommend to the planning and zoning commission and council the adoption of ordinances designating for protection areas as having special cultural, historic, archaeological, community or architectural value as "notable property;" 
(iv)  To investigate and recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the council the adoption of ordinances designating for protection properties or structures having special cultural, historic, archaeological, community or architectural value as "landmarks;" 
(v)  To investigate and recommend to the commission and the council the adoption of ordinances designating for protection areas as having special cultural, historic, archaeological, community or architectural value as "historic districts;" 
(vi)  To keep a register of all properties and structures which have been designated as "notable properties," "landmarks" or "historic districts," including all information required for each designation; 
(vii)  To confer recognition upon the owners of "notable properties," "landmarks" and property or structures within "historic districts" by means of certificates, plaques or markers; and to make recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes leading from one "notable property," "landmark" or "historic district" to another; 
(viii)  To advise and assist owners of historically significant property or structures on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse; 
(ix)  To nominate "notable properties," "landmarks" and "historic districts" to the National Register of Historic Places, and to review and comment on any nominations to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(x)  To inform and educate the citizens of the city concerning the historic, archaeological and architectural heritage of the city through publication or sponsorship of maps, newsletters, brochures, pamphlets, programs and seminars by the city, the commission or other appropriate parties; 
(xi)  To review applications for construction, alteration, removal or demolition affecting historically significant property. To hold public hearings on proposed or designated "landmarks" or structures within "historic districts" and issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions. Applicants may be required to submit plans, drawings, elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary to make decisions; 
(xii)  To hold public hearings on each proposed nomination of a National Register Landmark and of a "historic district" and on the guidelines developed for each nomination; 
(xiii)  To recommend that the director issue a stop work order for any construction, alteration, removal or demolition which would require a certificate of appropriateness for which a certificate has not been issued or to stop work that violates the conditions of a certificate; 
(xiv)  To consider applications for certificates of economic hardship that would allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied; 
(xv)  To develop specific design guidelines based on the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation for the alteration, construction or removal of designated "landmarks" or property and structures within historic preservation overlay districts; 
(xvi)  To review and comment on proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use permits or applications for zoning variances that affect historically significant property, including but not limited to proposed or designated "notable properties," proposed or designated "landmarks" or "historic districts;" 
(xvii)  To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for technical advice; 
(xviii)  To advise the council on the need to retain such specialists or consultants or to appoint such citizen advisory committees as may be required from time to time; 
(xix)  To testify before all boards and commissions, including the planning and zoning commission and the board of adjustment, on any matter affecting historically, archaeologically, culturally and architecturally significant property, structures, sites and areas; 
(xx)  To review any proposed change of zoning, zoning variance or any matter affecting historically, archaeologically, culturally and architecturally significant property, structures, sites and areas, upon referral from the planning and zoning commission or council; 
(xxi)  To make recommendations to the council concerning budgetary appropriations to further the general purposes of this ordinance; 
(xxii)  To develop a preservation component in the comprehensive plan and to recommend it to the planning and zoning commission and to the council; 
(xxiii)  To periodically review the Unified Development Code and to recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of historically significant property, "notable property," "landmarks" or property, sites and structures within "historic districts;" and 
(xxiv)  To review and comment on applications for demolition permits referred to the commission by the building official pursuant to the city's adopted building code(s). The commission may advise the property owner of any historical significance of the building to be demolished and recommend alternatives. The commission may document historic resources to be demolished. The commission shall have no authority to deny an application for a demolition permit. 
(4)  Applicability. The provisions of this section 29-2.30 shall apply to all property designated as a historic landmark or historic district as set forth in the sections that follow, subject to the clarifications and exceptions listed in the subsections below: 
(i)  City property. Proposed improvements, alterations, demolition or clearance to a building, site, structure, or object owned by the city which has been designated a landmark or is within a historic district shall be approved according to the procedures and regulations of this section 29-2.3(c). 
(ii)  Property owned by public agencies. To accomplish the purposes of this section 29-2.3(c), the city may enter into agreements with other units of government. The historic preservation commission may recommend and the council may authorize such agreements. Such agreements may address, designation of landmarks and historic districts; administration of historic preservation fund resources; improvements to landmarks, properties in historic districts, and properties adjacent to landmarks and historic districts; and other mutually acceptable provisions. 
(iii)  Religious institutions. Religious institutions in current use as houses of worship are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(iv)  Prior permits. Nothing contained in this section shall affect any building permit, demolition permit or land disturbance permit issued for property which becomes part of the HP-O district if the permit was issued prior to such designation. 
(5)  Landmark and historic district designation procedure. 
(i)  A petition to designate a landmark may be made only by the owner(s) of the proposed landmark. A petition to designate a historic district may be made only by the owners of at least sixty (60) percent of the Boone County tax map parcels in the proposed historic district. If a tax map parcel has more than one owner, all such owners must sign any petition mentioned in this section before the parcel shall be counted as supporting the petition and the parcel shall receive only one vote, regardless of the number of owners. 
(ii)  A petition to designate a landmark or historic district shall be on a form provided by the director and approved by the historic preservation commission. The petition shall clearly identify all historic and architectural features proposed for regulation. The petition shall identify the facts which support a determination that the proposed landmark or historic district meets the criteria for designation set forth below. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the petition shall be handled in the same manner as a petition for rezoning. Prior to setting a date for a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the director shall forward a copy of the petition to the historic preservation commission for its review. The historic preservation commission shall prepare a report to the planning and zoning commission and the council setting forth its recommendation on whether the proposed landmark or historic district meets the criteria for designation set forth in this section. 
(iii)  Not less than sixty (60) days prior to the circulation of any petition herein within a district or to create a district, affected Boone County tax parcel owners must be notified by certified mail of the nomination or other matter on which a petition is to be circulated, and all proposed regulations shall be clearly identified. Proof of such mailing shall be made to the historic preservation commission at the time it considers the petition, and the cost of the mailing shall be borne by the person or organization sponsoring or otherwise promoting the petition. 
(iv)  The ordinance placing property within the HP-O district shall designate the property as a landmark or as a historic district. The ordinance may designate a structure within a historic district as a landmark. The ordinance shall identify all historical and architectural features that shall be subject to regulation. No interior features shall be identified in any structure in a historic district unless the structure is designated as a landmark. 
(v)  Overall boundaries for local historic districts shall be determined by the same standards used by the National Register of Historic Places, as laid out in Defining Boundaries for National Register Properties: National Register Bulletin 21 (Washington D.C.; U.S. Department of the Interior, 1995; rev. 1977) and included within the UDC Administrative Manual. Gerrymandering that has the apparent effect of overwhelming significant areas of opposition is prohibited. 
(6)  Criteria for designation. In order to be designated as a landmark or historic district, a structure or district must have sufficient integrity of location, design, materials and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration and it must meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  It has character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of Columbia, Boone County, Missouri, or the United States; 
(ii)  It is the site of a significant local, county, state or national event; 
(iii)  It is identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of Columbia, Boone County, Missouri, or the United States; 
(iv)  It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials; 
(v)  It is the work of a master builder, designer, architect, or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of Columbia, Boone County, Missouri, or the United States; 
(vi)  It contains elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant; 
(vii)  It contains design elements that are structurally or architecturally innovative; 
(viii)  Its unique location or physical characteristics make it an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood or city; 
(ix)  It has yielded or may likely yield information important in prehistory or history; 
(x)  Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance; 
(xi)  Its suitability for preservation or restoration; or 
(xii)  It is at least fifty (50) years old or of most unusual historical significance. 
(7)  List of designated local historic districts and landmarks. 
(i)  David Guitar House, 2815 Oakland Gravel Road (District). 
(ii)  Miller Building, 823 East Broadway (District). 
(iii)  Taylor House Inn, 716 West Broadway (District). 
(iv)  Wright Brothers Mule Barn (now Fay Street Lofts), 1101 Hinkson Avenue (District). 
(8)  Certificate of appropriateness required. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for interior construction or alteration of any structure in a historic district unless the structure has been designated a landmark. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following actions affecting any historic or architectural feature identified in the ordinance placing the property in the HP-O district may be undertaken: 
(i)  Any construction, alteration, removal, or any demolition in whole or in part regardless of whether a permit from the city is required. 
(ii)  Any construction, alteration, removal or demolition, in whole or in part, proposed by the city, for a city-owned landmark or structure within a historic district. 
(9)  Certificate of appropriateness procedure. 
(i)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made on forms provided by the director and approved by the historic preservation commission. The application shall identify the facts which support a determination that the proposed actions meet the standards for review and design guidelines set forth in subsection (10) below. 
(ii)  After determining that the application for certificate of appropriateness is complete, the director shall schedule the application for consideration by the historic preservation commission within a reasonable time. If a fully completed application for a certificate of appropriateness has not been acted upon within forty (40) days after the date the application was filed with the director, it shall be deemed approved, unless tabled or continued with the consent of the applicant. No motion to table or continue shall be made without the consent of the applicant. The director shall conspicuously place a sign on the property giving public notice of the meeting at which the application shall be considered. The sign shall be placed at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. 
(iii)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the historic preservation commission may appeal to the board by filing a notice of appeal with the director within thirty (30) days of the decision of the historic preservation commission. Notice of the historic preservation commission's decision shall be mailed to the applicant unless the applicant or the applicant's agent was present at the meeting at which the decision was made. The board shall provide a hearing and render a decision in accordance with the provisions of RSMo. Ch. 536. 
(10)  Standards for certificate decision and design guidelines. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall be guided by the following standards, and design guidelines in addition to any area-specific design guidelines included in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district. 
(i)  Reasonable efforts shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. 
(ii)  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
(iii)  Building alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall not be allowed. 
(iv)  Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and its environment. When these changes have acquired significance in their own right, they shall be treated the same as if they were part of the original structure. 
(v)  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be preserved when possible. 
(vi)  Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired, rather than replaced, whenever practicable. If replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be based upon accurate duplication of features, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
(vii)  The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
(viii)  Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project. 
(ix)  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties and for new construction may be permitted when such alterations, additions or new construction do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, material and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
(x)  Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
(xi)  The height of any proposed alteration or construction shall be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with surrounding structures. 
(xii)  The proportions and relationships between doors and windows shall be compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark, and with surrounding structures. 
(xiii)  The relationship of a structure to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible. 
(xiv)  The design of the roof should be compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark and surrounding structures. 
(xv)  The scale of the structure after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and character and with surrounding structures. 
(xvi)  Façades should blend with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures. The directional expression of a landmark after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style and character. 
(xvii)  Architectural details including materials and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark compatible with its original character or significant architectural style and to preserve and enhance the landmark or historic district. 
(11)  Signs. 
(i)  Signs in the HP-O district are subject to the general sign regulations of the City Code. In addition, all signs for a landmark or structures in a historic district not specified in the application for landmark or historic district designation must receive a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission, which shall review the proposed sign in accordance with the following general guidelines: 
(A)  Additional sign restrictions included in the ordinance which designates a landmark or historic district; and 
(B)  Signs shall be designed and placed so as to appear an integral part of the building design, and to respect the neighboring properties and the district in general. Signs shall be designed with appropriateness relative to the services of the establishment served. 
(ii)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of normal "for rent" and "for sale" signs as permitted by the section 29-4.8 (signs). Any owner offering property for sale which is located within the HP-O district is required to advise potential purchasers that the property is located within the HP-O district. Any person violating this subsection shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be fined as provided for in chapter 16 of the City Code. 
(12)  Certificate of economic hardship. 
(i)  A person whose application for a certificate of appropriateness has been denied or granted conditionally may apply for a certificate of economic hardship. Alternatively, an application for a certificate of economic hardship may be filed with the application for certificate of appropriateness. Application shall be made on forms provided by the director and approved by the historic preservation commission. If a fully completed application for a certificate of economic hardship has not been acted upon within forty (40) days after the date the application was filed with the director, it shall be deemed approved, unless tabled or continued with the consent of the applicant. No motion to table or continue shall be made without the consent of the applicant. The application shall identify facts which support a determination that denial of the application will deprive the owner of the property of reasonable use of or a reasonable economic return on the property. An application for certificate of economic hardship may include any or all of the information below: 
(A)  Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the historic preservation commission for changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
(B)  A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation; 
(C)  Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal; after any changes recommended by the historic preservation commission; and, in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for continued use; 
(D)  In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property; 
(E)  Applicant may demonstrate with factual data/evidence that the hardship is not self-created. If the property is income producing, the applicant may provide detailed annual income and expense reports for the property for the last two (2) years, rent rates and capitalization rates for the property and comparable properties, and any other pertinent information that would substantiate the applicant's claim concerning economic hardship; 
(F)  Appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
(G)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two (2) years; 
(H)  Assessed value of the property; 
(I)  Real estate taxes; and 
(J)  Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or other. 
(ii)  An application for a certificate of economic hardship, if not filed with the application for certificate of appropriateness, must be made within sixty (60) days of a decision on the application for certificate of appropriateness. The director shall schedule the application for consideration by the historic preservation commission within a reasonable time. The director shall conspicuously place a sign on the property giving public notice of the meeting at which the application shall be considered. The sign shall be placed at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. 
(iii)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the historic preservation commission may appeal to the board by filing a notice of appeal with the director within thirty (30) days of the decision of the historic preservation commission. Notice of the historic preservation commission's decision shall be mailed to the applicant unless the applicant or the applicant's agent was present at the meeting at which the decision was made. The board shall provide a hearing and render a decision in accordance with the provisions of RSMo. Ch. 536. 
(13)  Continuing validity of certificates. Certificates of appropriateness and certificates of economic hardship shall become void if the work authorized by the certificate is not commenced within six (6) months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness and certificates of economic hardship shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(14)  Variances. The historic preservation commission may make recommendations to the board to allow variances for standard parking and lot line requirements for property in the HP-O district, where such variances will aid in the retention of the property's historic character and appearance. The historic preservation commission shall also make recommendations to allow designated properties to be utilized for noncomplying uses if such use would serve to perpetuate the viable contemporary utilization of the historic structure. 
(15)  Review. District boundaries and designation status may be reviewed after no less than ten (10) years, at the request of either the historic preservation commission or the petition of the owners of at least sixty (60) of the Boone County tax parcels in the district. After the initial ten-year period, district boundaries and designation status may be reviewed no more often than once every five (5) years. 
(d)  FP-O floodplain overlay. 
(1)  Authority. The council enacts these floodplain management regulations under its authority to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the health, safety and general welfare which authority was granted to the City of Columbia as a home rule charter city by the people of the State of Missouri in Article VI, Section 19(a) of the Missouri Constitution and by the General Assembly of the State of Missouri in RSMo Ch. 89. 
(2)  Findings of fact. 
(i)  Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood hazard areas of Columbia, Missouri, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(ii)  General causes of these flood losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodways causing increases in flood heights and velocities, (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(iii)  The flood insurance study (FIS) that is the basis of this ordinance use standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of interrelated steps: 
(A)  Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this ordinance is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials for Boone County, Missouri, dated April 19, 2017 as amended, and any future revisions thereto; 
(B)  Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood; 
(C)  Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point; 
(D)  Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any increase in flood height; and 
(E)  Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
(3)  Purpose. The purpose of the floodplain overlay district is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in subsection (2) above and to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations 59.22(a)(3), and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this section to: 
(i)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(ii)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(iii)  Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 
(4)  General provisions. 
(i)  Lands to which ordinance applies. This section shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Columbia identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for Boone County on map panels 29019C0165D, 29019C0260D and 29019C0355D dated March 17, 2011 and on map panels 29019C0169E, 29019C0170E, 29019C0188E, 29019C0266E, 29019C0267E, 29019C0270E, 29019C0280E, 29019C0281E, 29019C0282E, 29019C0283E, 29019C0284E, 29019C0286E, 29019C0287E, 29019C0290E, 29019C0291E, 29019C0292E, 29019C0295E, 29019C0305E, 29019C0315E, and 29019C0335E, dated April 19, 2017 as amended, and any future revisions thereto, and that portion of the X zone shaded, other flood areas, which is in the upper square mile of a flood drainage area. In all areas covered by this section, no development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop granted by the director under such safeguards and restriction as the director may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare and health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in this section. 
(ii)  The enforcement officer. The director of community development is hereby designated as the duly designated local floodplain administrator under this section. 
(iii)  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the floodway, flood fringe, and flood drainage area shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the flood insurance rate map or floodway map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the director shall make the necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the board will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a case to the board and to submit technical evidence, if desired. 
(iv)  Compliance. No development within known flood hazard areas of the city shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(v)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this section 29-2.3(d) to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section 29-2.3(d) imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section 29-2.3(d) shall prevail. 
(vi)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(vii)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section 29-2.3(d) is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This section 29-2.3(d) does not imply that areas outside of the floodway, flood fringe, and flood drainage area boundaries or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This section 29-2.3(d) shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(viii)  Appeal. Where a request for a floodplain development permit to develop or for a variance is denied by the director the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance to these regulations directly to the board. 
(5)  Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for development in this floodplain overlay district. 
(6)  Administration. The director of community development is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. Duties of the director shall include, but not be limited to: 
(i)  Review all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this section have been satisfied; 
(ii)  Review all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(iii)  Issue floodplain development permits for approved applications; 
(iv)  Notify adjacent communities, the State of Missouri Emergency Management Agency, the Missouri Clean Water Commission, and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(v)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(vi)  Verify, record, and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(vii)  Verify, record, and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been floodproofed; and 
(viii)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the director of community development shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(7)  Application for permit. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
(i)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; 
(ii)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
(iii)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(iv)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; 
(v)  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; and 
(vi)  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the director. 
(8)  General provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(i)  No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and other improvements including the placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE, AO and AH zones) and that portion of the X zone shaded, other flood areas, which is in the upper square mile of a flood drainage area, unless the conditions of this subsection are satisfied. 
(ii)  All areas identified as unnumbered A zones and X zones shaded, other flood areas, on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 1% annual chance flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this section. If flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state or other sources. 
(iii)  New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments shall require: 
(A)  Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(B)  New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and onsite waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination. 
(C)  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damage, and with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(D)  All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(E)  That until a floodway has been designated, no development, including landfill, may be permitted within zone AE and the flood drainage area (zone X shaded, other flood areas - upper square mile) on the city's FIRM unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 1% annual chance flood more than one foot on the average cross section of the reach in which the development or landfill is located as shown on the flood insurance rate study incorporated by reference per section 29-2.3(d)(4)(i). 
(F)  The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
(G)  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(iv)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that (1) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, (3) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and (4) proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals the regulatory flood elevation. 
(9)  Specific standards for flood hazard reduction. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section 29-2.3(d)(4)(i), the following provisions are required: 
(i)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvements of any residential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two (2) feet above base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (iii), below; 
(ii)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two (2) feet above base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 29-2.3(d)(6)(vii); 
(iii)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(A)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
(iv)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used on connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairways or elevator); and 
(v)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(10)  Manufactured homes. 
(i)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met: 
(A)  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
(B)  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side; 
(C)  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
(D)  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
(ii)  All manufactured homes to be placed within zones AH, AE and X shaded, other flood areas, on Columbia's FIRM on sites: 
(A)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(B)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(C)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(D)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of item (i), above. 
(iii)  Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones AH, AE and X shaded, other flood areas, on Columbia's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of item (i), above, shall be elevated so that either: 
(A)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
(B)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of item (i), above. 
(11)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within the identified floodplain on Columbia's FIRM shall either be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or its jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and it has no permanently attached additions. 
(12)  AH zones. Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(13)  AO zones. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section (b)(1) are areas designed as AO zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO Zones: 
(i)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two (2) feet above the depth number specified in feet on Columbia's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(ii)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
(A)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two (2) feet above the depth number specified in feet on Columbia's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(B)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 29-2.3(d)(6)(vii). 
(iii)  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(14)  Floodway area. 
(i)  Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the floodway district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments must be prohibited unless a "no-rise" certification statement by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided. A "no-rise" certification statement shall be accompanied by supporting documentation which shall adequately demonstrate that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. No use shall increase the flood levels of the regulatory flood elevation. These uses are subject to the standards of subsection (d). The following are recommended uses for the floodway district. 
(A)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry; 
(B)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas; 
(C)  Nonresidential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport landing strips; or 
(D)  Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves. 
(ii)  In zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data available through federal, state or other sources or section 29-2.3(d)(8)(iv), in meeting the standards of this subsection. 
(15)  Variance procedures. 
(i)  The board shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this section. 
(ii)  In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other subsections of this section, and: 
(A)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(B)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(C)  The susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(D)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(E)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(F)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(G)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(H)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(I)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(J)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(K)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(iii)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board on a floodplain variance application may appeal such decision to the circuit court of Boone County. 
(16)  Conditions for floodplain variances. 
(i)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (ii) through (vi) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(ii)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this subsection. 
(iii)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(iv)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(v)  Variances shall only be issued upon (1) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(vi)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(17)  Penalties for Violation. Violation of the provisions of this section 29-2.3(d) or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates section 29-2.3(d) or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(18)  Amendments. The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this section may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At least fifteen (15) days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulations of this section 29-2.3(d) are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.  
ARTICLE 3. - PERMITTED USES 
 
Sec. 29-3.1. - General. 
(a)  The permitted uses and conditional uses in each zone district, with the exception of the C-2 district located outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary, are allowed as indicated in Table 3.1 below. Additional uses of property or restrictions on the use of property may be contained in section 29-3.3 (use specific standards) or in an overlay zone district applicable to the property in section 29-2.3. If the property is located in a PD (planned development) zone district, the permitted uses and any conditions on those permitted uses are allowed as set forth in the rezoning ordinance and related documents for that property on file with the department. 
(1)  A "P" in a cell of the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicates that the use is permitted by-right in that zone district, subject to compliance with the use-specific standards in the right-hand column of that line of the table and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(2)  A "C" in a cell of the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicates that the use is permitted only after the applicant obtains conditional use approval pursuant to section (conditional use permit), and subject to the use-specific standards in the right-hand column of that line of the table and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(3)  An "A" in a cell of the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicates that the use is only permitted as an accessory to a permitted use and subject to the use-specific standards in the right-hand column of that line of the table and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(4)  A "CA" in a cell in the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicates that the use is only permitted as an accessory to a use that is first approved as a conditional use on the same property and subject to the use-specific standards in the right-hand column of that line of the table and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(5)  A "T" in a cell of the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicates that the use is permitted subject to a temporary use permit issued pursuant to section 29-6.4, and subject to the use-specific standards in the right-hand column of that line of the table and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(6)  Uses not listed and those with a blank cell in the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 indicate that the use is not permitted in that zone district. 
(7)  A development may include multiple principal uses, including a combination of residential and nonresidential uses, provided that each use is either a permitted use or a conditional use in that zone district, that a conditional use approval is obtained for any conditional use, all use-specific standards applicable to each use are met, the development complies with all applicable density, dimensional, impervious surface, development, and performance standards of this chapter. 
(8)  The director has the authority to interpret whether a proposed land use is included within a listed land use shown in the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 based on its scale, character, traffic impacts, storm drainage impacts, utility demands, and potential impacts on surrounding properties. 
(9)  Each use that exists on the effective date that is required by this Code to obtain conditional use approval, but that was a permitted use (without the need for conditional use approval) prior to the effective date is deemed to have a conditional use approval to (a) continue operation in structures and on land areas where the operation was conducted on the effective date and (b) to expand operations without the need to obtain a conditional use approval, provided that the expansion complies with all use-specific standards and all other applicable standards of this chapter. 
(10)  All uses required by the State of Missouri to have an approval, license, or permit to operate issued by the state or by another public or quasi-public or regulatory agency are required by the city to have that state approval, license, or permit in effect at all times, and failure to do so constitutes a violation of this Code. 
(b)  The permitted uses and conditional uses in the C-2 district located outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary are allowed as indicated in section 29-3.4 hereof and shall be subject to the use-specific standards set forth in section 29-3.4.  
Sec. 29-3.2. - Permitted use table. 
Table 29-3.1: COLUMBIA, MISSOURI, PERMITTED USE TABLE
P=Permitted use C=Conditional use A=Accessory use CA=Conditional Accessory use T=Temporary use 
Zoning District 	Residential 	Mixed Use 	Special Purpose 	Use-Specific Standards, in Section 29-3.3 
	R-1 	R-2 	R-MF 	R-MH 	M-OF 	M-N 	M-C 	M-DT 	M-BP 	IG 	A 	O 	PD 	
LAND USE CATEGORY 														
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Household Living 														
Dwelling, One-family Detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 		Per PD Approval 	(a) 
Dwelling, One-family Attached 		P 	P 		P 	P 								(b) 
Dwelling, Two-family 		P 	P 		P 	P 								
Dwelling, Live-work 			C 		P 	P 	P 	P 						(c) 
Dwelling, Multi-family 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 						(d) 
Manufactured Home Park 				P 										
Second Primary Dwelling Unit 											C 			(e) 
Group Living 														
Boarding House 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					Per PD Approval 	
Continuing Care Retirement Community 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 						(f) 
Dormitory/Fraternity/Sorority 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 						
Group Home, Large 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 						(g) 
Group Home, Small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 			(g) 
Halfway House 			C 		C 	C 	C 	C 						(h) 
Residential Care Facility 			C 		P 	P 	P 	P 						
Temporary Shelter 			C 		C 	C 	C 	C 						(i) 
PUBLIC and INSTITUTIONAL USES 
Adult and Child Care 														
Adult Day Care Center 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				Per PD 	
Family Day Care Center 	A 	A/C 	P 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		A 			(j) 
Community Service 														
Assembly or Lodge Hall 						C 	P 	P 		P 			Per PD Approval 	
Cemetery or Mausoleum 	C 	C 	C 	C 							P 			
Community/Recreation Center 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 			
Community Garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		(hh) 
Elementary/Secondary School 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Funeral Home or Mortuary 					C 	C 	P 	C 		P 				(k) 
Higher Education Institution 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 				(l) 
Hospital 					P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 				
Museum or Library 	C 	C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 			
Police or Fire Station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 			
Public Service Facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Public Park, Playground, or Golf Course 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 		
Religious Institution 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Reuse of Place of Public Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 										(m) 
Utilities and Communications 														
Communication Antenna or Tower as a Principal Use 	See section 29-3.3(n) 		(n) 
Public Utility Services, Major 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Public Utility Services, Minor 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) as a Principal Use 	See section 29-3.3(o) 		(o) 
COMMERCIAL USES 
Agriculture & Animal-Related 														
Agriculture 											P 		Per PD Approval 	
Farmer's Market 	T 	T 	T 		T 	P 	P 	T 	T 	P 	P 	P 		
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery 							P 			P 	P 			
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility 										P 	P 			(qq) 
Pet Store or Pet Grooming 						P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
Urban Agriculture 			C 		P 	P 	C 	C 			P 			(p) 
Veterinary Hospital 					C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 				(q) 
Food & Beverage Service 														
Bar or Nightclub 						C 	P 	P 		C 			Per PD 	
Restaurant 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				(r) 
Guest Accommodations 														
Bed and Breakfast 		C 	C 		C 	P 	P 	P 					Per PD 
Approval 	(s) 
Hotel 							P 	P 	P 	P 				
Travel Trailer Park 							C 				C 			
Office 														
Commercial or Trade School 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			Per PD Approval 	(t) 
Medical Marijuana Testing Facility 							P 		P 	P 				(qq) 
Office 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Research and Development Laboratory 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				(u) 
Wholesale Sales Office or Sample Room 							P 	P 	P 	P 				
Personal Services 														
Personal Services, General 					C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			Per PD 	(v) 
Self-service Storage Facilities 							P 	C 		P 				(w) 
Tree or Landscaping Service 							P 		P 	P 				(oo) 
Recreation & Entertainment 														
Indoor Recreation or Entertainment 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Indoor Entertainment, Adult 							C 			C 			Per PD Approval 	(x) 
Outdoor Recreation or Entertainment 							P 		C 	P 	C 	C 		(y) 
Physical Fitness Center 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Theatre, Drive-In 							C 			P 				
Retail 														
Alcoholic Beverage Sale 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			Per PD 
Approval 	(z) 
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility 							P 	P 		P 				(qq) 
Retail, Adult 							P 	P 		P 				(x) 
Retail, General 						P 	P 	P 		P 				(aa) 
Vehicles & Equipment 														
Car Wash 						C 	P 	P 	P 	P 			Per PD Approval 	
Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, and Servicing 										P 				
Light Vehicle Sales or Rental 							P 	P 	P 	P 				(bb) 
Light Vehicle Service or Repair 						C 	P 	P 	P 	P 				(cc) 
Major Vehicle Repair and Service 							P 		P 	P 				(cc) 
Parking Lot, Commercial 							P 	P 	P 	P 				
Parking Structure, Commercial 							P 	P 	P 	P 				
INDUSTRIAL USES 
Commercial Services 														
Heavy Commercial Services 							P 	P 		P 			Per PD Approval 	
Mechanical and Construction Contractors 							C 			P 				
Storage and Wholesale Distribution 									P 	P 				(dd) 
Manufacturing, Production and Extraction 														
Artisan Industry 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			Per PD Approval 	
Bakery 						C 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Heavy Industry 										C 				
Light Industry 									C 	P 				(ee) 
Machine Shop 							C 			P 				
Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing Facility 									P 	P 				(qq) 
Mine or Quarry 										C 	C 			
Transportation 														
Airport 											C 		Per PD 
Approval 	
Bus Barn or Lot 							P 			P 				
Bus Station 							P 	P 		P 				
Rail or Truck Freight Terminal 									C 	P 				
Waste & Salvage 														
Sanitary Landfill 											C 		Per PD 	
Vehicle Wrecking or Junkyard 										C 				(ff) 
ACCESSORY USES 
Accessory Dwelling Units 	C 	A 	A 										Per PD Approval 	(gg) 
Backyard or Rooftop Garden 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 			(hh) 
Communication Antenna or Tower as an Accessory Use 	See section 29-3.3(n) 	(n) 
Customary Accessory Uses and Related Structures 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		(ii) 
Drive-Up Facility 					CA 	CA 	A 	CA 	A 	A 				(jj) 
Home Occupation 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 			(kk) 
Home Occupation with Non-Resident Employees 	CA 	CA 	CA 	CA 										(ll) 
Outdoor Storage in Residential Districts 	A 	A 	A 	A 										(mm) 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) as a Principal Use 	See section 29-3.3(o) 		(o) 
TEMPORARY USES 
Temporary Construction Office or Yard 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	Per PD Approval 	
Temporary Parking Lot 					T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 		
Temporary Real Estate Sales/Leasing Office 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 		T 			(nn) 
Temporary/Seasonal Sales or Event, Other 	T 	T 	T 		T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 		
 
(Ord. No. 23895 , § 1, 6-3-19)  
Sec. 29-3.3. - Use-specific standards. 
All uses for which the permitted use table in section 29-3.2 shows use-specific standard(s) shall comply with the applicable standard(s) in this section. In addition, all development shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
In the event of a conflict between these use-specific standards and the requirements of chapter 29-4, the use-specific standards set forth in this section shall apply, except in the M-DT district, where the standards of the M-DT district will apply. 
Where these use-specific standards require spacing between uses, no existing use that complied with applicable spacing requirements when the primary use was established on the property shall be made nonconforming because of the later location of any facility closer than the required spacing or because of an amendment to this chapter changing any applicable spacing distance. 
(a)  Primary use of land and buildings: Dwelling, one-family detached. 
(1)  Single family dwellings developed in accordance with the "Cottage" standards shall be permitted only in the R-2 district in accordance with the procedural requirements of section 29-5.4(j). 
(i)  An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall not be permitted on any lot in the R-2 district developed in accordance with the "Cottage" standards. 
(2)  A manufactured home or modular home may be placed on a lot in the R-1, R-2, R-MF, or A districts if the structure meets the following standards: 
(i)  The longest exterior dimension of the body shall be not more than two and one-half (2½) times the shortest exterior dimension; 
(ii)  The roof shall be double-pitched with a minimum vertical rise of three (3) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run, and shall be covered with wood, asphalt, composition or fiberglass roofing material; 
(iii)  The roof shall have a minimum eave projection or overhang of ten (10) inches on at least two (2) sides, which may include a four-inch gutter; 
(iv)  The exterior siding shall be made of non-reflective material customarily used on site-built dwellings, such as wood, composition or simulated wood, clapboards, conventional vinyl or metal lap siding, brick, stucco, or similar materials, but excluding smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. Siding material shall extend below the top of the exterior foundation or curtain wall; 
(v)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the recommended installation procedures of the manufacturer and city building codes. The running gear, tongue, axles, and wheels shall be removed from the unit at the time of installation. A continuous, permanent masonry foundation or permanent masonry piers with masonry curtain wall, un-pierced except for required ventilation and access, shall be installed under the perimeter of the home; 
(vi)  The home shall have a garage if fifty (50) percent or more of existing homes on the same block face have a garage; and 
(vii)  The home shall have a covered porch at the main entrance if fifty (50) percent or more of existing homes on the same block face have a covered porch. 
(b)  Primary use of land and buildings: Dwelling, one-family attached. The structure containing this use is limited to no more than two (2) contiguous attached dwellings in the R-2 zone district, and no more than six (6) contiguous attached dwellings in the R-MF zone district. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, interior units in a one-family attached dwelling structure shall not be subject to side yard setbacks. 
(c)  Primary use of land and buildings: Dwelling, live-work. This use shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Not more than three (3) people may be engaged in the making, servicing or selling of goods, or provision of personal and professional services, within a single unit; 
(2)  At least one person shall reside in the dwelling unit where the nonresidential activity or activities occur; 
(3)  The residential unit must be located above or behind the non-residential areas of the structure; and 
(4)  Where a conditional use permit is required, all non-residential uses shall be specifically approved within such conditional use permit. 
(d)  Primary use of land and buildings: Dwelling, multi-family. This use shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Façade length and articulation. 
(i)  At least one of the following design features shall be incorporated within each twenty-five (25) feet of horizontal primary façade length: (1) Roof dormers; (2) gables; (3) recessed entries; (4) covered porches; (5) pillars, pilasters or posts; or (6) bay windows; and 
(ii)  Total length of any multi-family primary façade shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet, and no façade wall shall extend more than eighty (80) horizontal feet without projections or recesses having a depth of at least three (3) percent of the length of the façade and extending at least twenty (20) percent of the length of the façade. 
(2)  Entryway design. The front entry of each multiple-family building shall be emphasized by the use of at least one of the following: (1) Side-lights (glazed openings to the side of the door), and transom-lights (glazed opening above the door); or (2) changes in the texture or color of materials from the predominant façade materials at least twelve (12) inches in width above and to both sides of the door; or (3) projections extending at least eight (8) inches in front of the primary façade of the building above and to both sides of the door. 
(3)  Roof articulation and design. Rooflines longer than one hundred (100) horizontal feet shall include at least one vertical elevation change of at least two (2) vertical feet per one hundred (100) horizontal feet or part thereof. All sloped roofs shall have overhanging eaves of at least one foot, and roofs with a pitch of less than 2:12 shall be screened by a parapet wall. 
(4)  All-sided design. The following shall apply to ensure that "all-sided" design is achieved: 
(i)  All sides of a building having frontage on public or private streets or internal travel ways shall use the same predominate façade material used on the primary façade of the building and shall incorporate at least two (2) of the façade features listed in subsection 29-3.3(d)(1) above; 
(ii)  When any side of a building is twenty-four (24) feet or less in height and not required to comply with the requirements of item (i), above, and is adjacent to an existing single- or two-family dwelling in the R-MF district or R-1 or R-2 district zoned land it shall be screened from the adjacent property in accordance with section 29-4.4(e); and 
(iii)  When any side of a side of building greater than twenty-four (24) feet in height is adjacent to an existing single- or two-family dwelling in the R-MF district or R-1 or R-2 district zoned land it shall be screened from the adjacent property in accordance with section 29-4.4(e) and shall use the same predominate façade material used on the primary façade of the building and shall incorporate at least two (2) of the façade features listed in subsection 29-3.3(d)(1) above. 
(5)  Parking garages and carports. No more than fifty (50) percent of required on-site parking may be surface parking visible from a public or private street. Any façade of a parking garage and any end or side of a carport structure visible from a public or private street shall use the same predominant building materials used on the primary façade of the primary multi-family parking structure. No parking garage or carport shall be located closer than the primary façade of a multi-family building to the street adjacent to the front property line. 
(6)  Universal design. In principal structures containing more than one hundred (100) bedrooms, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling units shall incorporate at least two (2) of the following elements of "universal design": (1) At least one no-step entrance; (2) interior doorways with at least thirty-two-inch wide openings; (3) at least one bathroom with thirty-two (32) inch counter height; (4) at least one bathroom with wall reinforcements for handrails; and/or (5) all light switches between forty-four and forty-eight (44—48) inches in height. 
(7)  Additional standards. If more than over fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units in the structure have four (4) or more bedrooms, the following additional standards shall apply: 
(i)  In the R-MF and M-N, and M-DT districts, no principal structure may contain more than two hundred (200) bedrooms in any one structure; 
(ii)  Each principal structure must include at least one operable entry/exit door for each one hundred (100) linear feet of each street frontage, or part thereof; 
(iii)  No façade of a primary multi-family structure facing an R-1, R-2, or R-MF district or a property containing a one-family attached, detached, or duplex dwelling may contain an exterior balcony or patio; and 
(iv)  No outdoor activity area such as a swimming pool, tennis court, or game court may be located between any façade of the principal structure and any property line adjacent to an R-1, R-2, or R-MF district or a property containing a one-family attached, detached, or duplex dwelling. 
(e)  Primary use of land and buildings: Second primary dwelling on a lot. This use must be located on a lot of two and a half (2.5) acres or more, and may not be a manufactured home. 
(f)  Primary use of land and buildings: Continuing care retirement communities (CCRC). This use shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  A CCRC shall be planned and constructed as a unified development; 
(2)  Uses located within a CCRC shall be owned and operated by a single, properly licensed entity or provided under a direct contract with the owner; 
(3)  The height and area requirements applicable to the R-MF district shall apply to any proposed component of a CCRC; and 
(4)  A twenty-five-foot perimeter setback shall be provided around all sides of a CCRC. 
(g)  Primary use of land and buildings: Group home. This use shall meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  Before operating such group home, the owner or operator of the home shall register with the department; and 
(2)  The exterior appearance of the home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood standards. 
(h)  Primary use of land and buildings: Halfway house. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  In the R-MF district, this use is limited to not more than eight (8) occupants, and shall only be permitted if the board finds that the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest considering the size and character of the proposed facility and its proximity to elementary/secondary schools, religious institutions, dwellings, and other halfway houses; 
(2)  In the mixed use districts, this use is limited to not more than fifteen (15) occupants, and shall only be permitted if the board finds that the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest considering the size and character of the proposed facility and its proximity to elementary/secondary schools, religious institutions, dwellings, and other halfway houses; and 
(3)  Halfway houses serving individuals between the ages of seventeen (17) and twenty-five (25) who have not been imprisoned (except for "shock probation" terms) and have not been convicted of adult or juvenile violent crimes (as defined by the Missouri Department of Corrections), are only permitted in the M-N and M-C districts, and are limited to not more than forty (40) occupants. In the M-N and M-C districts, halfway houses for youth offenders are only permitted if the board finds that facility will have twenty-four-hour on-duty staff and the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest considering the size and character of the proposed facility and its proximity to elementary/secondary schools, religious institutions, dwellings, and other halfway houses. 
(i)  Primary use of land and buildings: Temporary shelter. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  An application for a conditional use permit for a temporary shelter shall include information about the size and design of the structure, population groups served, length of stay permitted, maximum design capacity and support services provided. These items shall be used to determine if the facility is in conformance with the character of the adjacent area; 
(2)  A temporary shelter shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another temporary shelter; and 
(3)  The minimum lot area for a temporary shelter shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. If a proposed temporary shelter structure is larger than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross floor area there shall be provided an additional one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area for each additional five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area within the structure. 
(j)  Primary use of land and buildings: Family day care center. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  In the R-1, R-2, R-MH, and A districts: 
(i)  Not more than ten (10) children not related to the operator shall be kept. Up to three (3) additional children over the age of two (2) may be kept for up to two (2) hours per day. Up to three (3) additional school-age children may be kept on unscheduled days of school closings; provided that at no time shall more than thirteen (13) children not related to the operator be kept; 
(ii)  The use shall be permitted only if the rear yard in which the home would operate meets the minimum requirements of this section; 
(iii)  The use shall be located in a dwelling used by the operator as his or her private residence; 
(iv)  The operator shall not employ more than one full-time (forty (40) hours per week) assistant who does not reside on the premises or more than two (2) half-time (twenty (20) hours per week) assistants who do not reside on the premises; and 
(v)  A family day care center may utilize one sign used for identification purposes, but such sign must be attached flat to the structure, may not be larger than one square foot, and may not be illuminated. 
(2)  In the R-2 district, a family day care home that exceeds the size limit of item (1)(i), above, may be approved as a conditional use. 
(k)  Primary use of land and buildings: Funeral home or mortuary. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  The use shall be conducted within a fully enclosed legally permitted structure and may include a covered exterior entry or porte cochere to shelter users during visitation services or transporting the deceased; 
(2)  No outside storage or display of equipment or merchandise used or customarily sold in conjunction with such use shall be permitted; and 
(3)  Cremation of the deceased shall be permitted on-site only in the IG district or in other districts as specifically allowed by a conditional use permit. 
(l)  Primary use of land and buildings: Higher education institution. This use, to the extent subject to this chapter and applicable state and federal law, shall comply with the following additional standards: 
(1)  Before any building or structure shall be constructed on a campus of an institution of higher learning, a development plan of the campus shall be submitted to the commission, and after a public hearing, such commission shall report its recommendations to the council. If the council shall approve the development plan by ordinance, and that plan shall be filed with the permanent records of the city; 
(2)  The development plan shall show existing and future buildings, parking areas, streets and drives, athletic facilities, and other features which may affect surrounding property or the public interest; and 
(3)  No building permit within the boundaries of the development plan shall be issued until the director determines that any building or structure constructed on the campus (a) substantially conforms to the approved development plan, or (b) is a minor structure or expansion of an existing structure related to the operation of buildings and facilities shown on the development plan and does not create impacts beyond the boundaries of the development plan. If at any time a major deviation from the approved development plan is proposed, an amended plan shall be submitted to the commission and the council for approval in the same manner as the original plan, and no building permit for a building based on the substantial deviation shall be issued until the council's approval of the amended plan has been obtained. 
(m)  Primary use of land and buildings: Reuse of place of public assembly. Religious institutions or any property used primarily as a place of public assembly as a permitted use in the R-1 district may be reused as a place of public assembly subject to such restrictions as the board may impose, and provided that the following additional standards are met: 
(1)  The building or structure was constructed and used primarily as a place of public assembly; 
(2)  The reuse shall be primarily as a place of public assembly, provided that uses which are ordinarily accessory uses to a place of public assembly may be permitted; 
(3)  The reuse shall be for not-for-profit and for noncommercial purposes by a charitable, philanthropic, eleemosynary, or other organization which could be organized as a not-for-profit corporation under state law; and 
(4)  The reuse shall not constitute a more burdensome use nor impose a greater adverse impact on the neighborhood than the existing or prior use in terms of traffic congestion, parking, storm drainage, and neighborhood impacts. 
(n)  Primary use of land and buildings: Communication antenna or tower. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Purposes. These standards are intended to provide for the appropriate location and development of communications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and businesses of the city; to minimize adverse visual impacts of communications antennas and towers through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; to protect residential areas/land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers; to maximize and encourage the use of disguised support structures and antenna support structures so as to ensure the architectural integrity of designated areas within the city and the scenic quality of protected natural habitats; to promote and encourage shared use/co-location of towers as a primary option rather than construction of additional towers; and to comply with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended and interpreted by the courts, and related regulations. 
(2)  Permitted uses in all districts. The following uses shall be permitted in any zoning district subject to the issuance of a building permit by the department, provided that drawings and other documentation are submitted showing compliance with subsection 29-3.3(n)(5) (standards), unless otherwise required by law: 
(i)  The collocation, addition, or replacement of antennas on any tower; or the addition of accessory equipment to any tower in accordance with these regulations; 
(ii)  The mounting of antennas on any existing antenna support structure. This shall not include the mounting of antennas on signs; 
(iii)  The installation of antennas or towers on structures or land owned by the city, following approval by the council of a lease providing for use of structures or land owned by the city; 
(iv)  The replacement or modification, as defined under this Code, of any tower, on the same site, so long as the purpose of the replacement is to accommodate shared use of the tower or to eliminate a safety hazard; 
(v)  Satellite receiver dishes up to one meter in diameter; and 
(vi)  Any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station which is required to be approved by the city under federal law. 
(3)  Permitted uses in selected districts. The following use shall be permitted in any zoning district other than zoning districts A, R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-MH or PD with a residential development component, subject to the issuance of a building permit by the department, provided that drawings and other documentation are submitted showing compliance with subsection 29-3.3(n)(5) (standards): 
(i)  The construction of an enclosed support structure designed to match the architecture, material, and color of existing adjacent accessory structures which renders antennas and accessory equipment disguised from public view; and 
(ii)  Satellite receiver dishes up to two (2) meters in diameter. 
(4)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be available only after the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 29-6.4 (conditional use permit): 
(i)  Construction of new communications towers or any alteration of a communications tower not permitted under the previous two subsections shall be allowed in all districts except for A, R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-MH or PD with a residential development component; and 
(ii)  Construction of disguised support structures shall be allowed in zoning districts A, R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-4, R-MH, and PD with residential development. 
Decisions on applications for conditional use permits shall be rendered within the time required by applicable state or federal law. 
(5)  Standards. All antenna towers installed, built or altered after December 15, 1997 shall comply with the following standards to the fullest extent permitted by law: 
(i)  Security. All antennas and towers shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security devices. A description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part of any application to install, build or alter antennas or towers. Additional measures may be required as deemed necessary by the board in the case of a conditional use permit. 
(ii)  Lighting. Antennas and towers shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other state or federal agency with authority to regulate, in which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be made a part of the application to install, build or alter the antenna or tower. Strobe lights shall not be used unless required by the FAA or other state or federal agency with authority to regulate. 
(iii)  Advertising. Placement of advertising on structures regulated by this section is prohibited. 
(iv)  Collocation. All new towers shall be structurally and mechanically capable of accommodating the antenna or array of antennas of more than one provider based upon the following tower heights: 
(A)  40 to 120 feet - shall support at least four (4) antenna arrays; 
(B)  121 to 150 feet - shall support at least five (5) antenna arrays; and 
(C)  Greater than 151 feet - shall support at least six (6) antenna arrays. 
(v)  Height. The height of a tower shall be governed by the underlying district; however, when rendering its decision on a conditional use permit for a new tower, the board, as a condition of issuance of the permit, may allow an increase in height as it deems appropriate to allow effective functioning of the equipment as required by the Federal Telecommunications Act, while still protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(vi)  Color and finish. Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to the requirements of the FAA or any applicable state or federal agency, be painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built environment of the site. 
(vii)  Screening. Equipment shelters, cabinets and guy anchors shall be screened from view by a permanent screen consisting of a masonry wall, wood fence, landscaping material, or combination thereof, at least eight (8) feet in height. The required screening shall have an opacity of eighty (80) percent year around and, if landscaping is used, the eighty (80) percent opacity and eight-foot minimum height shall be achieved within four (4) full growing seasons. 
(viii)  Setbacks. All towers shall meet the setback and yard requirements of the applicable zoning district. In addition, all towers shall be separated from any off-site residential structure, or the boundary of any residentially zoned property, either (a) a distance equal to the height of the tower, or (b) if the tower is of a self-collapsing design, then the maximum distance from the base of the tower that any portion of the tower or ice accumulation from the tower could fall, based on information provided by the tower manufacturer. The required setback shall be met upon the property which the tower is located and may not include adjacent public right-of-way. 
(ix)  Anchoring. Ground anchors of all guyed towers shall be located on the same parcel as the tower and meet the setback and yard requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(x)  Cabinets. The horizontal dimensions of a communication equipment cabinet shall not exceed four (4) feet by six (6) feet and vertical height shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
(6)  Obsolete tower structures and antennas. 
(i)  Any tower or disguised support structure that is not occupied by active antennas for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days or any antenna which is not used for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed at the expense of the property owner. The director is authorized to order removal of any abandoned tower or antenna within a reasonable time as specified in writing to the property owner by the director. The order shall require the tower or antenna to be removed unless the owner, within ten (10) days of receipt of the order, appeals the matter to the board pursuant to section 29-6.3 (appeals). If the board finds that a tower has not been occupied by active antennas for three hundred sixty-five (365) days or an antenna has not been used for three hundred sixty-five (365) days, it shall order the tower or antenna to be removed within a specified time. 
(ii)  If the unused tower or antenna is not removed as specified in an unappealed order of the director or as specified by the board, the director may cause the tower or antenna to be removed. The director shall submit the actual cost of such removal to the owner of the property. If the owner does not pay the cost within thirty (30) days of receipt, the director shall certify the cost to the director of finance who shall cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared and collected. The tax bill shall be due and payable from the date of issuance and shall be a lien on the property from the date of issuance until paid. Tax bills issued pursuant to this section shall bear interest from the date of issuance at the rate of nine (9) percent per annum. 
(7)  Commercial operation of unlawful towers or antennas. Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to operate or construct a tower or structure, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or operate for any private commercial purpose any new antenna, tower or disguised support structure in violation of any provision of this section regardless of whether such antenna or structure is located on land belonging to a governmental entity. 
(o)  Primary use of land and buildings: Wind energy conversion system (WECS). This use shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Permitted uses. WECS are allowed as a permitted use as follows: 
(i)  One noncommercial wind energy system (WECS) shall be allowed as an accessory use to a permitted principal use on the same lot, on lots meeting setback and fall zone requirements, in districts R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-MH, A, and PD with residential development. 
(ii)  Two (2) noncommercial WECS shall be allowed as accessory uses to a permitted principal use on the same lot, on lots meeting setback and fall zone requirements, in districts M-OF, M-N, M-C, M-DT, M-BP, IG, and PD without residential development. 
(iii)  Notwithstanding subsections (i) and (ii), WECS shall not be permitted uses within the boundaries of the downtown community improvement district as defined in the petition approved by Ordinance No. 20866, as amended. 
(iv)  Commercial WECS are not allowed as a permitted use as a matter of right in any district. 
(2)  Conditional uses. WECS which are not allowed as a permitted use may be allowed by issuance of a conditional use permit by the board as follows: 
(i)  In all locations where WECS are not allowed as permitted uses, a WECS shall be allowed only after the issuance of a conditional use permit. Where one or two (2) WECS are allowed as permitted uses, additional WECS shall be allowed only after the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(ii)  Applications for conditional use permits shall include all items required by the submittal requirements list on file at the department. 
(iii)  A request for issuance of a conditional use permit shall include the following supplemental materials, as may be applicable, based upon the specific WECS application: 
(A)  A Missouri-licensed engineer's certification that the monopole structure, foundation, and design are appropriate, given local soil and climate conditions. Manufacturer certification and specification sheets may, at the discretion of the building official, be used in place of engineering certification, if these provide sufficient information on the installation of the monopole (e.g. size and depth of hole to dig, type of soil or bearing needed to support the pole and turbine). For building-mounted WECS, a written structural analysis from an engineer or contractor determining that installation of a WECS will not cause damage to the structure and that the WECS design is suitable for the structure based on the analysis of the roof's structural members. A certification from a Missouri-licensed engineer on the general design of a building-mounted WECS shall be required. 
(B)  A copy of the interconnection agreement application between the applicant and the applicable utility if connecting to the grid. 
(C)  A copy of the shadow flicker analysis, if required. This shall apply only to systems greater than ten (10) kW in nameplate generating capacity. No WECS shall be installed and operated in a manner that causes shadow flicker to fall on or in any residential dwelling existing at the time the application to install a WECS is received by the city. The applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses, either through siting or mitigation. Shadow flicker expected to fall on an adjacent parcel or roadway may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed thirty (30) hours per calendar year. If such flicker is likely, the applicant shall, at the applicant's sole expense, furnish a flicker study for city review. 
(3)  Procedures for permits. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate any WECS within the city unless a building permit has been obtained. The building permit may be revoked by the building official if it is determined at any time the approved system does not comply with the rules set forth in this section 29-3.3(o). 
(ii)  Authorization for interconnection to the electric grid is independent of the approval for the WECS building permit. If an interconnected system is planned, the applicable utility's interconnection requirements must also be satisfied, and no building permit shall be issued until the building official has been provided with that utility's written authorization. 
(iii)  Building permits and, if necessary, conditional use permits and variances shall be applied for and reviewed under the procedures established in chapter 6 (buildings and building regulations) and chapter 29, article 6 (procedures and enforcement), except where noted below. The director, upon written request of the applicant, may waive any of the submittal requirements that the director deems not applicable after reviewing the request. An applicant desiring such a waiver shall provide supporting documentation from a licensed engineer justifying the waiver. The director may also require additional information as minimally needed to determine compliance with this Code. 
(iv)  The application for any WECS building permit shall include the information found in the list of application requirements maintained by the department. 
(4)  General requirements and construction. 
(i)  Tower. Only monopole towers are permitted for freestanding WECS. Guyed or any other types of towers are not permitted. 
(ii)  Color and surface. Freestanding WECS monopole towers shall be a neutral color such as white or light gray. Supporting structures for building-mounted WECS shall match the color of the building on which they are mounted. Surfaces of the WECS and building-mounted supporting structures shall be a non-reflective, matte finish. 
(iii)  Signage and visual impact. No lettering, advertising, or graphics other than a standard manufacturer's insignia shall be on any part of the tower, hub, or blades. No other signage or message may be displayed, other than for safety or apparatus identification (e.g. nameplate, serial number or emergency instructions). The applicant shall avoid state or federal scenic areas and significant visual resources listed in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(iv)  Climbing apparatus. The tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first ten (10) feet. 
(v)  Lighting. No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) guidelines, where lighting intensity and frequency of strobe shall adhere to requirements established by FAA permits and regulations. Red strobe lights are preferred for nighttime illumination and to reduce impacts on migrating birds. Red pulsating incandescent lights shall be prohibited unless required by the FAA. 
(vi)  Compliance. All WECS equipment and connections must comply with all applicable local and state regulations and relevant national and international codes. In case of noncompliance, the applicant may be required to hire outside inspectors as deemed necessary by the building official or board. 
(vii)  Maintenance. Facilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The property owner of any WECS shall maintain such system in a safe and attractive manner, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning, and other acts that may be required for the maintenance and function of such a system. Failure to maintain the WECS may result in enforcement action including, but not limited to, citations, fines, or revocation of permits in accordance with this Code. 
(viii)  Interconnection and utility considerations. The applicant shall notify and apply with the appropriate electric utility in making a WECS application to install an interconnected, customer-owned WECS. The WECS shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility, and shall not be interconnected to any utility-operated power line or by any other means of conveyance until so authorized by the utility. Interconnected WECS shall require the approval of the applicable utility before receiving a conditional use or building permit from the city. Off-grid (not connected to the utility) systems shall be exempt from this application requirement. A response from the utility is not required to approve or deny an off-grid WECS application. 
(ix)  Restriction on use of electricity generated. A WECS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on-site consumption, except that excess electrical power generated by the WECS and not presently needed for use by the owner, may be used by the utility in accordance with laws and regulations governing interconnection and utility approval. 
(x)  Feeder lines. All communications and feeder lines installed as part of a WECS shall be buried where feasible. 
(xi)  Displacement of parking and landscaping prohibited. The location of the WECS shall not result in the net loss of required parking or landscaping as specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
(5)  Noise, vibration, and sound pressure level. A WECS shall be designed, installed and operated so that any noise or vibration has minimal impact on adjacent properties. A WECS shall not exceed fifty-five (55) dB(A) at any adjacent property line. This sound pressure level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages or severe wind storms. If the ambient sound level for the WECS location exceeds fifty-five (55) dB(A), the maximum standard shall be ambient dB(A) plus five (5) dB(A). No WECS shall emit low frequency sound at or below twenty (20) Hertz. The process for reporting and investigating a noise complaint is as follows: 
(i)  Upon written notification of a complaint of excessive noise, the building official or designated representative of the department (the "enforcing person"), shall record the filing of such complaint and promptly investigate the complaint. If noise levels are determined to be in excess of the maximum standard, the enforcing person shall require the property owner to perform ambient and operating decibel measurements at the nearest point from the wind turbine to the property line of the complainant and to the nearest off-site, inhabited residence. 
(ii)  If the noise levels are found to have exceeded the allowable limit, the enforcing person shall notify, in writing, the owner of the WECS site to correct the violation. If the noise violation is not remedied within thirty (30) days, the WECS shall remain inactive until the noise violation is remedied, which may include (but is not limited to) relocation or removal at the owner's expense. 
(iii)  If it is determined that maximum noise limits have not been exceeded, notice in writing shall be provided to the person who filed such complaint and the owner of the WECS property stating that no further action is required, within twenty-one (21) days of the receipt of the request. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision to the board in accordance with section 29-6.3(f) (appeals). Any such appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the enforcing person's decision. 
(6)  Safety Design Requirements and Standards. 
(i)  A WECS shall have automatic braking, governing, and a feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over-speeding. All WECS shall have lightning protection and shall comply with FAA standards. The system shall also be capable of stopping power generation in the event of a power outage so as to prevent back-feeding of the grid. 
(ii)  A clearly marked and easily accessible power shut off/disconnect will be required as determined by the building official. Any battery or energy storage device will be clearly marked and a sign indicating the presence of such device(s) shall be posted at the site's electric meter. 
(iii)  No portion of the WECS swept area shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to the ground. The swept area shall extend no closer than twenty (20) feet horizontally to the nearest tree, structure, or aboveground utility facility. No WECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can extend within twenty (20) feet laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or service drops). 
(iv)  A sign or signs shall be posted on the tower, transformer and substation warning of high voltage. A sign shall also be posted at the property's electric meter, noting the presence of a WECS and any battery system. Signs with emergency contact information shall also be posted on the turbine, or at another suitable point, such as the entrance to the WECS's service area. 
(v)  No WECS installation shall cause electromagnetic interference. If interference is established, the building official shall notify the owner of the property in writing to correct the violation. If the interference is not remedied within thirty (30) days, the WECS shall remain inactive until the interference is remedied, which may include, but is not limited to, relocation or removal at the WECS owner's expense. 
(7)  Setback and area regulations. 
(i)  WECS and their associated outbuildings and cabinets shall meet all setback requirements for principal structures for the zoning district in which the WECS is located. A WECS and its associated outbuildings and accessories shall not be located forward of the principal structure on a lot. 
(ii)  The minimum distance between any freestanding WECS and any property line shall be the distance equivalent to the fall zone, which is ninety (90) percent of the WECS system height. No part of the fall zone shall cross an adjacent property line. The setback shall be measured from the property line to the point of the WECS structure closest to the property line. 
(iii)  For building-mounted WECS, no part of the fall zone shall cross an adjacent property line. The fall zone for a building-mounted WECS shall be fifty (50) percent of the height as measured from the lowest attachment to the building/structure to the highest point of the blades or rotors. 
(iv)  The fall zone shall be entirely contained on the subject parcel. In no case may the fall zone radius include an overhead electric power line. The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five (5) feet; the fall zone radius may include the underground line(s). The provisions of this chapter regarding allowable minor projections into required setbacks, is not applicable. 
(8)  Height regulations. The maximum height for any WECS (freestanding or building-mounted) shall be the total system height as set forth below: 
(i)  In the R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-MH, and M-N Districts, forty-five (45) feet; 
(ii)  In the M-C District, sixty (60) feet; 
(iii)  In the M-OF District, ninety (90) feet; 
(iv)  In the M-DT, M-BP, and IG Districts, one hundred twenty (120) feet; 
(v)  In the A District, a maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet is allowed for windmills on agriculturally-used parcels under allowable zoning district standards. This standard shall apply to all WECS applications on parcels of three (3) acres or fewer in the A District; 
(vi)  For lots greater than three (3) acres, one hundred fifty (150) feet; and 
(vii)  In all PD Districts, height shall be as set forth in the approved statement of intent. 
Maximum height may be exceeded, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the board. The applicant must demonstrate that additional height is necessary and that the benefits of the taller WECS do not increase any adverse impacts to neighboring properties. 
(9)  Additional regulations. 
(i)  No other apparatus or mechanical and electronic equipment, such as telecommunication antennas, microwave dishes, or satellite dishes, shall be attached to a WECS tower or its associated components, such as the nacelle. 
(ii)  No part of a WECS shall be located within or over public drainage, utility or other established easements. 
(iii)  No WECS shall be constructed, altered, or maintained so as to project above any of the airspace surfaces described in FAR Part 77 of the FAA guidance on airspace protection. 
(iv)  No part of the WECS, including the swept area, shall be within or overhang any portion of the property that is within a required building setback. 
(10)  Discontinuation and decommissioning. A WECS shall be considered abandoned after six (6) months without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the enforcing person outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and accessory facilities shall be removed in their entirety within ninety (90) days of abandonment. If this is not done, the city's standard procedures for nuisance removal may be followed at the discretion of the building official or the official's designee. 
(p)  Primary use of land and buildings: Urban agriculture. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Greenhouses, hoop houses, cold frames, storage sheds, and other accessory structures are limited to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet, shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from any abutting lot with an occupied residential use. 
(2)  The cumulative area covered by structures more than four (4) feet above grade shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the site. 
(3)  Operation of power equipment or generators may occur between 7:00 am and no later than 10:00 pm. 
(4)  Sales of products grown on the site is permitted on the site, provided that the structure used for sales is no larger than one hundred (100) square feet and is not located in a required yard area. 
(5)  Food products may be grown in soil native to the site if a composite sample of the native soil, consisting of no less than five (5) individual samples, has been tested for lead content and the lead content in the soil is determined to be at or below the Missouri direct-contact standards for lead; and either: 
(i)  The city determines through maps, deeds, prior permits or a combination of those sources that the site has only been put to residential or agricultural use in the past; or 
(ii)  A composite sample of the native soil, consisting of no less than five (5) individual samples, has been tested for metal content using the US EPA 3050B, 3051, or a comparable method and that (i) the metals arsenic, cadmium, mercury, molybdenum, Nickel, selenium, and zinc are determined to be at or below the thresholds listed in the tables in subsection (6) below, as amended. 
(6)  Soil testing requirements: 
(i)  Clean soil is soil that has less than two hundred (200) ppm of lead content. At least five (5) samples of the native soil from the proposed planting area shall be tested for lead content and heavy metals. If the site has been determined through maps, aerial photography, deeds, prior permits or a combination of those sources that it has only been used for residential or agricultural purposes in the past, the following gardening techniques may be conducted based upon the lead content test results. 
Lead content 	Permitted Activity 
Less than 200 ppm 	Soil native to the site may be used. 
200 ppm to 400 ppm 	Soil native to the site shall not be used for gardening. Raised beds are required using clean soil. 
400 ppm to 600 ppm 	Soil native to the site shall not be used for gardening. Raised beds are required using clean soil. Water source for cleaning produce shall be provided on site. 
600 ppm and higher 	Urban Agriculture shall be prohibited. 
 
(ii)  If the site has been determined through maps, aerial photography, deeds, prior permits or a combination of those sources that it has been used for purposes other than residential or agricultural in the past, soil shall be tested for metal content using the US EPA 3050B, 3051, or a comparable method. Gardening may be conducted if the test results for the following chemicals are below the levels identified in the following table: 
Chemical Name 	CASRN 	Soil Exposure Direct Contact Residential Maximum (mg/kg) 
Arsenic, Inorganic 	7440-38-2 	5.5 
Cadmium (Diet) 	7440-43-9 	98 
Mercuric Chloride (and other Mercury salts) 	7487-94-7 	32 
Lead and Compounds 	7439-92-1 	400 
Mercury (elemental) 	7439-97-6 	3.1 
Molybdenum 	7439-98-7 	550 
Nickel Soluble Salts 	7440-02-0 	2100 
Selenium 	7782-49-2 	550 
Zinc and Compounds 	7440-66-6 	32000 
 
(iii)  As an alternative to meeting the standards above, food products may be grown in clean soil six (6) inches deep brought to the site without completing a soil test of the native soil. 
(q)  Primary use of land and buildings: Veterinary hospital. This use, when domesticated animals or fowl are treated, kept, cared for, bred or board on-site, shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Any outside animal run structure, pen or enclosure shall be fully fenced (including overhead). 
(2)  A secondary or perimeter fence or wall shall be constructed around all outside animal run structures, pens, enclosures and outside exercise yards in a manner that protects animals from injury and contain animals securely. 
(3)  Veterinary hospitals that provide outside facilities (including but not limited to a run, pen, enclosure or exercise yard) which abut residential uses or residential zoning district, shall be subject to the following setbacks: 
(i)  Two hundred (200) feet from the residential use or residential zoning district to any outside animal run structure, pen, enclosures or outdoor exercise yard with openings; and 
(ii)  One hundred (100) feet from the residential use or residential zoning district to any principle structure or secondary or perimeter fence or wall, which encloses an outdoor exercise yard, without openings. 
(4)  All other applicable state regulations shall be met. 
(r)  Primary use of land and buildings: Restaurant. In the M-N district, live or recorded music may only be played indoors and must be inaudible on the property line. 
(s)  Primary use of land and buildings: Bed and breakfast. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Not more than five (5) guest rooms shall be allowed. 
(2)  In addition to meeting all parking requirements of article 4 there shall be one off-street parking space provided for each guest room. 
(3)  There shall be no individual room cooking facilities used for the bed and breakfast stay. 
(4)  The establishment shall be owner-occupied and managed. If the owner is not the record owner of the real estate, proof of ownership interest in the bed and breakfast establishment shall be required. 
(5)  The establishment shall comply with all applicable adopted city fire and building codes and shall be inspected for such compliance by the building and site development division of the department prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(6)  Only one wall-mounted sign, not exceeding eight (8) square feet in size, shall be allowed. 
(7)  Meals may be served only to residents and overnight guests. 
(t)  Primary use of land and buildings: Commercial or trade school. In the M-OF district, this use is not permitted to offer retail goods or services to the public. 
(u)  Primary use of land and buildings: Research and development laboratory. In the M-OF, M-N, M-C, M-DT districts, this use is limited to those not involving use of hazardous materials. 
(v)  Primary use of land and buildings: Personal services, general. In the M-OF, M-N, M-C, and M-DT districts, this use may not involve the use of explosive or hazardous materials. 
(w)  Primary use of land and buildings: Self-service storage facility. 
(1)  When such uses are located in the M-C district and are no greater than fourteen (14) feet in height, unless otherwise permitted, shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  All storage shall be kept within an enclosed building, except recreation or other oversized vehicles, compressed flammable gas tanks, or gasoline containers in excess of two (2) gallons, which shall be stored only in exterior areas screened from the view from any street frontage. 
(ii)  Where the site is adjacent to residentially-zoned land, a permanent screen shall be required and shall conform to the provisions of section 29-4.4(e). 
(iii)  Storage of feed, fertilizer, grain, soil conditioners, pesticides, chemicals, explosives and other hazardous materials, asphalt, brick, cement, gravel, rock, sand and similar construction materials, inoperable vehicles, or bulk storage of fuels shall be prohibited. 
(iv)  The use of power tools, paint sprayers, or the servicing, repair or fabrication of furniture, boats, trailers, motor vehicles, lawn mowers, appliances and other similar equipment shall be prohibited. 
(v)  The sale of any item from the facility or the conduct of any type of commercial activity at the facility shall be prohibited. 
(vi)  Building heights shall be limited to fourteen (14) feet, unless the building complies with the following standards, which are intended to ensure that buildings in excess of fourteen (14) feet in height are visually compatible with surrounding developments: 
(A)  Property shall not be adjacent to, and no structure shall be within one hundred (100) feet of a lot that is residentially zoned or used; 
(B)  The exterior of the building shall be constructed entirely of brick, stone, precast concrete panels that include a masonry façade or other architectural elements, split face block or other similar high-quality materials. Prefabricated metal panels and smooth-faced concrete block shall be prohibited; 
(C)  All exterior portions and/or façades, including the roof, shall use colors consisting of a neutral earth tone; 
(D)  In addition to the screening and landscaping standards of section 29-4.4(e), one street tree shall be placed every forty (40) linear feet of site frontage along any property line that abuts a right of way in order to screen the mass of the building; and 
(E)  Building height shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet or contain more than four (4) stories. 
(vii)  Loading docks shall be prohibited. 
(2)  When such uses are located in the M-C district and proposed to be greater than fourteen (14) feet in height they shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  Approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures of article 6 of this chapter is required. When considering a conditional use, in addition to meeting the conditional use standards required by this chapter, the commission shall also consider the context of the surrounding land uses and building forms, and impose any conditions and restrictions needed to assure that proposed self-service storage facilities are compatible with the surrounding area. The standards included in item (1)(i) through (vi), above, shall be considered as standards for a conditional use as well; however, they may be waived if the applicant shows that due to special circumstances unique to the property, they are not required to ensure the visual compatibility of the proposed building with surrounding properties. Additional conditions may include, but are not limited to, limits on signage, additional setbacks, additional screening or fencing, orientation of buildings, and maximum height. 
(3)  When such uses are located in the I-G district they shall be subject to: 
(i)  All storage shall be kept within an enclosed building, except recreation or other oversized vehicles, compressed flammable gas tanks, or gasoline containers in excess of two (2) gallons, which shall be stored only in exterior areas screened from the view from any street frontage; 
(ii)  Where the site is adjacent to residentially-zoned land, a permanent screen shall be required and shall conform to the provisions of section 29-4.4(e); 
(iii)  Where the site is adjacent to residentially-zoned land, twenty-five (25) feet of required yard shall be provided, and if the building exceeds forty-five (45) feet in height, one additional foot of setback shall be provided for each foot of height in excess of forty-five (45) feet; 
(iv)  Storage of feed, fertilizer, grain, soil conditioners, pesticides, chemicals, explosives and other hazardous materials, asphalt, brick, cement, gravel, rock, sand and similar construction materials, inoperable vehicles, or bulk storage of fuels shall be prohibited; 
(v)  The use of power tools, paint sprayers, or the servicing, repair or fabrication of furniture, boats, trailers, motor vehicles, lawn mowers, appliances and other similar equipment shall be prohibited; 
(vi)  The sale of any item from the facility or the conduct of any type of commercial activity at the facility shall be prohibited; and 
(vii)  Loading docks shall be prohibited. 
(x)  Primary use of land and buildings: Indoor entertainment, adult and retail, adult. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Adult retail shall be conducted in a completely enclosed structure (i.e., no outdoor display or storage); 
(2)  Indoor adult entertainment shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any pre-existing elementary/secondary school, religious institution, state-licensed family day care center, public library, public park, dwelling unit, or other indoor adult entertainment business; measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the indoor adult entertainment business to the nearest point on the property line of the elementary/secondary school, religious institution, state-licensed family day care center, public library, public park, dwelling unit, or other indoor adult entertainment business; 
(3)  Notwithstanding any provision in section 29-4.8 to the contrary, an indoor adult entertainment business shall have no more than one on premise sign which shall be a wall sign approved by the board as part of the conditional use permit. The surface area of the sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached. The sign shall not be a neon or similar sign. The sign may be illuminated but shall not be a flashing sign. The sign shall not depict any portion of the human anatomy; 
(4)  No sign shall be placed in any window; 
(5)  No flashing lights or colored lights or string of lights shall be placed on the outside of the building or on the inside of the building so that the lights can be viewed from outside the building; 
(6)  The premises of all indoor adult entertainment businesses shall be constructed to include a partition or other physical barrier on all customer entrances that will ensure that the interior of the business is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with a partition or other physical barrier shall be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. No indoor adult entertainment business shall be conducted in a manner that permits the observation of entertainers, servers or employees from the exterior of the building; 
(7)  On-premise advertisement, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building; 
(8)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, off street parking for an indoor adult entertainment business shall be located on the premises of the business; 
(9)  No operator shall allow or permit this use to be or remain open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day; 
(10)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business; and 
(11)  No person shall knowingly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(y)  Primary use of land and buildings: Outdoor recreation or entertainment. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Golf courses are permitted in the A and O districts only; and 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures may provide those types of services generally associated with such clubs and facilities to their members. 
(z)  Primary use of land and buildings: Alcoholic beverage sales. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  This use shall be permitted in restaurants or similar places where substantial quantities of food are served, all in compliance with the alcoholic beverage regulations of chapter 4 of this Code; and 
(2)  Merchandise may not be displayed, stored, or offered for sale on any yard adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
(aa)  Primary use of land and buildings: Retail, general. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  A retail use in the M-N and M-BP districts may not exceed a gross floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, except a grocery store may not exceed forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. A single structure may contain more than these amounts of gross floor area, as long as no use within the structure exceeds the applicable size set forth herein; 
(2)  A retail use in the IG district may not exceed a gross floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, except upon issuance of a conditional use permit; and 
(3)  Merchandise may not be displayed, stored, or offered for sale on any yard adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
(bb)  Primary use of land and buildings: Light vehicle sales or rental. When such uses are in the M-DT district, all displays, sales and rental activities shall not occur in an area intended to be occupied by a building and shall not be located forward of the required building line (RBL). 
(cc)  Primary use of land and buildings: Light vehicle service and repair. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  In the M-N, M-C, M-DT, M-BP, and I-G districts, all service and repair activities must take place in an enclosed structure; 
(2)  Vehicle bodywork or painting, or major engine or transmission repairs shall not be permitted within the M-N or M-DT district. Such activities shall be permitted in the M-C, M-BP, and I-G districts provided such activities are conducted within a fully enclosed building; 
(3)  Inoperable or damaged vehicles awaiting repair shall be screened from view of all adjacent properties; 
(4)  No salvage activities shall be permitted; and 
(5)  Gas station or fuel centers with a convenience store are permitted within the M-DT urban general west frontage type, as shown on the M-DT regulating plan, and shall not be required to comply with the required building line (RBL) standards. 
(dd)  Primary use of land and buildings: Storage and wholesale distribution. Storage of feed, fertilizer, grain, soil conditioners, hazardous materials, asphalt, brick, cement, gravel, rock, sand, and similar construction materials, or fuels is only permitted in the IG district. 
(ee)  Primary use of land and buildings: Light industry. This use shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  In all zone districts where this is a permitted use: 
(i)  No use or activity shall result in the harmful discharge of any waste materials into or upon the ground, into or within any sanitary or storm sewer system, into or within any water system or water, or into the atmosphere; 
(ii)  No use or activity shall be conducted in a manner that constitutes a menace to persons or property or in a manner that is dangerous, obnoxious or offensive by reason of the creation of a fire, explosion or other physical hazard, or by reason of air pollution, odor, smoke, noise, dust, vibration, radiation or fumes; 
(iii)  No outside storage shall be allowed; and 
(iv)  Eighty (80) percent of the use activity shall occur within an enclosed building and hazardous materials are a minor component of its business activity. 
(2)  In the M-BP district, this use may include plants and facilities for the assembly, compounding, manufacture, packaging, processing, repairing or treatment of equipment, materials, merchandise or products; except for the following: 
(i)  Bone, fat, meat or tallow rendering plants; fish, meat or poultry packing houses; and slaughterhouses; 
(ii)  Foundries or mills for sand casting, forging, primary or secondary processing, reduction, reprocessing or electroplating ferrous or nonferrous metal; 
(iii)  Manufacture, milling or processing of feed, fertilizer, grain or soil conditioners; 
(iv)  Manufacture, compounding or processing of hazardous materials; 
(v)  Manufacture, milling, mixing or processing of asphalt, brick, cement, gravel, rock, sand, and similar construction materials; and 
(vi)  Manufacture, processing or refining of fuels. 
(ff)  Primary use of land and buildings: vehicle wrecking or junkyard. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  The facility must be enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least ten (10) feet in height, sufficient to block all views of stored or stacked vehicles, vehicle parts, and wrecking equipment when viewed from adjacent public rights-of-way; 
(2)  If located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zoning district or residential use, any equipment used for crushing or dismantling vehicles shall be located in a completely enclosed structure, or if not enclosed, shall meet the operating hours established in chapter 11 (health and sanitation) of the City Code; and 
(3)  In addition to the above, any vehicle wrecking or junkyard facility shall meet all applicable provisions of chapter 11 (health and sanitation) of the City Code. 
(gg)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Accessory dwelling units. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  No more than two (2) dwelling units, including the accessory dwelling, may be permitted on a single lot; 
(2)  The lot must be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet, and lot width must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet; 
(3)  A detached accessory dwelling shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet behind the principal dwelling, and a minimum of six (6) feet from any side or rear lot line. On corner lots, the accessory dwelling shall be set back from side streets not less than the distance required for the principal residence. For the purpose of providing adequate fire protection access, the distance from the nearest street frontage to the center of the rear wall of the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet of travel distance unless otherwise specified by the most current adopted edition of the International Fire Code or authorized by the fire chief; 
(4)  An accessory dwelling shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total square feet of the principal dwelling, as shown in the Boone County Assessor's records, or eight hundred (800) square feet, whichever is less. In addition, a detached accessory dwelling shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard; 
(5)  A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed the height of the principal dwelling or twenty-four (24) feet, whichever is less; 
(6)  When an accessory dwelling is attached to a principal dwelling, only one entrance may face the front lot line; 
(7)  In addition to the parking required for the principal dwelling, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for accessory dwellings having three (3) or more bedrooms. No more than three (3) bedrooms shall be allowed in an accessory dwelling unit; 
(8)  When a driveway is constructed or used to provide vehicle access to an accessory dwelling, the driveway shall be surfaced as required by this chapter. Gravel may be considered an acceptable alternative surfacing material under the following conditions: 
(1)  The fire chief has determined paved access is not necessary to provide safe and adequate fire access to all parts of all dwellings on the lot; 
(2)  An existing gravel driveway provides access to the accessory dwelling unit, or a new compacted gravel driveway is constructed to provide such access; and 
(3)  The driveway apron (i.e., the driveway within the public right-of-way) is constructed of a paved surface as required by city specifications. 
(9)  Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling, application shall be made to the city, including a plot plan showing existing buildings and proposed accessory dwelling location, in addition to the above listed criteria. 
(hh)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Backyard, rooftop, or community garden. Each of these uses shall be limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business shall be conducted upon the premises, and no obnoxious fertilizer is stored upon the premises, and no obnoxious soil or fertilizer renovation is conducted. 
(ii)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Customary accessory uses and related structures. 
(1)  All customary accessory uses and accessory structures shall comply with the following additional standards, unless otherwise provided in this Code: 
(i)  All accessory uses and accessory structures shall be subordinate to the principal structure(s) and primary use(s) on the property. The aggregate first floor square footage of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed the first floor square footage of any principal structure on the lot. The aggregate square footage of all areas devoted primarily to accessory uses on a lot shall not exceed the square footage of all areas devoted to the primary use of the lot; 
(ii)  All accessory uses and structures shall comply with all dimensional regulations (i.e. building height, lot coverage, and minimum yard) applicable to the principal structure(s) on the property unless this chapter provides a specific exception to those regulations; 
(iii)  No part of a detached accessory structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet to another structure; 
(iv)  An accessory use may not begin operation before a permitted primary use or an approved conditional primary use begins operation on the property. An accessory structure may not be constructed before a permitted principal structure is constructed on the property; and 
(v)  Driveways, parking areas and loading areas shall comply with the requirements of section 29-4.3. 
(2)  Customary accessory uses and accessory structures to one-family, two-family, live-work, shall also comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Detached accessory structures shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less, and may not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of a required rear yard; 
(ii)  For any dwelling there shall be permitted one garage with space for not more than one motor vehicle for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area, provided that total garage space shall not exceed the total habitable first-floor floor area of the primary dwelling; 
(iii)  Detached accessory structures and accessory surface improvements (such as tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools, or paved patios) shall be located: 
(A)  Not forward of the principal structure, 
(B)  Not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line, and 
(C)  Not less than one foot from any alley line; 
(iv)  Notwithstanding the provision of subparagraph (iii) above, when the rear lot line is common to a side or rear lot line of another lot, detached accessory structures and accessory surface improvements must be located a minimum of three (3) feet from such rear lot line. For corner lots, detached accessory structures and accessory surface improvements must be located not less than the distance required for residences from side streets; and 
(v)  An accessory structure or accessory surface improvement constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the setback standards affecting the main building, provided that on a corner lot, a garage integrally attached to the main building may extend to a point not less than eighteen (18) feet from the rear lot line, but shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard. 
(3)  In the R-MF district, for-profit or not-for-profit accessory uses and related structures must comply with the following additional standards: 
(i)  The use must be accessory and subordinate in floor area to a permitted use, and must be primarily an amenity or service to the occupants and users of the permitted use, subject to the additional provisions contained in this subsection; 
(ii)  The commercial use, alone or in combination with other small-scale commercial uses, shall not exceed the smaller of twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the building or five hundred (500) square feet. Where the proposed location of the conditional accessory use is within a unified development of multiple buildings under single ownership and control, or a single building totaling greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, the board may consider a larger space for the ancillary commercial use provided it complies with the other standards of this subsection; 
(iii)  The commercial use shall not involve the sale of age-restricted products such as alcohol, tobacco and firearms; 
(iv)  The commercial use shall not generate noise or traffic in excess of the levels expected if the entire premises were used for permitted uses; 
(v)  Hours of operation shall be limited to not earlier than 6:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m. daily; and 
(vi)  There shall be no additional parking required to accommodate the use. 
(4)  In the IG district, accessory uses may include retail sales to the public of goods produced on the premises. 
(jj)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Drive-up facility. This use is subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Any drive-up facility located within one hundred (100) feet of an R-1 or R-2 zone district shall require buffering meeting the requirements of section 29-4.4 (landscaping screening) and along the property line with the R-1 or R-2 district, shall have no speakers facing the R-1 or R-2 districts, and shall have no menu boards or other signs visible from the R-1 or R-2 districts; and 
(2)  All drive-up facilities shall be subject to all applicable noise control ordinances. 
(kk)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Home occupation. This use is permitted if compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood, however, in order to promote peace, quiet and freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effects of commercial uses being conducted in residential areas all home occupations must meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be incidental to the use of a dwelling unit for residential uses. No person other than a person residing at the dwelling unit shall be directly involved with or work in the home occupation. If the home occupation employs persons to work at other locations, the dwelling unit shall not be used as an assembly point for any employees who may work at sites outside of the dwelling; 
(2)  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises shall be made, including the creation of a separate entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance exclusively for the home occupation; 
(3)  No more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and garage shall be devoted to the home occupation. A garage shall not be used for a home occupation if such use has the effect of eliminating required parking; 
(4)  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or garage and no stock in trade shall be displayed or visible outside, or stored outside of any building, and no raw materials, tools or appliances or waste products shall be stored outside of any building; 
(5)  Signs may be used for identification or advertisement of the home occupation but such signs must be attached flat to the structure, may not be larger than one square foot and may not be illuminated; 
(6)  Direct sales to the public shall not be conducted on the premises, provided that off-site orders previously made may be filled on the premises; 
(7)  The use shall not generate traffic in volumes greater than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. For purposes of this section, the normal volume of traffic generated by a single-family dwelling shall be defined as twelve (12) vehicle trips to and/or from the dwelling unit per twenty-four-hour period. The use shall not use commercial or business vehicles to deliver finished products from the dwelling unit. All parking necessarily generated by the use shall be off the street in accordance with section 29-4.3(f) of this chapter; 
(8)  The use shall not produce noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perception outside the structure; 
(9)  No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive or other restricted materials may be used or stored on the site; and 
(10)  All persons desiring to have a home occupation must first present appropriate plans to the building regulations supervisor detailing how the dwelling will be used or altered to accommodate the use. Thereafter, whenever any permit or license is to be renewed, the dwelling may be inspected to determine how it has been altered to accommodate the use. 
(ll)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Home occupation with non-resident employees. This use shall be subject to the standards listed for all home occupations in subsection (kk) above; except that the home occupation may be carried out by occupants of the dwelling unit as well as by one full-time forty-hour individual or two (2) one-half-time (not more than twenty (20) hours each) individuals who do not reside in the dwelling unit. In addition, the board may allow that not more than forty (40) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and garage area shall be devoted to the home occupation. A conditional use permit for a home occupation shall expire three (3) years from the date of approval, after which a new conditional use permit may be requested. 
(mm)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Outdoor storage in residential districts. 
(1)  No portion of any front yard, except a legal driveway and for not more than two consecutive weeks, shall be used for the storage of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, camper trailers, camper shells, commercial vehicles. 
(2)  A maximum of two (2) inoperative motor vehicles intended for repair or restoration may be kept on a property provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(i)  The vehicles are not stored on any part of a front yard; 
(ii)  The vehicles shall be kept in an enclosed garage, under an opaque cover designed for the vehicle, or otherwise screened from view from public streets; and 
(iii)  No vehicular parts shall be stored outdoors. 
(3)  Storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, camper trailers, and camper shells shall comply with the following additional standards: 
(i)  In residential districts, the above listed vehicles and items shall be stored only in the side or rear yard, and shall not be stored within two (2) feet of any property line; and 
(ii)  No vehicle shall be used for living or sleeping purposes for a period of more than two (2) consecutive weeks while stored on the premises. 
(4)  Vehicles with gross weight exceeding five (5) tons or ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or longer than twenty-four (24) feet, or containing more than six (6) wheels, or over twelve thousand (12,000) pounds licensed gross vehicle weight, shall not be permitted to be stored outside in any residential district. 
(nn)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Temporary real estate sales/leasing office. This use shall be located on property being sold or leased and limited to the period of sale or lease, and shall not exceed a period of two (2) years without issuance of a conditional use permit from the board. 
(oo)  Accessory and temporary uses of land and buildings: Tree or landscaping service. When such use is located in the M-C or M-BP district the following additional standards shall apply: 
(1)  No grinding or reprocessing of materials or debris shall be permitted on the site; 
(2)  Vehicles and equipment used as part of such business operations may be located on the site provided they are screened from adjoining residential property in accordance with the provisions of this UDC and are not located forward of the principal building on the site; and 
(3)  Repair of vehicles or equipment used as part of such business shall be conducted within a fully enclosed structure. 
(pp)  Reserved. 
(qq)  Primary use of land and buildings: Medical marijuana facilities. Pursuant to Article XVI of the Missouri Constitution the following four (4) types of medical marijuana facilities have been authorized: cultivation, dispensary, infused product manufacturing, and testing. These facility types are defined within section 29-1.11 of this chapter and shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  No facility shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an existing public or private elementary or secondary school, child day care center, or church as those terms are defined in the Rules of the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services as contained in the Code of State Regulations Title 19 CSR Division 30 Chapter 95. 
(2)  The number of medical marijuana dispensary facilities located within the city limits shall be limited to one (1) per twenty thousand (20,000) population, or fraction thereof, as established by the most recent U.S. Census Bureau, Population Estimates Program (PEP). 
(3)  No single tenant space may be occupied by multiple facility types. Each facility shall only be permitted to operate according to its definition and licensure. 
(4)  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities may be located within a multi-tenant retail-commercial building provided such facilities are separated from other tenants by full walls separating each tenant space. 
(5)  Hours of operation for a medical marijuana dispensary shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; irrespective of what zoning district such facility may be located within. 
(6)  All facilities shall be within a fully enclosed building unless otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
(7)  No facility shall be permitted to be located within a mobile structure. 
(8)  All newly-constructed facilities shall be designed to visually integrate with the surrounding structures and comply with applicable city codes. To further preserve the aesthetic integrity of neighborhoods and areas in which retrofitted or newly constructed facilities may be located, there shall be no use of bars or cages on windows to comply with the security requirements within this section. 
(9)  Odor emitted from facilities shall not be noxious, cause a public nuisance, be perceptible outside the building, as measured at the property line, or otherwise violate the regulations promulgated by the department of health and senior services. 
(10)  Waste generated by facilities shall be disposed of in accordance to requirements promulgated by the department of health and senior services and other applicable federal, state, and local laws, whichever shall be more restrictive, to prevent exposure to the public or create a nuisance. 
(11)  Facility signage shall be subject to the regulations promulgated by the department of health and senior services and the requirements of this chapter, whichever is more restrictive. 
(12)  Exterior site/security lighting shall be subject to the regulations promulgated by the department of health and senior services and the requirements of this chapter, whichever is more restrictive. 
(13)  Within thirty (30) days of ceasing facility operations, all plants, medical marijuana-related equipment, signage, and any other facility-related items shall be removed from the building and site within or upon which the facility previously existed. 
(14)  All facility applicants shall submit, as a component of the City of Columbia Business License application, a security plan, operations and management plan, and emergency response plan compliant with the provisions enumerated in chapter 13 of this Code prior to the issuance of a business license. 
(15)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility without a valid license from the department of health and senior services, a valid business license from the City of Columbia, and in a manner not in conformance with these supplemental standards of other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(16)  The foregoing use specific standards shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or local laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 23771 , § 1, 2-4-19; Ord. No. 23895 , § 1, 6-3-19)  
Sec. 29-3.4. - C-2 district outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary. 
(a)  The permitted uses and conditional uses for property in the C-2 district located outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary shall be allowed as set forth in this section. 
(1)  Permitted uses. In the C-2 district located outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary, no building, land or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(i)  All permitted uses in district M-N with the exception that dwelling units shall also be subject to the following floor area requirements: 
(A)  One-family—Not less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet excluding basements, porches and garages. 
(B)  Two-family—Not less than five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit excluding basements, porches and garages. 
(C)  Multiple-family—Not less than four hundred (400) square feet per dwelling unit, excluding basements, porches and garages. 
(ii)  Armories. 
(iii)  Assembly and lodge halls. 
(iv)  Automobile repair facilities provided that all repair shall take place within an enclosed building. 
(v)  Bakeries. 
(vi)  Bars, cocktail lounges and nightclubs. 
(vii)  Billiard halls and game arcades. 
(viii)  Bicycle repair shops. 
(ix)  Bus stations. 
(x)  Car washes, coin-operated or attendant-operated. 
(xi)  Electrical repair shop. 
(xii)  Garment storage facilities. 
(xiii)  Government buildings and facilities. 
(xiv)  Hospitals for small animals, if within an enclosed building. 
(xv)  Hotels. 
(xvi)  Laundries, commercial. 
(xvii)  Lumberyards. 
(xviii)  Multi-level, underground or covered commercial parking for automobiles and light trucks. 
(xix)  Newspaper publishing plants. 
(xx)  Printing shops. 
(xxi)  Restaurants, cafes and cafeterias. 
(xxii)  Service stations, provided all fuel storage tanks are located underground. 
(xxiii)  Shops for custom work, or the manufacture of articles to be sold at retail only on the premises, provided that in such manufacture the total mechanical power shall not exceed five (5) horsepower for the operation of any one shop, and provided that the space occupied by the manufacturing use permitted herein shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the total floor area of the entire building or the equivalent of the ground thereof, and provided further that such manufacturing use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, or otherwise. 
(xxiv)  Sign painting shops. 
(xxv)  Theatres, not including drive-in theatres. 
(xxvi)  Trade schools. 
(xxvii)  Wholesale sales offices and sample rooms. 
(xxviii)  Customary accessory uses, including drive-up facilities, subject to the use-specific standards of section 29-3.3. 
(xxix)  Any retail business or use of a similar character to those listed above, provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, or otherwise. 
(2)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in C-2 district located outside the M-DT regulating plan boundary only after the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of section 29-6.4(m): 
(i)  Halfway houses for not more than fifteen (15) occupants, provided that the board finds that the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest considering the size and character of the proposed facility and its proximity to schools, churches, mosques, synagogues, residences, other halfway houses and halfway houses for young offenders for not more than forty (40) occupants. 
(ii)  Hospitals for human beings, medical or dental clinics, sanitariums, and medical laboratories. 
(iii)  Mortuaries, which may include a crematory. 
(iv)  Research and development laboratories, provided there is minimal/insignificant use of hazardous materials based on a risk assessment. 
(v)  Self-service storage facilities, subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  The application required by section 29-6.4(m) shall include a conceptual design plan that shows: 
1)  The location of the proposed facility in relation to the existing uses of the building. 
2)  The square footage of the total building and area that will be allocated for the proposed facility. 
3)  The means of ingress and egress to the proposed facility. 
4)  The use group or groups that the building is currently permitted for as defined in chapter 6 (building and building regulations) of this Code. 
5)  How the altered building will address parking and loading demands generated by the proposed facility. 
The conceptual design plan is not required to be "sealed" by a registered design professional. The plan may be drawn by the applicant. The plan shall be prepared in a manner that all details are legible. 
(B)  The facility is incidental to the primary use of the building in which it is located (i.e., a mixed use occupancy building shall be required). 
(C)  The facility shall not be used to store flammable gases, aerosols, paints, thinners, feed, fertilizer, soil conditioners, pesticides, chemicals, explosives and other hazardous materials, construction materials, inoperable vehicles, or for bulk storage of any kind. 
(D)  The use of power tools, paint sprayers, or servicing, repair or fabrication of furniture, boats, trailers, motor vehicles, lawn mowers, appliances and other similar equipment is prohibited in the facility. 
(E)  The facility shall be used exclusively for the storage of goods. No individual tenant may convert, use, or otherwise alter a leased or rented unit to sell any stored item from the facility or to conduct any type of commercial activity at the facility. 
(F)  When the facility is located on the first floor of a building, it shall not be located in front of the primary use so that it is the visible storefront of the building. 
(G)  When the facility is located in the basement or on any floor higher than the first floor of a building, it may occupy the entire basement or floor only if existing exterior windows remain intact and are "blacked-out" to ensure that stored items are not visible and that the architectural integrity of the building façade is maintained. Building facades on new or renovated construction shall incorporate design elements that break-up the façade so it does not create a blank elevation. 
(H)  When the facility is located in an existing or renovated building, loading and unloading activities, on public rights-of-way, shall not occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. (Monday thru Friday). 
(I)  When the facility is located in a newly constructed building, provision for off-street loading/unloading facilities shall be incorporated into the design of the structure. The facility shall be of adequate depth from the right-of-way so that no blockage of the travel way will occur during loading/unloading activities. When such provision is made, the limitation on hours of loading and unloading, stated in item (H), above, shall not apply. On-site parking requirements shall be governed by the provisions of section 29-4.3. 
(J)  All proposed construction, renovation, or alteration activities necessary to permit the facility to occupy an existing or new structure shall be in accordance with the requirements of chapter 6 and chapter 9 of the City Code. Activities begun before submission, review and approval of professionally sealed plans and the issuance of a building permit shall be a violation of the conditional use permit conditions and this Code. 
(vi)  Uncovered, surface commercial parking for automobiles and light trucks abutting a public street, except for publicly-owned parking facilities. Parking areas located behind buildings, not directly adjacent to a public street (except an alley), are permitted. 
(vii)  Uncovered, surface off-street parking areas, except for publicly-owned parking facilities. 
(b)  Height and area regulations. In district C-2 any building, portion of a building or dwelling hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered shall be subject to the following regulations (for exceptions, see section 29-4.1(c), exceptions and encroachments): 
(1)  Lot size. No minimum requirement. 
(2)  Yards. No minimum requirement. 
(3)  Building height. Buildings shall have a minimum of two (2) stories consisting of a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. One hundred twenty (120) feet or ten (10) stories is the maximum building height permitted by right. Buildings that exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet or ten (10) stories shall be subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council according to the standards and procedures in item (7), below. 
(4)  Vision clearance. No requirement. 
(5)  Floor area. No minimum requirement. 
(6)  Parking. On-site parking is required for dwelling units in new buildings and buildings expanded after August 18, 2014. There shall be no parking requirement for new dwelling units created in buildings or enclosed portions of buildings that are at least fifty (50) years old. There shall be no parking requirement for buildings or portions of buildings that exist as of August 18, 2014 that are removed and rebuilt, in whole or in part, to restore but not expand the previously existing building, and there shall be no parking requirement for buildings that have been issued a building permit prior to August 18, 2014. (See section 29-4.3, parking and loading.) 
(7)  Tall structure approval. All buildings that exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet or ten (10) stories in height shall require council approval. Requests for tall structure approval in district C-2 shall require a petition on a form provided by the director and shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for a recommendation and city council consideration of an ordinance approving the tall structure in the same manner and following the same procedural steps as described in section 29-6.4(n) of this Code. 
Petitioners shall provide the planning and zoning commission with preliminary building plans (elevations and representative floor plans), site plan including adjacent streets and alleys, and a shade study. A "shade study" represents, in graphic form, the shade cast by the tall structure on adjacent properties and streets, by time of day and by season. An example of adverse impacts revealed by a shade study would be complete shading of rooftop solar panels mounted on an adjacent, lower building. 
A tall building may be approved by the city council if it satisfies the following criteria: 
(i)  The height is consistent with adopted city plan recommendations for maximum building height in the specific location; 
(ii)  The additional height will not impair emergency response to the subject building or other places in the immediate vicinity in the opinion of the fire code official and chief of police; 
(iii)  The additional height will not have an adverse impact on the availability of air and light to adjacent buildings and public streets; adequate spacing exists between the proposed building and openings in the walls of an adjacent building or between the proposed building and rooftop spaces used as amenities to allow the penetration of sunlight to those openings or rooftop spaces; 
(iv)  The additional height will not create demand on any public utility or public infrastructure in excess of available capacity, as concluded by an engineering analysis of the projected utility loads and the existing and planned capacities of infrastructure to accommodate it; and 
(v)  Public sidewalks, crosswalks, and streets adjacent to the site are of sufficient capacity to handle the anticipated pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by the tall structure, as concluded by a traffic impact analysis.  
ARTICLE 4. - FORM AND DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS 
 
Sec. 29-4.1. - Dimensional summary table. 
(a)  General dimensional standards. The following Tables 4.1-1 to 4.1-3 state the dimensional standards for residential, mixed use, and special purpose districts contained in chapter 29-2 (zoning districts). In case of a conflict between the dimensions shown in this section 29-4.1 and the dimensions shown for individual districts in chapter 29, article 2, the provisions of this section 29-4.1 shall apply. In each table, a blank cell indicates that there is no standard for that dimension or measurement. (See section chapter 12A of the City Code for additional required building setbacks from stream corridors. See section 29-4.1(b)(2) (solar orientation density bonus) and section 29-4.1(b)(3) (rural cluster density bonus), for additional information related to dimensional standard reductions and bonuses). 
Table 4.1-1: Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts 
	District 
Standard 	R-1 	R-2 [1] 	R-MF [2] 	R-MH 
		Current 	Cottage 		
Lots 
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 
One-Family Dwelling 	7,000 	5,000 	3,000 	5,000 	3,750 
One-Family Attached Dwelling 		3,500 		3,500 	
Two-Family Dwelling 		7,000 		7,000 	
Multiple Family Dwelling 				2,500 per du 	
Sorority or Fraternity 				7,500 	
CRCC 				No min., but max. density 17du/ac 	
Lot area if no public or community sewer [5] 	15,000 	15,000 			
Minimum Lot Width (ft.) (detached) 	60 	60 	30 	60 	45 
Minimum Lot Width (ft.) (attached) - per lot 		30 		30 	
Maximum size of contiguous area that may be replatted without being within a "cottage" subdivision 			1 		
Minimum Setbacks (ft.) 
Front Yard 
Front Yard Depth 	25 	25 	10 	25 	20 
Front lot line to garage depth (if applicable) 	25 	25 	20 		
Side Yard 
Side Yard 	6 	6 	6 	10 	10 
Side Yard - Corner Lot Street Side 	25 	25 	10 	15 	
Distance between mobile dwelling units 					20 
Rear Yard 	Lesser of 30% lot depth or 25 	Lesser of 25% lot depth or 25 	10 	25 	10 
Maximum Height (ft.) 
Primary Residential Building 
See also section 29-4.7 Neighborhood Protection Standards 	35[3] 	35[3] 	35 	35[3] 	35 
Primary Non-residential Building [4] 
See also section 29-4.7 Neighborhood Protection Standards 	75 	75 		75 	
[1] All R-2 lands are subject to Current Standards until they request application of the Cottage Standards, and that request is approved under section 29-6.4(j). 
[2] Multifamily structures constructed before January 1, 2014, with building height up to 45 ft. and lot area of at least 1,500 sq. ft. per dwelling unit are conforming structures. 
[3] Or 45 ft. if two side yards at least 15 ft. in width are provided. 
[4] Provided that each building setback is increased one foot above the District residential building minimum for each one foot of additional building height above the residential building maximum. 
[5] The minimum lot area for on-site septic is subject to health department approval based, in part, on distances between the lot and existing public sewer mains. This lot area could be greater, conditional, or denied on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Table 4.1-2: Dimensional Standards for Mixed Use Districts 
	District 
Standard 	M-OF 	M-N [1] 	M-C [2] 	M-BP 	M-DT 
		Current 	Pedestrian 	Current 	Transit 		
Lots 
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 	See section 29-4.2 for M-DT Dimensional Standards 
Lot Area 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	
Lot Width at Building Line[3] 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	
Building Setbacks (ft.) 	
Front Yard 	
General 	Min. 25 	Min. 25 	Min. 0 
Max. 10 [4] 	Min. 25 	Min. 0 
Max. 10 [4] 	Min. 15 	
From Arterial and Collector Streets 	Min. 25 	Min 25 	Min. 0 
Max. 10 [4] 	Min. 25 	Min. 0 
Max. 10 [4] 	Min. 25 	
Side Yard 	
General 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	
Adjacent to R District 	Min. 10 	Min. 10 	Min. 10 	Min. 20 	Min. 20 	Min. 20 	
Corner Lot with Frontage on Arterial or Collector Street 	Min. 15 	Min. 15 	Min. 0 	Min. 15 	Min. 10 	Min. 25 	
Corner Lot with Frontage on Other Streets 	Min. 15 	Min. 15 	Min. 0 	Min. 15 	Min. 10 	Min. 20 	
Rear Yard 	
General 	Min. 25 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	Min. 0 	
Adjacent to R District 		Min. 10 	Min. 10 	Min. 20 	Min. 20 	Min. 20 	
Maximum Height (ft.) 	
Primary Building 
See also section 29-4.7 Neighborhood Protection Standards 	45 	35 	35 	45 	55 	45 	
[1] All M-N lands are subject to Current Standards until they request application of the Pedestrian Standards and that request is approved under section 29-6.4(j). 
[2] All M-C lands are subject to Current Standards until they request application of the Transit Standards, and that request is approved under section 29-6.4(j). 
[3] If direct driveway access is proposed to lots fronting collector or arterial streets see section 29-5.1(f)(1)(iv)(d). 
[4] 75% of building frontage width must be located between minimum and maximum setback distances. 
 
Table 4.1-3: Dimensional Standards for Special Districts 
	District 
Standard 	IG 	A 	O 
Lots 
Minimum Lot Area (ac.) 		2.5 	2.5 
Minimum Lot Area For Private Open Space (sq. ft.) 			7,000 
Minimum Lot Width at Building Line (ft.) 		60 	60 
Minimum Setbacks (ft.) 
Front Yard 	25 	25 	25 
Side Yard - General 	0 	25 	25 
Side Yard - Adjacent to R District 	20 		
Rear Yard - General 	10 	25 	25 
Rear Yard - Adjacent to R District 	20 		
Maximum Height (ft.) 
Primary Building 
See also section 29-4.7 Neighborhood Protection Standards 		35 	35 
 
(b)  Special dimensional standards or measurements. 
(1)  Median front yard for multiple lots. 
(i)  In the R-1, R-2, and R-MF districts, where the nearest lots on either side of a residential lot have been developed with residential structures, the median of the front yards of such residential buildings shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the subject lot. In no case shall the setback be less than the minimum setback established in Table 4.1-3 unless a reduction is approved by the board. 
(ii)  Where a recorded plat has been filed showing a setback line that otherwise complies with the requirements of this chapter, but is less than the established setback for the block as provided above, the setback line shown on the plat shall apply. 
(2)  Solar orientation density bonus. 
(i)  A subdivision in the R-1 or R-2 districts in which at least seventy-five (75) percent of lots are created on blocks where the longer dimension of the block is oriented within fifteen (15) degrees of true east-west in order to increase potential solar gain, the maximum number of single-family or two-family lots permitted on the parcel under Table 4.3-1 shall be increased by ten (10) percent above the number of lots permitted, and the minimum size and width of each lot shall be reduced by fifteen (15) percent below the minimum lot size and width required if the streets had not been so aligned. 
(ii)  In a subdivision that meets the requirements for application of the solar orientation density bonus, the minimum lot size and lot width in the R-1 or R-2 districts shall be adjusted to allow the parcel to contain ten (10) percent more lots greater than if the streets had not been so aligned. 
(3)  Rural cluster density bonus. 
(i)  A subdivision in the R-1 or R-2 districts that preserves at least fifty (50) percent of the gross land area of the parcel in open space protected from future development shall be allowed to include ten (10) percent more residential lots than if such land had not been designated for protection. 
(ii)  In order to earn a density bonus, the lands protected from development shall meet the following requirements: 
(A)  The calculation of protected open space shall not include any lands designated as floodway or flood fringe in the FP-O floodplain overlay; 
(B)  The protected lands shall include any lands designated as sensitive lands on the land analysis map required by section 29-5.1(b) to the greatest degree practicable; 
(C)  The protected lands shall be designed to be contiguous to any protected lands on adjacent subdivided lands to the greatest degree practicable; 
(D)  The applicant shall record in the real property records of Boone County a restrictive covenant, in a form acceptable to the city counselor, or designee, preventing future development of the protected lands in perpetuity, and demonstrating that a homeowners association or other entity has accepted responsibility for maintenance and management of the protected lands and has legal authority to collect funds from homeowners or others adequate to pay the expenses of such maintenance and management. 
(iii)  In a clustered subdivision that meets the requirements for application of the rural cluster density bonus, the minimum lot size and lot width in the R-1 or R-2 districts shall be adjusted to allow the parcel to contain ten (10) percent more lots greater than if fifty (50) percent of the gross land area had not been protected from development. 
(iv)  The rural cluster density bonus may be combined with the solar access density bonus in section 29-4.1(b)(2). 
(4)  Rear yards. 
(i)  No rear yard shall be required in any nonresidential district on any lot of which the rear lot line adjoins a railway right-of-way or which has a rear railway track connection. 
(ii)  In computing the depth of a rear yard for any building where such yard abuts an alley, one-half of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard. 
(iii)  The standards in subsections (i) and (ii) do not apply in the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), which has separate provisions for measuring building rear setbacks. 
(5)  Official major roadway plan. The major roadway plan shall be prepared by CATSO and submitted to the commission for recommendation and adoption by the council. Once a major roadway plan has been adopted by council, where a line on the major roadway plan (MRP) indicates that street widening has been planned right-of-way shall be reserved for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, and the depth or width of a yard shall be measured from the MRP line to the nearest line of the building. The board may vary the setback lines established in conformance with the major roadway plan if it determines that unwarranted hardship, which constitutes an unreasonable deprivation of use as distinguished from the mere grant of a privilege, may be avoided. 
(6)  Detached accessory structure. 
(i)  In any residential district, a detached accessory structure shall not: 
(A)  Exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height; 
(B)  Be higher than the main building; or 
(C)  Occupy more than thirty (30) percent of a rear yard. 
(ii)  A detached accessory structure may be connected with the main building by a breezeway, open on each side, not more than six (6) feet wide, the roof of which is not more than twelve (12) feet high at its highest point, and is not an extension of the roof of the main building. 
(7)  Higher education institution buildings. Buildings constructed on the campus of an institution of higher learning, and that have been included as part of a development plan approved by the council, need not comply with the yard requirements of the district in which they are located, but shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Minimum distance between the building and a street line is twenty-five (25) feet; and 
(ii)  Minimum distance to a property line other than a street is fifteen (15) feet for buildings thirty-five (35) feet or less in height, and five (5) additional feet for each additional ten (10) feet or part thereof in height. 
(c)  Exceptions and encroachments. 
(1)  Height. Table 4.1-4 identifies exceptions to those height limits shown in section 4.1(a) and (b) above. 
Table 4.1-4: Height Exceptions 
Structure, Feature, or Use 	Maximum Height (ft.) 	Conditions or Limits 
Elementary/Secondary schools in R-MF district 	100 	
¦ Parapet walls 	6 feet above maximum height limit of district 	
¦ False mansards 		
¦ Flagpoles 		
¦ Chimneys 		
¦ Finial cooling towers 		
¦ Elevator bulkheads 		
¦ Penthouses 		
¦ Stacks 		
¦ Cupolas 		
¦ Antennas 		
¦ Spires, and 		
¦ Rooftop solar energy equipment 		
¦ Rooftop HVAC equipment screened by parapet wall 		
Rooftop or yard mounted WECs equipment in M-BP or IG district 	30 ft. above maximum height limit in district 	
Agricultural uses (e.g. silos, windmills, barns, etc.) in A-1 	75 feet 	
Radio and television antenna (private, noncommercial) in residential districts 	45 feet 	Must not be located in front yard, and must comply with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
 
(2)  Yard areas. Table 4.1-5 identifies exceptions and encroachments to required yard areas. Except for permitted exceptions in the table, every part of a required yard or court shall be open and unobstructed from its lowest point to the sky. 
Table 4.1-5: Yard Area Exceptions 
Structure, Feature, or Use 	Yard Encroachment (maximum) 	Conditions or Limits 
Building sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features, eaves, and rain barrels 	2 ft. into a yard 	
Canopies or open porches 	6 feet into front or rear yard 	Roof area limited to 60 sf or less; Porch cannot be enclosed 
Driveways 	Single- and Two-Family Residential 	Up to a 2-car garage 	Permitted to a maximum width of 20 ft. in any front, rear, side, or corner side yard 	Single- and two-family residential driveways shall maintain a setback of 5 ft. from the side property line and shall not occupy more than 50% of the lot width. 
		3-car garage 	Permitted to a maximum width of 28 ft. in any front, rear, side, or corner side yard 	
		Shared duplex driveway 	Permitted to a maximum width of 36 ft. in any front, rear, side, or corner side yard 	
	Multi-Family, Commercial, and Mixed-Use 	Permitted to a maximum width of 24 ft. (one-way, in or out), and 36 ft. (combined, in and out) in any front, rear, side, or corner side yard 	Multi-family, commercial, and mixed-use driveways shall maintain a setback of 10 ft. from any side property line adjacent to a Residential district, or as determined by the required driveway radius. 
Lot boundary fences, walls, and retaining walls 	Permitted up to lot line 	May not encroach on public right-of-way or adjacent property without consent of owner 
Open fire escape 	Into side yard, by no more than ½ the side yard width 	Cannot extend more than 4 feet from the building 
Open paved terraces 	10 feet into front or rear yard 	
Solar or geothermal energy equipment 	Permitted in a side or rear yard 	Not within 2 feet of a side or rear property line 
  
Sec. 29-4.2. - M-DT form-based controls. 
The M-DT district is to encourage a mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented district - with a secondary focus on land uses. Property frontages and façades are part of the public realm, literally forming the walls of the street-space and are therefore subject to more regulation than the other portions of the private property. The principal regulatory sections of the M-DT district are the regulating plan, the building form standards, and the urban space standards, described below: 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The regulating plan. The regulating plan applies M-DT regulations to individual properties in the district. It is public space master plan with specific information on development parameters for each parcel and shows how each lot relates to the street-space and the surrounding neighborhood. The regulating plan also identifies additional regulations and/or opportunities for lots in specific locations, as well as place-specific exceptions to the building form standards. 
(2)  The building form standards. The building form standards (BFS) are coded street frontages. They establish basic parameters governing building form for different locations shown on the regulating plan in order to shape the street-space through the site and form controls on buildings. Their secondary intent is to ensure that the buildings are coordinated to form a functioning, sustainable, block structure throughout the district. They describe the buildable envelope (in three dimensions) and certain permitted or required building elements that define the form and mixed-use character of the district. The building form standards establish both the boundaries within which things may be done and specific things that must be done. The street frontage designated on the regulating plan determines the applicable building form standard for a building site. 
(3)  The urban space standards. The urban space standards establish those rules and standards for the street-space and squares and greens within the M-DT district that are the responsibility of the developer. They establish an environment that encourages and facilitates pedestrian activity and "walkable" streets that are comfortable, efficient, safe, and interesting, and ensure the coherence of the street-space. 
(b)  Using the M-DT district form standards. This section describes how to apply the requirements of the M-DT district to specific properties. 
(1)  Look at the zoning map and determine if property in question is located within the M-DT district. If it is not, then section 29-4.2 is not applicable. 
(2)  Look at the regulating plan in section 29-4.2(c) and find the property in question. Note the color of the street-space fronting the lot—and then look at the "key" box to determine which building form standard frontage applies to the property. Note the required building line and the parking setback line. 
(3)  Find the applicable individual building form standard in section 29-4.2(e). The individual building form standard frontage will tell you the parameters for development on the lot in terms of height, siting, elements, and use. 
(4)  Additional regulations applicable to all properties in the M-DT district are located in sections 29-4.2(d) (general building form standards) and (f) (urban space standards). 
Land uses, parking requirements, and signage standards that apply to the M-DT district are found in article 3 and in sections 29-4.3 and 29-4.8 of this chapter. 
(c)  The regulating plan. The regulating plan dated March 20, 2017, as amended from time to time as provided herein, is hereby adopted and approved by the council as the regulating plan for the M-DT district. The official copy of the regulating plan, as amended, shall be kept on file in the office of the director. The regulating plan makes the M-DT standards place-specific, by describing where each building form standard applies and by defining the public spaces. The regulating plan also identifies the items below, as illustrated in the plan and key that follow: 
• The boundaries for the district; 
• Existing and proposed streets and alleys; 
• The required building lines, parking setback lines, and lot building limits. 
(1)  Understanding the regulating plan. The following images of the M-DT district regulating plan and key are for illustrative purposes only. Contact the community development department for further information about the M-DT district and shall maintain a copy of the regulating plan with the official zoning map. 
 
The regulating plan key, below, highlights the regulations conveyed on the plan. 
 
(2)  Streets, blocks and alleys on the regulating plan. 
(i)  Street connectivity and the pedestrian-oriented public realm are fundamental characteristics of the M-DT district. When a property is developed or redeveloped: 
(A)  For large-scale projects, that involve a site that is the majority of a block or more, applicants shall apply for an amendment to the regulating plan which may require the addition of new streets or alleys to create a smaller block pattern. 
(B)  No streets or alleys shown on the regulating plan may be removed without a replacement street being constructed in a location that maintains overall street connectivity in that area. 
(C)  New alleys or pedestrian pathways required by the regulating plan or a regulating plan amendment shall be public, or publicly accessible. 
(D)  All lots shall share a frontage line with a public street. 
(ii)  Block size is a key component of walkability. For existing block faces of greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet in length at the time of redevelopment: 
(A)  The block face must be interrupted by an alley, common drive, or pedestrian pathway providing through-access to another public street, alley, common drive or designated conservation line. 
(B)  Individual lots or development sites with up to one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage are exempt from the requirement to interrupt the block face. 
(C)  Individual lots or development sites with more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage shall meet the requirement within the lot or site, unless already satisfied within that block face. 
(iii)  Curb cuts interfere with pedestrian movement and should be limited or removed to the extent possible during redevelopment. 
(A)  For lots with an alley accessible to service vehicles, existing curb cuts shall be eliminated or vacated at the time of redevelopment unless the director in consultation with the department of public works determines that they are necessary to protect public safety or avoid traffic congestion, or because alley access will not serve the functional needs of the property. 
(B)  For lots without alley access, existing curb cuts may be maintained or relocated along the same frontage. 
(C)  Where a parking structure is provided with at least thirty (30) percent of its spaces publically available, existing curb cuts may be relocated or maintained to provide access to the structure, even if the parcel has alley access. 
(iv)  Alleys are a key component of M-DT district connectivity and service infrastructure. 
(A)  Alleys or common drives must provide automobile and service access to the rear of all lots, except where the city has regulated alley access, where lots abut non-developable lots, or where a lot has streets on three sides and the absence of an alley or common drive would not deprive an adjacent neighbor of rear lot access. 
(B)  New alleys require an amendment to the regulating plan. 
(C)  For new alleys or common drives, public access, public utility, and drainage shall be dedicated through an irrevocable easement. 
(D)  Alleys may be incorporated into (rear) parking lots as standard drive aisles if cross-access to all abutting properties is maintained. 
(E)  Where an alley does not exist but is identified on the regulating plan, and it is not feasible to construct the alley at the time of redevelopment, no permanent structure shall be constructed on the proposed alley right-of-way. 
(3)  Regulating plan amendments. Any amendment or change to the regulating plan shall require the adoption of a revised regulating plan through the same procedures used for an amendment to the zoning map as described in chapter 6 (procedures and enforcement) of this Code. 
(d)  General building form standards. The building forms detailed in this section establish the standards and parameters for new development and redevelopment within the M-DT district. The following standards apply to all building form standard frontages, unless expressly stated otherwise within an individual building form standard or otherwise designated on the regulating plan. 
(1)  Transitions. When the building form standard designation shown on the regulating plan changes along a property's required building line, that property owner has the option of applying either building form standard for a maximum additional distance of up to eighty (80) feet along that required building line, as measured from the lot corner nearest the transition. 
(2)  Façade composition. "Façade composition" is the arrangement and proportion of façade materials and elements (windows, doors, columns, pilasters, bays). "Complete and discrete" means one part of the façade is different from another to break down the perceived scale of large buildings and provide a better pedestrian experience. 
(i)  The maximum length of individual façade compositions along a required building line, generally running parallel to the fronting sidewalk, for each building form standard is specified in the elements section of the individual building form standard frontage standards. 
(ii)  New buildings and new building façades are required to achieve a complete and discrete vertical façade composition along a street frontage. This requires compliance with the following minimum standards: 
(A)  There must be a clearly different ground story façade configuration, either materials or fenestration proportions and spacing or both, from one vertical façade composition to the next; and at least two (2) of the following: 
(B)  Fenestration proportions differing between one vertical façade composition to the next of at least twenty (20) percent in height or width or height:width ratio (See Figure 4.2-1). 
(C)  At least two (2) different bay configurations (See Figure 4.2-2). 
(D)  Change in wall material (changes in paint color are insufficient). 
(E)  Change in total fenestration percentage (minimum difference ten (10) percent; ground floor façades are not included). 
(iii)  Each façade composition, regardless of the number of bays such composition may have, shall include a functioning street entry door. 
(iv)  Individual infill projects on lots with street frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet on a block face are exempted from the overall façade composition requirement for that block face, but shall still include a functioning street entry. 
(v)  Where glass is used to meet the fenestration requirements, it shall have a light transmission at the ground story of at least seventy (70) percent and for the upper stories at least fifty-five (55) percent, unless otherwise required by the building or energy conservation code. 
Figure 4.2-1: Fenestration Proportions: Minimum differences to achieve subsection (B)
  
(3)  Building Size. The maximum ground floor footprint for each building, but not including parking structures that comply with this Code, is thirty-four thousand (34,000) gross square feet. The construction of larger buildings shall require an adjustment of form-based controls as described in section 29-6.4(e). 
(4)  Neighborhood transitions. For any urban general, urban storefront, and urban general-west frontage sites, the following rules apply. 
(i)  Where a site developed as other than a single-family detached residential dwelling shares a common lot line with a lot that is zoned R-1 or R-2: 
(A)  There shall be at least a twenty-foot setback from the common lot line. Common drives and alleys are allowed in this setback area. (See Figure 4.2-3.) 
(B)  Notwithstanding any minimum height requirement, within fifty (50) feet of the common lot line, and within eighty (80) feet of any required building line, the structure shall have a maximum height of thirty (30) feet. (See Figure 4.2-4.) 
 
(C)  Farther than eighty (80) feet from any required building line, there shall be an additional thirty-foot setback — for a total setback of fifty (50) feet — from the common lot line for all structures. Surface parking and common drives and alleys are allowed in this setback area. (See Figure 4.2-4.) 
(ii)  Where a site developed as other than a single-family detached residential dwelling shares a common lot line with (or sits across an alley from) a lot that is zoned R-1 or R-2, a garden wall, four (4) to six (6) feet in height, shall be constructed within one foot of the common lot line or alley. Trees from the street tree list shall be planted, on maximum thirty-foot centers, within ten (10) feet of this wall. Required tree planting numbers and locations may be adjusted to accommodate any required fire access. 
(5)  Height. 
(i)  The height of all buildings is measured in stories, with a building height limit in feet, measured from the average fronting sidewalk elevation to the top of the wall plate, unless otherwise designated in this section 29-4.2. 
(ii)  The minimum façade height that is required at the required building line is shown on the individual building form standard. 
(iii)  English basement units do not count against the building story height limit but do count against the building height measurement. 
(iv)  If a parking structure is constructed after the adoption of this section 29-4.2 and any portion of the parking structure is located within thirty (30) feet of a building constructed pursuant to this section 29-4.2, no portion of the parking structure shall exceed the building's primary roof ridge or parapet height. 
(v)  At least eighty (80) percent of each story must meet the minimum clear height prescribed in the individual building form standard. 
(vi)  The ground story finished floor elevation requirements shall be measured: 
(A)  From the average exterior sidewalk elevation at the required building line, and 
(B)  Within thirty (30) feet of any required building line. 
(6)  Siting. 
(i)  Building façades shall be built to the required building line as stated in the individual building form standard. 
(ii)  The building façade shall be built to the required building line within thirty (30) feet of a block corner, unless otherwise stated in the individual building form standards. 
(iii)  The required building line, which is shown on the regulating plan as an absolute line, allows an offset area (or depth) of twenty-four (24) inches beyond that line (into the buildable area) to allow for façade articulation, unless otherwise stated in this section 29-4.2. Portions of the façade located within that twenty-four-inch zone comply with the required building line. 
(A)  The required building line for property located along Providence Road, regardless of frontage type, allows an offset area (or depth) of sixty (60) inches beyond that line (into the buildable area) to allow for façade articulation. Portions of the façade located within that sixty-inch zone comply with the required building line. If no building is located within this area, it shall be improved with landscaping materials as approved by the city arborist. 
(iv)  Buildings may only occupy that portion of the lot specified as the buildable area—the area behind the required building line as designated by the individual building form standards. 
(v)  No part of any building may be located outside of the buildable area except overhanging eaves, awnings, stoops, steps, or balconies. Handicapped ramps approved by the director in order to comply with federal law may also extend beyond the buildable area. Stoops, steps, and ramps shall not be located within a required clear walkway. For appropriate commerce and retail uses, temporary displays or cafe seating may be placed in the dooryard. 
(vi)  No part of any building may be located outside of any designated lot building limit. 
(vii)  There is no required setback from alleys or common drives except as stated on the building form standards. On lots without alley access, a minimum twelve-foot setback from the rear lot line shall apply. 
(viii)  There are no side lot setbacks, except as specified in the neighborhood transitions (above) or in the building form standards. 
(ix)  The parking setback line is generally twenty-four (24) feet behind the required building line and extends as a vertical plane from the first floor level unless otherwise shown on the regulating plan or otherwise stated in this section 29-4.2. Vehicle parking shall be located behind the parking setback line, except where parking is provided below grade, on-street, or otherwise indicated on the regulating plan. 
(A)  Except for buildings located along Ninth Street and Broadway, the parking setback line on second floor levels and above may extend to the required building line of the frontage type as shown on the regulating plan. 
(B)  Parking shall not be located closer than six (6) feet to the required building line on any first floor level, with the following exceptions: a) If a public utility easement is located within the parking setback, preventing its use for building purposes, parking may be included in the easement area; b) A parking area of not greater than sixty (60) feet in width located to the side of a building may be permitted if the parking area is screened from the street by a street wall and no new curb cut is made in the public street. 
(x)  All lots, including corner lots and through lots, shall satisfy the build-to requirements for all of their required building line frontages, and the dooryard and/or front yard requirements for each designated building form standard, unless otherwise stated in this section 29-4.2. 
(xi)  Where a street wall is permitted or required in the individual building form standard, it shall be a minimum of four (4) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. When required to screen the edge of a parking area or outdoor refuse or bulk material storage area, the street wall shall be located along any required building line frontage that is not otherwise occupied by a building. 
(xii)  Street walls may be constructed utilizing either masonry, ornamental materials, or a private landscape buffer in accordance with the provision of section 29-4.4(d)(i), or any combination thereof. Walls may be opaque or partially open and may include landscaping. 
(7)  Private or public open area. Private or public open area must comply with standards in each individual building form standard frontage (section 29-4.2(e)) and in section 29-4.4 (landscaping and screening). 
(i)  Non-residential open space requirements. Private or public open area shall be provide for lots greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in buildable area, according to the following schedule: 
(A)  Ten (10) percent of the total buildable area shall be allocated as open area. 
(B)  In addition to item (i), above, buildings that contain four (4) or more dwelling units shall provide private or public open area as prescribed Item (2), below. 
(C)  Thirty-three (33) percent of required public or private open area may be satisfied through the use of balconies of individual units meeting the requirement of item (v), below, or rooftops. 
(D)  Retail sales that have sales floors for customers and commercial services that provide customer seating or gathering areas, such as restaurants, lodging, and entertainment uses, shall not be subject to the minimum open area requirement. 
(E)  Private or public open area may be located on any floor or combination of floors or any location on the lot provided it is accessible to all residents or tenants of the building the open area requirement is intended to benefit. 
(F)  Any single private or public open area, with the exception of individual balconies, shall be a minimum of seventy (70) square feet and shall have a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet and a minimum contiguous area of seventy (70) square feet. 
(G)  Balconies may be counted as "private open area" when their minimum size is eight (8) feet wide and five (5) feet deep. 
(ii)  Residential open space requirements. Private or public open area shall be provided in any building which contains four (4) or more dwelling units, according to the following schedule: 
(A)  Seventy (70) square feet per dwelling unit (efficiency; one to two (2) bedrooms); one hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit (three (3) or more bedrooms). 
(B)  Private or public open area may be located on any floor or combination of floors or any location on the lot provided it is accessible to all residents or tenants of the building the open area requirement is intended to benefit. 
(C)  Any single private or public open area, with the exception of individual balconies, shall be a minimum of seventy (70) square feet and shall have a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet and a minimum contiguous area of 70 square feet. 
(D)  Balconies may be counted as "private open area" when their minimum size is eight (8) feet wide and five (5) feet deep. 
(8)  Balconies. 
(i)  Balconies may not project within five (5) feet of a common lot line. 
(ii)  Balconies shall not project more than two (2) feet forward of the required building line (RBL). 
(iii)  Where an individual building form standard includes balconies as a method for achieving the required private or public open area, the balcony: 
(A)  Shall be enclosed by balustrades, railings, or other means; 
(B)  Shall not otherwise be enclosed above a height of forty-two (42) inches, except with insect screening and/or columns/posts supporting a roof or connecting with another balcony above; and 
(C)  Shall be covered, by roofs or by balconies above. 
(iv)  Balconies on new, renovated, or retrofitted construction may project into the public right-of-way only if: 
(A)  The improvement complies with section 24-2(c) of the City Code; 
(B)  The balcony projects only over a public sidewalk or an alley, provided that such projection does not cause a disruption to any city service or maintenance of the underlying public improvements. No balcony shall project over the travel lanes of any public street; and 
(C)  The proposed balcony meets all applicable design standards contained in this Code and other ordinances passed by the council. 
(9)  Other building elements. 
 
Figure 4.2-6: Relationship between a window
and Common Lot Line.
(i)  Fenestration is regulated as a percentage of the façade between floor levels. It is measured as glass area (including mullions and similar window frame elements with a dimension less than one inch) or as open area. 
(ii)  As illustrated in Figure 4.2-6, unless otherwise designated in the individual building form standards or in the Building Code, no window within ten (10) feet of a common lot line may be at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees from that common lot line unless: 
(A)  That view is contained within the lot (e.g. by a privacy fence/garden wall, opaque glass), or 
(B)  The sill (or other limit to transparency) is at least six (6) feet above its finished floor level. 
(iii)  No part of any building may project forward of the required building line except overhanging eaves, awnings, stoops, steps, or balconies. Handicapped ramps approved by the director in order to comply with federal law may also extend beyond the buildable area. 
(iv)  Ground story awnings shall maintain a minimum horizontal clearance of one foot from any point where the tree lawn meets the clear walkway. 
(v)  Bay windows shall have an interior clear width of between four (4) and eight (8) feet at the façade. Bay windows shall project no more than forty-two (42) inches beyond the façade. 
(vi)  Attic stories are permitted within all building form standard frontages. 
(A)  On the required building line/façade side of the roof pitch, attic story windows may only be located in dormers and/or gable ends. 
(B)  Attic story dormers are permitted so long as they do not break the primary eave line, are individually less than fifteen (15) feet wide, and their collective width is not more than sixty (60) percent of the required building line façade length. 
(C)  The floor area of an attic story, measured as the floor area with a building code minimum clear height, may not occupy an area greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the floor area of the story immediately below. 
(D)  Attic stories meeting the above standards do not count against the maximum building height in feet or stories. 
(vii)  Where visible from the street-space, pitched roofs, exclusive of roofs behind parapet walls, shall be pitched between 4:12 and 12:12. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12. 
(viii)  English basement accessory dwelling units are permitted in townhouse frontages and do not count against the maximum building height in stories provided they have windows above grade and have direct street frontage access. 
(ix)  At least one functioning entry door shall be provided along each ground story façade. No ground story façade may include a section of greater than seventy-five (75) feet without a functioning entry door, unless otherwise stated in the building form standards. 
(x)  All required Front Porches shall be completely covered by a roof. Front Porches may be screened when all architectural elements (columns, railings, etc.) occur on the outside of the screen on the side facing the street-space. The front porch finished floor height shall be no more than eight (8) inches below the first interior finished floor level of the building to which it is attached. Front porches shall not extend past the dooryard into the clear walkway. 
(xi)  The stoop finished floor height shall be no more than eight (8) inches below the first interior finished floor level of the building to which it is attached. Stoops shall not extend past the dooryard into the clear walkway. 
(xii)  Privacy fences may be constructed along alleys and along common lot lines, but shall not be constructed forward of the required building line. Privacy fences shall have a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
(10)  Building functions. Broad parameters for allowable uses for ground stories and upper stories are identified in each building form standard. Specific permitted use standards are provided in chapter 29-3. 
(11)  Civic buildings. When civic buildings are designated on the regulating plan, they are exempt from the building form standards. Additions to civic buildings shall require amendment of the regulating plan. 
(12)  Gas station or fueling center with a convenience store. A gas station or fueling center with a convenience store shall be a permitted use within the urban general west frontage type, as shown on the regulating plan, and shall not be subject to the required building line setback as defined for other uses within said frontage type. 
(13)  Solid waste management. All new buildings and/or change in use shall have a plan for the management - collection, storage, and disposal - of solid waste, including grease handling dumpster containers. The city, based on the anticipated volume of solid waste and frequency of collection, may require trash rooms or trash enclosures within buildings or lots to facilitate orderly pick-up of solid waste and avoid congestion and accumulation of waste and waste receptacles within alleys and other public ways. 
(e)  Individual M-DT building form standard frontages. This section describes the intent and the standards applicable to each individual building frontage type designated on the regulating plan. The three (3) individual building frontage types are: 
• Urban general/urban storefront. 
• Urban general - west. 
• Townhouse/small apartment. 
Photos are provided to illustrate each frontage type and are advisory only. Where the statements of intent or photographs are inconsistent with the standards, the standards shall apply. 
(1)  Urban general/urban storefront frontage. 
(i)  Illustrations and Intent. 
 
Small mixed-use buildings with individual Shopfronts.
Urban general is to be used for those properties fronting the orange street-spaces on the regulating plan. 
Urban storefront is to be used for those properties fronting on the red colored street-spaces on the regulating plan. 
Urban general is the basic urban street frontage, once common across the United States. The purpose of this frontage is to develop multi-story buildings placed directly at the sidewalk with one or more entrances and windows across the façade. The uses range from commercial to residential, municipal to retail and restaurants— and combinations of all of the above. There could be several buildings lined up shoulder to shoulder, filling out a block, or on smaller blocks, a single building might fill the block face. 
 
Large mixed-use buildings with Shopfronts and vertical Facade composition to provide pedestrian scale
 
Street-oriented residential buildings with small Dooryards.
Where urban storefront is designated on the regulating plan, the urban general building form standard shall apply, and the additional specific standards for urban storefronts set forth in this subsection shall also apply. The main distinction between urban general and urban storefront is that the urban store ground story configuration shall be that of a shopfront - with uses limited to retail, food and beverage, or personal service. 
The urban storefront frontages are designated in the most intense areas of the M-DT district and it is anticipated that there will be significant pedestrian traffic along these blocks. The photos illustrate the range of buildings that could be constructed under the urban general and urban storefront frontages. 
 
Transparent Ground Story Facades provide views between interior and exterior, enlivening the sidewalk.
 
Shopfronts line the Ground Story, with offices or residences above.
(ii)  Height. 
 
Figure 4.2-7: Urban General/Urban Storefront Height Standards
(A)  Building height. 
1)  The building shall be at least two (2) stories (the second story shall be occupiable and meet the definition of a story) in height at the required building line, but no greater than six (6) or ten (10) stories, *as designated on the regulating plan, with an building height of seventy-two (72) or one hundred forty-two (142) feet respectively. For buildings on broadway that are four (4) or more stories, the first four (4) stories shall be built to the required building line. 
2)  Proposed buildings may be permitted to exceed the maximum height for their location as shown on the regulating plan subject to following the provisions of section 29-6.4(p) (tall structures in the M-DT district). 
(B)  Ground story height. 
1)  Non-residential uses. 
(a)  The ground story finished floor elevation shall be no lower than the average fronting exterior sidewalk elevation; and no higher than eighteen (18) inches above the average fronting sidewalk elevation. 
(b)  The ground story shall have a clear height of at least fifteen (15) feet contiguous to the required building line frontage for a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet. 
2)  Residential units at the required building line. 
(a)  The finished floor elevation shall be no less than three (3) feet. 
(b)  The ground story shall have a clear height of at least nine (9) feet. 
(c)  Main entrances and lobbies may be at grade, with transitions to meet the minimum finished floor elevation for the units within the building interior. 
(C)  Upper story height. The minimum clear height for each upper story is nine (9) feet. 
(D)  Street walls. A street wall not less than four (4) feet in height or greater than eight (8) feet in height shall be required along any required building line frontage when: 
1)  At-grade parking is located inside the parking setback line; or 
2)  Refuse storage areas or bulk material storage areas are present in view from the street. 
(iii)  Siting. 
(A)  Façade. 
1)  On each lot a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the building façade shall be built to the required building line. 
2)  A forecourt may be constructed along up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required building line for a building where: 
(a)  The forecourt is surrounded on three (3) sides by the building; 
(b)  The surrounding elevations meet all façade requirements; and 
(c)  The forecourt shall not provide automobile access other than for emergency services. 
3)  Within sixteen (16) feet of the block corner, the ground story façade may be chamfered to form a corner entry. 
(B)  Buildable area. The buildable and open area are shown in Figure 4.2-8. Improvement of open area shall follow the requirements of section 29-4.2(d)(7). 
(C)  Garage and parking. Openings in any required building line for parking garage entries shall have a maximum clear height no greater than sixteen (16) feet and a clear width no greater than twenty-two (22) feet. 
 
Figure 4.2-8: Urban General/Urban Storefront Siting Standards
(iv)  Elements. 
(A)  Fenestration. 
1)  Blank lengths of wall exceeding twenty (20) linear feet are prohibited on all required building lines. 
2)  For urban general frontages, ground story fenestration shall comprise between thirty-three (33) percent and eighty (80) percent of the ground story façade. 
3)  For urban storefront: 
(a)  Ground story fenestration shall comprise between fifty (50) percent and ninety (90) percent of the ground story façade. 
(b)  Single panes of glass shall not be permitted larger than ten (10) feet in height by five (5) feet in width. 
(c)  Ground story windows may not be made opaque by window treatments (excepting operable sunscreen devices within the conditioned space). A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the window surface shall allow a view into the building interior for a depth of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
4)  Upper story fenestration shall comprise between twenty (20) percent and seventy (70) percent of the façade area per story. 
(B)  Building projections. Shopfronts may extend up to twenty-four (24) inches beyond the façade. 
(C)  Vertical façade composition. Vertical façade compositions shall vary within the façade of a building as required. If a building exceeds the maximum street frontage without a change in façade, an average maximum façade composition across the block face, including other buildings, shall be a permitted adjustment. 
(D)  Street walls. One access gate no wider than twenty-two (22) feet and one pedestrian entry gate no wider than five (5) feet shall be permitted within any required street wall. 
 
Figure 4.2-9: Urban General/Urban Storefront Element Standards
(v)  Use. 
(A)  Ground story. The ground story may only house commercial, industrial, residential, public or institutional uses, as prescribed in chapter 29-3. See height specifications above for specific requirements unique to each use. 
(B)  Upper stories. 
1)  The upper stories may only house residential or commercial uses. *Rooftop food and beverage services are only permitted in the locations designated for core height on the regulating plan or if the rooftop is accessory or ancillary to a ground floor food service use. In all other locations, no food and beverage services uses shall be allowed in upper stories unless they are second story extensions accessory to the ground story use. 
2)  No commercial use is permitted above a residential use unless there is a separate access to the commercial use. 
3)  Additional habitable space is permitted within the roof where the roof is configured as an attic story. 
 
Figure 4.2-10: Urban General/Urban Storefront Use Standards
(2)  Urban general - west frontage. 
(i)  Illustrations and intent. This frontage is to be used in those portions of the regulating plan colored gold. 
 
National chains can provide street-oriented buildings.
The urban general-west frontage addresses the evolving area of west Downtown Columbia. Given Columbia's emphasis on sustainability and multi-modal transportation issues, more compact, urban land-use patterns are appropriate for this area. This frontage fosters single and multi-story buildings, placed to the front of their lot, with windows and one or more entrances onto the sidewalk. The uses may range from commercial to residential, municipal to retail and restaurants. Several buildings could stand shoulder to shoulder along a block face, or a single building might fill a smaller block. Less intense than downtown, this frontage anticipates a gradual increase in pedestrian traffic over time. It provides improved pedestrian connectivity and transition to the adjacent neighborhoods. The photos illustrate the range of buildings that could be constructed under this frontage. 
 
This frontage can accommodate large format, single use buildings or compact, mixed-use ones.
Street-oriented Civic building supports walkability.
  
(ii)  Height. 
 
Figure 4.2-11: Urban General West Height Standards
(A)  Building height. The building shall be at least one story and eighteen (18) feet in height at the required building line, but no greater than six (6) stories and seventy-eight (78) feet in height, unless otherwise designated on the regulating plan. 
(B)  Ground story height. 
1)  Non-residential uses. 
(a)  The ground story finished floor elevation shall be no lower than the average fronting exterior sidewalk elevation and no higher than eighteen (18) inches above the average fronting sidewalk elevation. 
(b)  The ground story shall have a clear height of at least twelve (12) feet contiguous to the required building line frontage for a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet. 
2)  Residential units at the required building line. 
(a)  The ground story shall have a clear height of at least nine (9) feet. 
(b)  Main entrances and lobbies may be at grade, with transitions to meet the minimum finished floor elevation for the units within the building interior. 
(C)  Upper story height. The minimum clear height for each upper story is nine (9) feet. 
(D)  Street wall height. A street wall shall be constructed to adequately screen any refuse or outdoor storage area or surface parking lot. When required, a street wall shall not be less than four (4) feet or greater than eight (8) feet in height. 
(iii)  Siting. 
(A)  Façade. 
1)  On each lot a minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of the building façade shall be built to the required building line. 
2)  Within eight (8) feet of the block corner, the ground story façade may be chamfered to form a corner entry. 
(B)  Buildable area and open area. The buildable and open area are shown in Figure 4.2-12. 
1)  The ground story may sit anywhere within the buildable area. 
2)  A second story and above, shall only be within the buildable area within one hundred (100) feet of the required building line. 
3)  Where private access drives are configured as recommended M-DT street types, a new required building line shall be created. 
4)  Private or public open area shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 29-4.2(d)(7). 
 
Figure 4.2-12: Urban General West Siting Standards
(C)  Garage and parking. Openings in any required building line for parking garage entries shall have a maximum clear height no greater than sixteen (16) feet and a clear width no greater than twenty-two (22) feet. 
(iv)  Elements. 
(A)  Fenestration. 
1)  Blank lengths of wall exceeding thirty (30) linear feet are prohibited on all required building lines. 
2)  Ground story fenestration shall comprise between thirty-three (33) percent and eighty (80) percent of the ground story façade. 
3)  Upper story fenestration shall comprise between twenty (20) percent and seventy (70) percent of the façade area per story. 
(B)  Vertical façade composition. No greater than the average street frontage length of seventy-five (75) feet per block face. 
(C)  Street walls. One access gate no wider than twenty-two (22) feet and one pedestrian gate no wider than five (5) feet shall be permitted in any required street wall. 
 
Figure 4.2-13: Urban General West
Elements Standards
(v)  Uses. 
(A)  Ground story. The ground story may only house commercial, residential, public or institutional uses, as prescribed in chapter 29-3. See height specifications above for specific requirements unique to each use. 
(B)  Upper stories. 
1)  The upper stories may only house residential or commercial uses. No food and beverage services uses shall be allowed in upper stories unless they are second story extensions accessory the ground story use. 
2)  No commercial use is permitted above a residential use. 
3)  Additional habitable space is permitted within the roof where the roof is configured as an attic story. 
 
Figure 4.2-14: Urban General West Use Standards
(3)  Townhouse/Small apartment frontage. 
(i)  Illustrations and intent. This frontage is to be used for those properties fronting a blue colored street-space on the regulating plan. 
The townhouse/small apartment frontage is of moderate intensity, often created by a series of smaller attached structures configured as single-family residential or stacked flats. This building form standard has regular street-space entrances as frequently as eighteen (18) feet. The character and intensity of this frontage varies depending on the street-space and the location of the required building line—the buildings may be placed up to the sidewalk with stoops, or further back with small dooryard gardens and/or front porches. Similar in scale to the townhouse and row house, a small apartment is of limited size and can also be used to transition from the more intense areas of the M-DT district to adjacent single-family neighborhoods. It is anticipated that the pedestrian activity along these frontages will vary considerably based on the time of day and week. This frontage accommodates office uses. The photos illustrate the range of buildings that could be constructed under the townhouse/small apartment frontage. 
 
This frontage accommodates a range of Townhouses and Small
Apartments in a range of building scales and configurations—but
all are street oriented.
(ii)  Height. 
 
Figure 4.2-15: Townhouse/Small Apartment Height Standards
(A)  Building height. 
1)  Each building shall be at least two (2) stories high at the required building line, but no more than four (4) stories with a building height of fifty-eight (58) feet, unless otherwise designated on the regulating plan. 
2)  A sidewing or ancillary structure shall be no higher than eighteen (18) feet in height. 
(B)  Ground story height. 
1)  When english basement accessory units are proposed within a building, the finished floor elevation of the first floor shall be no more than eight (8) feet above the average exterior sidewalk elevation at the required building line. Ground story residential units, when no english basement accessory unit is to be proposed, may be located at grade and are not required to be elevated above the exterior sidewalk. 
2)  At least eighty (80) percent of the ground story shall have an interior clear height of at least nine (9) feet. 
3)  Main entrances may be at grade, with transitions to meet the minimum finished floor elevation within the building interior. 
(C)  Upper story height. At least eighty (80) percent of each upper story shall have an interior clear height of at least nine (9) feet. 
(D)  English basements. The finished floor level of an english basement shall be no greater than five (5) feet below the average elevation of the fronting sidewalk. 
(iii)  Siting. 
(A)  Façade. On each site, the building façade shall be built to: 
1)  A minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the required building line, or 
2)  A line an additional eight (8) feet behind the required building line (only permitted to accommodate front porch depth—see elements subsection for front porch requirements) with a width not less than sixty-five (65) percent of the building façade. 
(B)  Buildable and open area. The buildable and open area are shown in Figure 4.2-16. 
1)  A private or public open area equal to at least fifteen (15) percent of the total buildable area shall be preserved on every lot which may be satisfied through the balconies of individual units, or rooftops, regulated in section 29-4.2(e)(9))(7). 
 
Figure 4.2-16: Townhouse/Small Apartment Siting Standards
(C)  Garage and parking. 
1)  Garage doors/entries are not permitted on any required building line/façade. 
2)  At-grade parking may be forward of the parking setback line only when it is within a garage on a corner lot and the parking area's required building line frontage is less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(D)  Frontage widths. 
1)  The minimum width for new townhouses is eighteen (18) feet. 
2)  Although there are no individual lot side setbacks, no individual small apartment building or set of townhouses may exceed one hundred (100) feet of street-space frontage. A gap of ten (10) to twenty (20) feet is required between each building or set of townhouse buildings. 
(iv)  Elements. 
(A)  Fenestration. 
1)  Blank lengths of wall exceeding fifteen (15) linear feet are prohibited on all façades. 
2)  Fenestration shall comprise between twenty-five (25) percent and seventy (70) percent of the façade. 
3)  Each townhouse and/or small apartment building shall include a functioning street-space entry. 
(B)  Vertical façade composition. No greater than the average street frontage length of seventy-five (75) feet per block face. 
(C)  Building projections. 
1)  Each townhouse shall include either: 
(a)  A stoop of not more than four (4) feet deep and six (6) feet wide (not including steps); or 
(b)  A front porch, between eight (8) and ten (10) feet deep that projects no more than two (2) feet forward of the required building line, and has a width not less than sixty-five (65) percent of the required building line. 
2)  A small apartment may be configured with a stoop or front porch or with a main entrance at grade. 
 
Figure 4.2-17: Townhouse/Small Apartment
Elements Standards
(v)  Use. 
(A)  All stories. 
1)  Only residential, guest accommodation, and office uses are permitted. 
2)  Individual townhouses shall have no more than two (2) residential units, including an accessory unit. 
3)  Additional habitable space is permitted within the roof where the roof is configured as an attic story. 
(B)  Ground story exceptions. Neighborhood serving retail is permitted on the ground story of buildings located at a block corner and in buildings sharing a lot line with an established block corner commercial space. 
(C)  Accessory dwelling units in M-DT. 
1)  English basement accessory dwelling units are only permitted in townhouses. 
2)  Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per townhouse. 
3)  On townhouse sites, a detached dwelling unit is permitted in the buildable area at the rear of the site or lot line subject to the provisions of section 29-3.3(gg)(4). 
 
Figure 4.2-18: Townhouse/Small Apartment Use Standards
(f)  M-DT urban space standards. The urban space standards show the relationship between new development or redevelopment and the streets and other public (and publicly accessible) spaces in the M-DT district. 
(1)  Applicability. The urban space standards apply to the area between building frontages and the curb line of existing or proposed streets in the M-DT district, and are intended to ensure the coherence and pedestrian-friendliness of the street-space. These standards are intended to supplement the city's existing street and sidewalk standards promulgated by the department of public works. In case of a direct conflict between these standards and the city's street and sidewalk standards, the existing street and sidewalk standards shall apply. 
(2)  Street-Space standards. 
(i)  General provisions. 
(A)  All plant material shall comply with section 29-4.4 landscaping and screening. 
(B)  Mechanical and electrical equipment including, but not limited to the following, may not be stored or located within any street-space: 
1)  Air compressors, 
2)  Pumps, 
3)  Exterior water heaters, 
4)  Water softeners, 
5)  Private garbage cans (not including public sidewalk waste bins), and 
6)  Storage tanks. 
(C)  Water pumps for public fountains or irrigation not visible are not included in this prohibition and temporary placement of private garbage cans within the street-space may be allowed to accommodate scheduled refuse pick-up. 
(ii)  Street-space plantings. Invasive species, as identified by the Missouri Department of Conservation's invasive species list, are prohibited within dooryards and on all parcels in the M-DT district. 
(iii)  Street-space elements. 
(A)  At the time of development, the developer is required to install streetlights and sidewalks, as illustrated in the street type specifications, on the street-space frontage being developed. 
(B)  Sidewalks not otherwise designated in the regulating plan or street type specifications shall provide a minimum six-foot clear walkway and be constructed to meet all existing standards and specifications. 
(C)  Street furniture is an element of the overall street-space design. Street furnishings should be simple, functional, and durable. 
(iv)  On-street parking. 
(A)  On-street parking spaces fronting a development project may count towards any parking requirements required under section 29-4.3 (parking and loading). 
(B)  The parking space/tree planting pattern may be interrupted by existing or new driveways designated in the regulating plan, streets, and alleys, but spacing shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet on center except where necessary for transit stops and stations. 
(v)  Pedestrian pathways. The area within a pedestrian pathway shall be a public access easement or public right-of-way. The easement width for these pathways must not be less than twenty (20) feet with a paved walkway not less than ten (10) feet wide providing an unobstructed view straight through its entire length, except where otherwise specified on the regulating plan. 
(3)  Street-type recommendations. The street type recommendations located in Appendix A illustrate model configurations for the street-spaces within the M-DT. The plans and sections specify vehicular travel lane widths, curb radii, sidewalks, dooryards, tree planting areas, and on-street parking configurations. Dooryards and alleys are generally reserved for utility easements.  
Sec. 29-4.3. - Parking and loading. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General requirements. 
(i)  The standards of this section 29-4.3 shall apply to all development and redevelopment, unless specifically excluded or modified by another provision of this Code. 
(ii)  Required off-street parking areas in existence on November 19, 2001, shall not be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below, the requirements for such use as would be required for the use as a new use of a building, structure or premises under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(i)  M-DT district (section 29-4.2). 
(A)  Development and redevelopment in the M-DT district is exempt from the minimum parking requirements in Table 4.3-1. 
(B)  Residential development and redevelopment in the M-DT district shall provide one-quarter (0.25) of one parking space per bedroom. For any newly constructed building containing twenty (20) or more bedrooms, the parking requirement shall increase to one-half (0.50) of one parking space per bedroom. This requirement may be satisfied on the site or within one-quarter (0.25) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) of the site. Measurement of the walking distance shall be from entrance to entrance. 
(C)  If on-site parking is provided, it shall meet all other requirements of this section 29-4.3 and may not be located forward to the parking setback line pursuant to the building form standards in section 29-4.2 (M-DT district). 
(D)  On-street parking shall meet the on-street parking requirements in section 29-4.2(f)(2)(iv). 
(E)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any new residential development in the M-DT district which contains twenty (20) or fewer bedrooms shall be exempt from all parking requirements contained in this section. 
(ii)  Small lots. 
(A)  No off-street parking shall be required for any non-residential primary use on a lot in any mixed use district that is smaller than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area, provided no portion of the front lot line of the property is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district. 
(B)  No off-street parking shall be required for any building in any mixed use district that contains a non-residential primary use that is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area, provided no portion of the front lot line of the property containing that building is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district. 
(iii)  Planned development. The off-street parking requirements of this section shall serve as the standard from which to request different parking requirements for a proposed use in a PD (planned development) district. Following approval of a PD district that is subject to an approved site plan with parking requirements that differ from those in this section 29-4.3, the requirements of this section shall not apply to property located in that district. If an approved planned zoning district site plan is silent on any aspect of parking addressed by this section, the provisions of this section shall apply to that aspect of parking. 
(iv)  Historic properties. 
(A)  No new on-site parking shall be required for the redevelopment of historic structures. 
(B)  If an existing historic structure has on-site parking, such parking must be retained and conform to the city's current parking improvement standards (e.g., be paved), unless the director determines that compliance is impracticable or would compromise the historic character of the property or area. 
(3)  Residential districts. The following standards apply in all residential districts: 
 
Figure 4.3-1: Tandem Parking
(i)  No detached garage shall be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to the front lot line or behind the building front, whichever is greater. 
(ii)  Parking spaces for residential and non-residential uses, other than single-family and two-family dwellings, shall not be located in the required front yard. 
(iii)  Required parking spaces may be tandem spaces to serve one- and two-family dwellings only, as exhibited in the Figure 4.3-1, provided no portion of the parked vehicles extends into the public right of way or any separate street or sidewalk easement. 
(4)  Change in Permitted Use. 
(i)  When the intensity of use of any legally established building, structure or premises is increased resulting in a net increase of gross floor area, net increase of dwelling unit(s), or any other unit of measurement specified herein for determining required parking areas, parking spaces and any other facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
(ii)  Whenever the type of use of a building, structure or premises is changed to a new type of use permitted by this chapter, parking spaces and areas shall be provided as required by the provisions of this section for such new type of use. 
(iii)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (i) and (ii) above, a permitted use that does not meet the parking requirements of this section may be converted to another permitted use without full compliance with the required number of parking spaces provided: 
(A)  The amount of parking available is at least seventy-five (75) percent of the parking required for the new use in Table 4.3-1. 
(B)  The applicant provides the maximum number of parking spaces able to be accommodated on the site while complying with all other provisions of this Code and without being required to remove or partially remove an existing structure. 
(b)  Parking requirements. 
(1)  Required parking spaces. The minimum and maximum off-street parking requirements for all uses allowed by this Code are listed in Table 4.3-1. 
(2)  Accessible parking. Within the requirements of Table 4.3-1, accessible parking shall be provided for all multi-family and non-residential uses as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and City Code requirements. 
Table 4.3-1: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking (and Maximum Permitted Off-Street Parking for Selected Uses)
sf = square feet; gfa = gross floor area 
Category 	Standard 
RESIDENTIAL USES 	
Household Living 	
Dwellings, One-Family Detached 	2 spaces/dwelling unit 
Dwelling, One-Family Attached 	
Dwelling, Two-Family 	
Dwelling, Live-Work 	1 space/dwelling unit 
Dwelling, Multi-family 	1.0 spaces/dwelling unit for "efficiency" apartment (i.e., units without a separate bedroom); 1.5 spaces/dwelling unit for 1 bedroom units; 2 spaces/dwelling unit for 2 bedroom units; 2.5 spaces/dwelling for 3 or more bedroom units; in addition to required parking for residents, 1 space/5 dwelling units will be required for visitor parking. 
Manufactured Home Park 	2 spaces/dwelling unit 
Second Primary Dwelling Unit 	1 space/dwelling unit 
Group Living 	
Boardinghouse 	1 space/3 guests design capacity 
Continuing Care Retirement Community 	1 space/3 habitable units 
Dormitory/Fraternity/Sorority 	1 space/2 occupants the building is ultimately designed to accommodate. Community development director may reduce requirements for dorms by not more than 20% during such periods students are not permitted autos. 
Group Care Home, Large 	1 space/2 beds design capacity 
Group Home, Small 	
Halfway House 	
Residential Care Facility 	1 space/6 beds, but not less than 2 spaces 
Temporary Shelter 	1 space per 4 occupants design capacity 
PUBLIC and INSTITUTIONAL USES 	
Adult and Child Care 	
Adult Day Care Center 
Family Day Care Center 	1 space/800 sf gfa plus 2 additional spaces or "pull-over" space for 2 vehicles out of the flow of driveway traffic. 
Community Service 	
Assembly or Lodge Hall 	1 space/200 sf gfa 
Cemetery or Mausoleum 	No requirement 
Community/Recreation Center 	1 space/500 sf gfa 
Elementary School 	1 space/10 seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or 1 space/classroom, whichever is greater 
Secondary School (middle and high) 	1 space/6 seats in the main auditorium or 3 spaces/classroom, whichever is greater 
Funeral Home or Mortuary 	1 space/6 seats or per 200 sf gfa in main assembly area, whichever is greater 
Higher Education Institution 	1 space/500 sf gfa of office, research, and library area plus 1 space/200 sf gfa of auditorium space 
Hospital 	1 space/500 sf gfa 
Museum or Library 	1 space/1,000 sf gfa 
Police or Fire Station 	No requirement 
Public Service Facility 	1 space/300 sf gfa 
Public Park, Playground 	Park/Playground: 1 space/5,000 sq. ft. of land area; Playfield (e.g., baseball, soccer): 20 spaces/field (min.) 
Golf Course 	1 space/400 sq. ft. of clubhouse area or 6 spaces/hole, whichever is greater 
Religious Institution 	1 space/6 seats or per 200 sf main assembly area, whichever is greater 
Reuse of Place of Public Assembly 	No requirement 
COMMERCIAL and INDUSTRIAL USES 	
Agricultural & Animal Related 	
Agriculture 	No requirement 
Farmer's Market 	1 space/booth; host property parking may apply if farmer's market does not leave host use deficient 
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery 	1 space/1,000 sf gfa 
Pet Store or Pet Grooming 	1 space/300 sf gfa 
Urban Agriculture 	No requirement 
Veterinary Hospital 	1 space/400 sf gfa 
Food & Beverage Service 	
Bar or Nightclub 	1 space/150 sf gfa 
Restaurant (no drive-through) 	1 space/150 sf gfa 
Restaurant (with drive-through) 	1 space/200 sf gfa 
Refer to Table 4.4-3 for drive-through stacking space requirements 
Guest Accommodations 	
Bed and Breakfast 	1 space/manager plus 1 space/dwelling unit 
Hotel or motel 	2 spaces/3 guest rooms plus 1 space/200 sf gfa in all accessory uses including restaurants and meeting rooms 
Travel Trailer Park 	1 space/1,500 sf of land area 
Office 	
Commercial or Trade School 	1 space/400 sf of enclosed floor space 
Office 	1 space/300 sf gfa (General) 
1 space/200 sf gfa (Medical) 
Research and Development Laboratory 	1 space/600 sf gfa 
Wholesale Sales Offices and Sample Room 	1 space/600 sf gfa 
Personal Services 	
Personal Services, General 	1 space/400 sf gfa 
Self-service Storage Facilities 	1 space/20 storage units 
Tree or Landscaping Service 	1 space/1,000 sf gfa 
Recreation & Entertainment 	
Indoor Recreation or Entertainment Physical Fitness Center 	General: 1 space/400 sf gfa 
Indoor Theater: 1 space per each 6 seats design capacity 
Indoor Entertainment, Adult 	1 space/400 sf gfa 
Outdoor Recreation or Entertainment 	General: 1 space/5,000 sf of land area, or 1 space/3 person design capacity, whichever is less; Swimming Pools: 1 space/200 sf of pool surface area 
Theater, Drive-In 	No requirement 
Retail 	
Alcoholic Beverage Sale 
Retail, General, Small 
Retail, Adult, Small 	1 space/300 sf gfa 
  
1 space/300 sf gfa 
Retail, General, Large 
Retail, Adult, Large 	1 space/400 sf gfa 
Vehicles & Equipment 	
Car Wash 	2 stacking/drying spaces/stall 
Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, and Servicing 	1 space/ 1,000 sf gfa 
Light Vehicle Sales or Rental 	1 space/ 500 sf gfa 
Light Vehicle Service or Repair 	1 space/ 500 sf gfa 
Parking Lot, Commercial 	
Parking Structure, Commercial 	
INDUSTRIAL USES 	
Commercial Services 	
Heavy Commercial Services 	1 space/750 sf gfa 
Mechanical and Construction Contractors 	1 space/1,000 sf gfa 
Warehousing and Storage 	1 space/2,000 sf gfa 
Wholesale Distribution 	1 space/2,000 sf gfa 
Manufacturing, Production, and Extraction 	
Artisan Industry 	1 space/1,000 sf gfa 
Bakery 	
Heavy Industry 	
Light Industry 	
Machine Shop 	
Mine or Quarry 	No requirement 
Transportation 	
Airport 	As determined by the Columbia Regional Airport management 
Bus Barn or Lot 	No requirement 
Bus Station 	
Rail or Truck Freight Terminal 	
Waste & Salvage 	
Sanitary Landfill 	No requirement 
Automobile Wrecking and Junk Yard 	
ACCESSORY USES 	
Accessory Dwelling Units 	No additional spaces for accessory dwelling units having up to 2 bedrooms; 1 additional space for 3 bedrooms 
Drive-Up/Through Facility 	Refer to Table 4.4-3 for drive-through stacking space requirements 
All other accessory uses 	No requirement 
TEMPORARY USES 	
Temporary Construction Yard or Office 	2 spaces 
Temporary Real Estate Sales/Leasing Office 	2 spaces 
All other temporary uses 	No Requirement 
 
(c)  Other parking requirements. For any use not listed in Table 4.3-1, the required minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined by the director based on the anticipated use and anticipated neighborhood and traffic congestion impacts. 
(d)  Parking alternatives. The director may approve applications containing alternatives to providing the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 4.3-1, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Transit incentives. 
(i)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for any development or redevelopment of land located within one-quarter (¼) mile of the City of Columbia transit center or immediately adjacent to transit lines that serve as a connection point for at least four other transit lines, may be reduced by twenty (20) percent. 
(ii)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for any development or redevelopment of lands zoned M-N (pedestrian) or M-C (transit), may be reduced by thirty (30) percent. This reduction may not be combined with the reductions in subsection (i) above. 
(iii)  Upon application of the owner, the parking requirement of a building or use may be reduced by five (5) percent if the lot or tract is at least two (2) acres, is located on a transit route, and the owner provides, at the owner's cost, transit pull-offs and transit rider shelters of a type and location acceptable to the city. 
(iv)  If an existing transit route, center, or zoning district is eliminated or changed in location, any development approved and built in conformance with this section 29-4.3 shall not be deemed nonconforming in terms of required parking. 
(2)  Shared parking. The director may approve joint parking facilities for development or uses with different operating hours or different peak business periods, if the shared parking complies with the following standards: 
(i)  Location. Shared parking facilities may be located on the same site as the proposed uses or within six hundred (600) feet, as measured along the roadway frontage(s) to the center of the parcels upon which the uses are located and have their primary entrance, if the uses are not on the same parcel. Off-site shared parking facilities shall be connected by sidewalks. 
(ii)  Shared parking facility parking space reduction. Where a joint parking facility meets the requirements of this subsection, the total off-site parking required for the uses may be reduced by the factors shown in Table 4.3-2. Total off-street parking required shall be the sum of the two (2) parking requirements for the two (2) uses divided by the factors for that combination of uses shown in Table 4.3-2. If more than two (2) uses share a parking lot or structure, the required parking shall be calculated by applying Table 4.3-2 to the two (2) uses with the largest parking requirements and then adding the required parking for the additional use(s). 
(iii)  Additional sharing permitted. As an alternative to the shared parking reduction factors in Table 4.3-2, the director may allow the following reductions in required parking: 
(A)  Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for food, beverage, and indoor entertainment uses located within six hundred (600) feet of a non-residential use that is not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours; and 
(B)  Up to one hundred (100) percent of parking spaces required for religious assembly uses located within six hundred (600) feet of a non-residential use that is not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours. 
Table 4.3-2: Shared Parking Reduction Factors 
Property Use 	Residential 	Public and Institutional 	Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment, Lodging, or Religious Assembly 	Retail Sales and Personal Services 	Office and Other
Commercial 
Residential 					
Public and Institutional 	1.1 				
Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment, Lodging or Religious Assembly 	1.1 	1.2 			
Retail Sales and Personal Services 	1.2 	1.3 	1.3 		
Office and Other Commercial 	1.3 	1.5 	1.7 	1.2 	
 
(iv)  Agreements. If the director determines that in the interest of the public safety and welfare there is a need to ensure shared parking facilities will continue to remain available indefinitely for the buildings or uses they serve, the director may require a written agreement assuring the continued availability of the shared parking spaces for the buildings or uses they serve. If required by the director, the agreement shall be on a form approved by the city counselor, or designee, and approved by the council. 
(3)  Credit for public parking. Some or all of the required off-street parking spaces for a non-residential use may be waived by the director if publicly owned off-street parking is located within a one thousand (1,000) foot walking distance from the main entrance of the proposed use, and the director also determines that adequate parking spaces are available within the publicly owned parking area to accommodate the anticipated use. 
(4)  Credit for on-street parking. The director, after consultation with the director of public works, may credit on-street parking spaces against required off-street parking requirements if the on-street spaces are located within two hundred (250) feet of an entry of the building in which the use is located, if the director determines that those parking spaces are frequently not utilized by the public, are readily available for residents, patrons, or employees of the proposed use and structure and granting such credit will not otherwise impair the public health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  Additional parking reductions. The director may allow an additional reduction in the required number of parking spaces (less than what may be determined using the adjusted off-street parking calculations in subsections (1) to (4) above) if the applicant submits a parking demand study, prepared by a licensed engineer in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the director which establishes the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces, and the director determines the study accurately reflects the foreseeable parking demand for the building and use of the property. In authorizing additional reductions shared access easements or agreements to adjacent parking areas and/or driveways may be required. 
(e)  Maximum parking limit. 
(1)  In any mixed use district, no single building that contains more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area, in which a single-user or multiple users operate a use listed in the retail, office, or personal service categories in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table), may provide on-site automobile parking in an amount greater than one hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum amount required by Table 4.3-1, except as permitted below in subsections (2) and (3). 
In the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), maximum on-site parking is limited to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum amount required for the same use in other mixed use districts, even though those minimums do not apply to the M-DT district. 
(2)  The parking on a site may be increased to two hundred (200) percent of the minimum amount required by Table 4-3.1 provided that: 
(i)  Such request is submitted to the director in writing with justification of why such increase is necessary; 
(ii)  The development site's landscaped area is not reduced to be less than fifteen (15) percent as a result of the increased parking; and 
(iii)  The interior parking lot landscaping area required by section 29-4.4(f) shall be increased to twenty (20) percent and shall comply with the tree planting and/or landscaping standards specified within subsections (1), (2), and (3) of section 29-4.4(f). 
(3)  Parking in excess of two hundred (200) percent of the minimum amount required by Table 4-3.1 shall require approval of a variance by the board in accordance with the standards of section 29-6 of this chapter. 
(f)  Location and use of parking facilities. 
(1)  Location. 
(i)  All required parking shall be provided on the lot(s) where the principal use is located unless otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(ii)  Off-street automobile parking facilities required by this section for all non-residential uses may be located either on the premises of the building or use or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such building or use. 
(iii)  In the M-N district, on-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be located closer to the primary street frontage of the lot than the front façade of the principal structure, except for one double-loaded row of parking, which may be located between the front building façade and the front lot line, if it is not located in a required front yard area. The option to include one double-loaded row of parking in this location is not available on properties where the applicant has selected to use the "pedestrian" dimensional standards shown in sections 29-2.2(b)(2) (M-N district) and 29-4.1 (dimensional standards). 
(iv)  No portion of an off-street parking facility shall be located in a public street or sidewalk, parkway, alley, or other public right-of-way. 
(v)  In a residential district, no paved driveway or outdoor parking area shall be permitted to cover more than thirty (30) percent or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is greater, of any required front yard or required rear yard area. The thirty (30) percent limit shall include areas included in driveways. 
(2)  Use. 
(i)  Land used for off-site parking for a non-residential generating use shall not be located in a residential district, unless that generating use is a permitted use or conditional use in that residential district. 
(ii)  Off-street parking spaces shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, or equipment. 
(3)  Use of yards. 
(i)  No vehicle shall be parked in a required front or side yard except on a permitted driveway. A permitted driveway is a driveway that leads to the front or rear of the building or to a permitted accessory building (garage) attached or detached from the principal structure and maintained in accordance with the city's property maintenance standards. 
(ii)  A permitted driveway may include a defined area for parking adjacent and attached to the driveway provided such extension does not occupy any part of a required front or side yard and complies with all provisions of sections 29-4.7(d) and (e). The extension must be paved in a material similar to that of the rest of the driveway. 
(iii)  Parking of vehicles in a direction perpendicular to the driveway is prohibited, except in the rear yard. 
(iv)  In residential districts, rear yards may be used for open parking of automobiles, including trailers and similar type vehicles, on an approved dust-free surface, subject to the installation and maintenance of a screening device not less than four (4) feet or more than six (6) feet in height. 
(v)  The director may issue a temporary permit to allow parking that does not meet the requirements of subsections (i) through (iv) under section 29-6.4(h) (temporary parking permits). 
(g)  Parking design standards. The design of required off-street and open parking areas and spaces shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Residential setback. No parking shall be permitted within six (6) feet of an adjoining lot containing a single- or two-family use, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(2)  Grades, drainage, and curbs. 
(i)  Parking areas shall be designed to assure positive drainage, but shall not exceed a slope of ten (10) percent; 
(ii)  Approach driveways which do not serve directly abutting parking spaces may be designed to a slope of up to fifteen (15) percent, if accompanied by appropriate landing grades and vertical curves at points of transition; 
(iii)  Storm drainage control and facilities shall be designed to satisfy the requirements of the storm drainage standards of the city; 
(iv)  Curb islands or wheel stops may be installed for drainage control, and for vehicular channelization and lane control; provided, that in parking areas of more than one hundred (100) spaces, curbing or similar measures shall be required to assure safe and proper control of vehicular and pedestrian movements; 
(v)  Parked vehicles shall be prevented from intruding on travel lanes, walkways, public streets, or adjacent properties by means of walls, curbs, wheel stops, or other means. 
(3)  Access. 
(i)  Ingress and egress shall be only by way of paved driveways or openings meeting the city's adopted access location and design requirements. 
(ii)  All parking areas containing more than two hundred (200) spaces shall be served by more than one standard entrance. 
(iii)  Access driveways shall be free of objects that might interfere with the ability of drivers to see pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(iv)  A driveway providing access to premises in commercial or industrial districts shall not be permitted through a residential district. 
(v)  The following additional standards apply in all residential districts: 
(A)  No garage for any use other than a single- or two-family dwelling shall be located nearer than sixty (60) feet to the front lot line; 
(B)  Required parking spaces may be provided in a tandem layout (i.e., one vehicle parked behind the other) to serve one- and two-family dwellings only; see Figure 4.3-1 above; and 
(C)  Parking spaces for all other uses in residential districts shall not be located in the required front or side yard. 
(vi)  Any non-residential driveway not conforming to the city's adopted design guidelines shall be reviewed and approved by the director of public works. 
(4)  Parking layout dimensions. All required parking spaces must comply with the minimum dimensions for spaces shown in the following Table 4.3-3 and Figure 4.3-2. 
Table 4.3-3: Off-Street Parking Layout Dimensions for Standard Sized Vehicles 
Parking Angle (1)—degree 	0° 	20° 	30° 	40° 	45° 	50° 	60° 	70° 	80° 	90° 
Curb Length Per Space (3)—ft. 	23.0 	24.9 	17.0 	13.0 	12.0 	11.3 	9.8 	9.4 	9.0 	8.5 
Space Depth (4)—ft. 	8.0 	14.5 	16.9 	18.5 	18.8 	19.3 	20.0 	19.5 	19.0 	18.0 
Access Aisle Width (5)—ft. 	12.0 [1][2] 	12.0 [1] 	12.0 [1] 	12.0 [1] 	13.0 [1] 	15.0 [1] 	18.0 	20.0 	22.0 	24.0 
Space Width (2)—ft. 	8.0 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 	8.5 
[1] Aisle width (D) shall not be less than 18 feet if the aisle is a designated fire lane. 
[2] Aisle width (D) shall not be less than 22 feet for two-way traffic. 
 
(i)  If the degree of angle of parking provided is not listed, the aisle width required shall be the next largest angle of parking shown. 
(ii)  If parking spaces are located only on one side of an access aisle, the width of the access aisle may be reduced by twenty (20) percent but not less than twelve (12) feet wide or eighteen (18) feet wide if a designated fire lane. 
(iii)  Non-residential driveways shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width with a curb return radius of thirty (30) feet. Non-residential driveway s with a width greater than thirty (30) feet up to a maximum of forty-one (41) feet must have the driveway throat stripped and approved by the director of public works. 
 
(5)  Surfacing. 
(i)  All new and expanded vehicle parking, vehicle storage, and maneuvering areas must be paved with concrete, asphalt, or an alternate paving material as determined by the director. 
(ii)  Pervious or semi-pervious parking area surfacing materials may be approved alternatives, if the director determines that such materials are appropriate for the city's climate and the durability required for their intended use. Permitted materials may include, but are not limited to "grasscrete," ring and grid systems used in conjunction with grass seed or sod, permeable concrete or asphalt, porous or grid pavers, or recycle materials such as glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block, and concrete. 
(iii)  Pavement cross-section shall be determined by the owner based on considerations of durability, subsurface conditions, and the type of vehicles using the parking area. 
(iv)  Interior driveways, fire lanes, and loading or maneuvering areas shall comply with applicable design and surfacing standards on file in the community development department. 
(v)  Parking spaces shall be delineated and appropriate traffic flow indications given by use of reflectorized paint on the parking area pavement. 
(6)  Lighting. Lights shall be required for all parking areas intended for night use. Lights shall be arranged or shielded to direct illumination away from residences and from public streets and other public areas in accordance with section 29-4.5 (exterior lighting). 
(7)  Exceptions. Driveways and off-street parking for one-family and two-family dwellings in the R-1 and R-2 districts shall not be required to comply with the provisions of subsections (2), (4) and (6) above. 
(h)  Parking structure, commercial or accessory. All accessory parking structures, commercial parking structures or portions of structures occupied by automobile parking shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The minimum setback for a parking structure shall be the same that is required for a principal structure. 
(2)  The height of an accessory parking garage may not exceed the height of the principal building it is intended to serve. 
(3)  Points of ingress and egress to the garage shall be clearly marked and shall be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to an intersection or other curb cut. 
(4)  All floors fronting a public street shall be level (not inclined). 
(5)  At least thirty (30) percent of each façade facing a public street shall be designed to conceal the view of all parked cars below the hoodline and to conceal internal light sources when viewed from the public street. 
(6)  Where a parking garage is subject to a front, side, or rear setback of ten (10) feet or more, a landscape strip at least four (4) feet wide shall be installed around the perimeter of the garage and comply with the landscape design requirements in section 29-4.4. 
(7)  When a garage is open during the evening hours, all internal areas and all entrances shall be lit with fixtures providing at least two (2) footcandles of light at floor level. 
(i)  Drive-through vehicle stacking. The following standards apply to all properties with a drive-through facility. 
(1)  Stacking Space Requirements. 
Table 4.3-4: Drive-Through Stacking Space Requirements 
Activity 	Minimum Stacking Spaces (per lane) 	Measured From: 
Bank, Financial Institution, or Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 	3 	Teller of Window 
Restaurant/Retail Store 	3 	Pick-Up Window 
Full Service Vehicle Washing Establishment 	3 	Outside of Washing Bay 
Self-Service or Automated Vehicle Washing Establishment 	1 	Outside of Washing Bay 
Other 	Determined by the Director based on anticipated need and avoidance of traffic congestion on adjacent streets 
 
(2)  Location and design of stacking lanes. 
 
Figure 4.3-3: Stacking Lanes
(i)  Minimum number of stacking spaces shall be in addition to the space at the teller or pick-up window. 
(ii)  Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile service order devices, and similar instruments shall not be audible beyond the property line of the site. 
(iii)  No service shall be rendered, deliveries made, or sales conducted within the required front yard or corner side yard; customers shall be served in vehicles through service windows or facility located on the non-corner sides and/or rear of the principal building. 
(iv)  Drive-through stacking lanes shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
(v)  Stacking lanes shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from rights-of-way. 
(vi)  A by-pass land around the drive-through facility stacking lane must be provided for financial institutions and restaurant/retail uses. 
(j)  Off-street loading requirements. 
(1)  Minimum requirements for off-street loading space. Off-street loading space shall be provided as set forth in Table 4.3-5 below, except as provided in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Existing structures. 
(i)  If the aggregate gross floor area of any building is increased by more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, off-street loading space shall be provided, in accordance with Table 4.3-5. 
(ii)  Existing buildings greater than fifty (50) years old shall be exempt from the requirement to construct off-street loading space if the gross floor area of the existing building is increased. 
Table 4.3-5: Off-Street Loading Space Standards 
Type of Use or Facility 	Off-Street Loading Requirement 
Office or Lodging 
Personal services and repair 
Retail store (large) 	1 space for each 50,000 sf of gross floor area in the structure or part thereof shall be provided. If a common loading dock is present no off-street loading/unloading spaces are required on-site. 
Building material sales 
Garden material sales 
Furniture and floor covering sales 
Industrial Services and Manufacturing Light Vehicle sales, rental, storage, repair, or service 
Heavy vehicle and equipment sales, rental, storage, repair, or service 
Wholesaling 	
Bus and Truck Terminals 	Space sufficient to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or loading/unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
 
(3)  Design and use of off-street loading areas. 
(i)  Off-street loading space shall be located on the same lot occupied by the use served and shall be accessible from a public street or alley. 
(ii)  Off-street loading space shall not be occupied by or considered as any part of the required off-street parking areas. 
(iii)  No portion of an off-street loading space shall be located within any fire lane required by city ordinance or within aisles, driveways, or maneuvering areas necessary to provide reasonable access to any parking space. 
(iv)  Off-street loading space and the aisles or driveways leading to the off-street loading space shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, or equipment. 
(v)  Any off-street loading area located within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary of a residential district shall be screened from view from the district by a masonry wall at least eight (8) feet in height of a color matching one of the primary colors used on the primary façade of the building. 
(4)  M-DT district. In the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), the director may alter or waive the requirements of this section 29-4.3(j) (off-street loading requirements) on a case-by-case basis if the applicant demonstrates that a specific standard is impractical or meaningless to achieve due to: 
(i)  Existence of historic buildings in areas where loading would need to be located; 
(ii)  Section 29-4.2 requirements that a building occupy the space where loading would need to be located; or 
(iii)  Other site limitations or circumstances that make strict adherence to these standards impracticable. 
(k)  Bicycle facilities. Any parking lot or structure containing ten (10) or more parking spaces shall provide adequate and safe on-site bicycle parking facilities in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Required bicycle spaces. 
(i)  Bicycle parking facilities shall be designed to accommodate the number of bicycle parking spaces, based on vehicle spaces, set forth in Table 4.3-6 below: 
Table 4.3-6: Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Vehicle Spaces 	Required Bicycle Spaces 
10—50 	4 
51—99 	8 
100—199 	12 
200—299 	15 
300 or more 	5 percent of the number of vehicle spaces or 50 space, whichever is less 
 
(ii)  For parking lots required by other provisions of this chapter to have more than twenty-five (25) vehicle parking spaces, the required number of vehicle parking spaces may be reduced by one space for each required bicycle parking space installed. 
(2)  Design. 
(i)  Location. Bicycle parking facilities shall be: 
(A)  Located within fifty (50) feet of the main customer and employee entrances to the principle use provided such location does not impede ADA required access or compromise pedestrian or customer safety; 
(B)  Clearly designated or of standard bicycle rack design which does not require separate identification; 
(C)  Safely separated from vehicle maneuvering areas; and 
(D)  Located on the ground level when in a parking structure. 
(ii)  Minimum dimensional standards. Each bicycle parking space shall be at least: 
(A)  Six (6) feet long; 
(B)  Two (2) feet wide; 
(C)  Have a minimum overhead clearance of seven (7) feet; and 
(D)  If more than one bicycle rack is used, a minimum five-foot wide access aisle is required beside or between each row of bicycle racks. 
(iii)  Materials. Bicycle parking facilities shall be surfaced with all-weather material and maintained in a safe and well-maintained condition. 
(iv)  Security. Bicycle parking facilities shall be equipped with either a lockable enclosure (bicycle locker) or a permanent, secure, and stationary structure (bicycle rack) that supports the bicycle frame and to which the frame and both bicycle wheels can be locked (with removal of the front wheel) or where the frame and one wheel can be locked (if both wheels remain on the bicycle). 
(l)  Screening and landscaping. All parking facilities shall comply with the screening and landscaping requirements of sections 29.4-4 and 29-4.7. 
(m)  Permits and certification. 
(1)  Parking lots without an associated building permit shall be subject to separate permitting and inspecting during construction, as appropriate, and shall not be open for use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the department. 
(2)  Prior to authorizing use of any parking area established under this section, or issuance of occupancy certificates for any uses dependent thereon, the director shall inspect and certify the parking area to be in compliance with these standards. 
(n)  Delayed construction of required parking. Upon application of the owner, up to twenty (20) percent of the parking required under this section may remain unimproved until such time as the director finds that it must be improved to adequately serve the parking demand. The director may approve a delayed construction of required parking if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The initial occupancy of the premises will be adequately served by the lesser number of spaces; 
(2)  A site plan clearly indicating the location, pattern, and circulation to and from the deferred parking spaces is approved; 
(3)  The land area delineated for future parking is brought to finished grade and is landscaped; 
(4)  The land area delineated for future parking shall not be used for building, storage, loading or other purposes; and 
(5)  The land area delineated for future parking shall not count toward the required landscaping for the site. 
(Ord. No. 23771 , § 1, 2-4-19)  
Sec. 29-4.4. - Landscaping, screening, and tree preservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Establish healthy environmental conditions by providing shade, air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, storm water runoff retardation, erosion control, and noise, glare and heat abatement; 
(2)  Provide visual buffering from streets, to buffer potentially incompatible land uses and to generally enhance the quality and appearance of a development site, and the city in total; 
(3)  Encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation; 
(4)  Supplement the land disturbance permit requirements of chapter 12A; and 
(5)  Protect trees and vegetation that offer environmental, aesthetic, habitat, sustainability, and economic benefits to the city and its citizens. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of this section 29-4.4 shall apply to lots and parcels in any district in which one or more of the following occurs: 
(i)  A new principal structure is constructed; 
(ii)  The floor area in an existing principal structure is increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent; 
(iii)  An existing principal structure is relocated on the lot or parcel; 
(iv)  The principal structure is renovated or redeveloped (including but not limited to reconstruction after fire, flood, or other damage) for a use no more intense than existing previously, and the building footprint is increased by more than ten (10) percent; 
(v)  A new primary use parking lot containing ten (10) or more spaces is constructed; or 
(vi)  An existing primary use parking lot containing twenty-five (25) or more spaces is reconstructed or redesigned with significant changes of ten (10) percent or greater, including, but not limited to the layout, location, or orientation of parking spaces, driving aisles or access drives. 
(2)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1) above, lots or parcels having single-family attached, single-family detached, two-family residential, or live work use(s) or zoning shall be exempt from the general provisions (section 29-4.4(c)), and property edge buffering (section 29-4.4(e)) requirements of this section. 
(3)  The provisions of section 29-4.4(g) apply to all development or redevelopment on lots and parcels that contain more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area, and to any new lot of record created after the effective date of this ordinance, regardless of the primary use of the property, in any district, except single-family or two-family residential structures on platted lots less than one acre in size. 
(4)  No provision of this section 29-4.4 shall require landscaping to be installed, or a tree to be preserved, in a portion of a lot required to be occupied by a building pursuant to the building form standards in section 29-4.2 (M-DT district). If there is a conflict between the requirements of section 29-4.2 and the requirements of this section 29-4.4, the director may modify or waive the provisions of this section 29-4.4 to allow the requirements of section 29-4.2 to be met. 
(c)  General provisions. 
(1)  Landscape plan required. A landscaping plan, prepared in accordance with this section, shall be required as part of all applications for development or redevelopment, unless otherwise exempt per this chapter. Approval of a landscape plan shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit, and prior to the development of any parking area or loading/ unloading area and may be combined with other required application material. Landscaping plans may be amended, however new plans shall be submitted for review and approval prior to installation of plant material, and in all cases must comply with the current landscaping requirements of this chapter. 
The landscape plan shall be presented on its own page, designed to scale, signed by an International Certified Arborist or design professional and contain the following information: 
(i)  A tree preservation plan that includes the following elements as described below: 
(A)  The full area of any climax forest on the site. 
(B)  The twenty-five (25) percent of climax forest to be saved on parcels greater than one acre in size. Such preservation areas shall be depicted as specified in item (D), below, and shall not include trees, located within a stream buffer, right-of-way or utility easement. 
(C)  Areas may be determined by actual field measurement, by planimeter, or automated software. (See section 29-4.4(i) for climax forest preservation requirements.) 
(D)  The required twenty-five (25) percent of climax forest to be preserved on any tract of land shall remain as an undeveloped stand of timber and comply with the following: 
1)  Required preservation areas shall be platted as a common lot that is subject to a tree preservation easement. The required platting of a common lot shall not apply to preservation areas within non-residential development; however, such preservation area shall be subject to a tree preservation easement; 
2)  When required preservation is greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet an applicant may divide such preservation area provided no single area contains less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Division of preservation area is permitted in accordance with the standards shown in Table 4.4-1. 
3)  When the tract of land includes a stream buffer none of the trees located within the stream buffer may be counted for meeting the required preservation. Trees retained will count toward screening requirements contained in section 29-4.4 (landscaping and screening). 
4)  An adjustment in the standards of Table 4.4-1 may be considered by the board as a variance subject to the provisions of article 6 of this chapter. 
Table 4.4-1: Climax Forest Division 
Required area to be preserved (in sq. ft.) 	Minimum parcel size (in sq. ft.) [1] 	Maximum number of parcels 
60,000 	30,000 	2 
120,000 	30,000 	2 
240,000 	30,000 	2 
480,000 	30,000 	3 
Greater than 480,000 	180,000 	Unlimited 
 
Notes: 
[1]—No parcel created shall have less than the minimum area specified. 
(ii)  A planting schedule detail containing common and botanical plant names, sizes, and graphical depictions. 
(iii)  The size and location of any walls, earth berms, and fences. 
(iv)  Provisions for watering, soil stabilization, plant protection, and maintenance. 
(v)  Location and description of any barriers to be erected to protect any vegetation from damage both during and after construction. 
(vi)  Zoning for the proposed development and adjacent properties. 
(vii)  Calculations showing compliance with this section 29-4.4. 
(viii)  The methods used to remove trees, the areas of tree removal, and areas of trees being saved and showing the location of protective fencing. The areas to be preserved shall be shown on the plan along with state plane coordinates at all points of intersect. 
(ix)  Aerial photograph conducted within one year of the application submittal date, or if no such aerial photography is available to the applicant, then an image from a public source such as Google Earth showing clearing limits, preservation area, protective fencing, and topography may be utilized as an alternative. 
(x)  Any land annexed or within the City of Columbia corporate limits that did not follow the tree preservation provisions of this chapter and is sought to be redeveloped or subdivided shall be subject to the following: 
(A)  No permit for the purpose of allowing redevelopment or subdivision shall be issued for a period of six (6) years unless the provisions of subsection (B), below, have been met. 
(B)  To obtain relief from the permitting restriction specified in subsection (A), above, the following shall be met: 
1)  The subject property shall be reforested such that the required twenty-five (25) percent of the climax forest that should have been preserved is re-established on a designated common lot. If required preservation is greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, multiple common lots may be established in accordance with the provisions of Table 4.4-1. 
2)  In addition to the reforestation requirements indicated in subsection (B)1) above, any annexed tract containing a regulated stream for which a stream buffer would have been required and no longer exists shall be reforested with native plant species at the reforested rate as shown below. The reforested stream buffer shall not be credited towards meeting the twenty-five (25) percent of the climax forest required by subsection (B)1) above. 
3)  Reforested common lots shall meet the following coverage standards: 
(a)  Fifty (50) percent of the area shall be covered with the following types of trees. No more than fifty (50) percent of the trees used to meet this requirement may be the same size. 
(i)  Tree whips between one to three (3) feet height at planting; 
(ii)  Tree saplings between four (4) to seven (7) feet in height at planting; 
(iii)  Container or root bag trees one-half (½) inch to one and one-half-inch caliper trunk size measured six (6) inches off the ground. 
(b)  Fifty (50) percent of the area shall be covered by shrubs that are one to three (3) feet in height at planting. 
(c)  One hundred (100) percent of the area shall be covered in native grasses and Forbes seed mix that includes: Indian grass, Big Bluestem, Coreopsis, Tick seed, Prairie Partridge Pea, Illinois Bundle Flower, and Purple Prairie Clover. 
(d)  Coverage and spacing of required reforestation plant materials shall comply with the requirements set forth in Table 4.4-2. 
(C)  A "look-back" period of three (3) years shall be used to determine the required area of climax forest that should have been preserved on the property. Such analysis will be conducted using aerial photography. 
(D)  Any climax forest preserved on the site that is located within a regulated preservation area (i.e. a stream buffer) shall not be counted toward meeting the required twenty-five (25) percent preservation standards or as part of the required area to meet reforestation. If climax forest has been preserved outside of a regulated preservation area the amount preserved may be counted to off-set that area which would otherwise be required to be reforested. 
Table 4.4-2: Reforestation Plant Material Coverage and Spacing 
Plant Type 	Coverage Area 	Plant Spacing Range 
Tree Whip 	135 sq. ft. 	15—30 ft. 
Tree Sapling 	270 sq. ft. 	20—40 ft. 
Container Tree 	540 sq. ft. 	30—40 ft. 
Root Bag Tree 	600 sq. ft. 	30—40 ft. 
Shrubs 	75 sq. ft. 	10—15 ft. 
Grass or Flowering plugs 	10 sq. ft. 	5 ft. 
Native Grass and Forbes 	6 lbs. of Pls./acre 	Mixture to contain minimum 3 different native seeds of which no single one is greater than 50% of mix. 
 
(2)  Minimum required landscaping. 
(i)  In the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), the required "private or public open areas" must comply with the following standards: 
(A)  Any ground level required private or public open area shall have at least one tree per eight hundred (800) square feet, which is at least two (2) inches DBH (diameter at breast height), and at least ten (10) feet in overall height. 
(B)  Where new trees are planted to meet this requirement, they shall be no closer than five (5) feet to any common lot line. 
(C)  Urban general lots that are reusing existing structures with no ground level private or public open area are exempt from this requirement. 
(ii)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, in all other districts, a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total land area of any tract, parcel or lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall be installed to comply with the specific requirements for street frontage landscaping, property edge buffering, and parking lot landscaping in this section 29-4.4, and the remainder (if any additional landscaping is needed to meet the fifteen (15) percent minimum) shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site. 
(3)  Plant materials. Plant materials shall be selected from the city's guidelines for landscaping and screening or approved by city arborist. All plant material shall be hardy to central Missouri (USDA hardiness Zone 5b), free of disease and insects, and must conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Association of Nurserymen. No one species for each plant type may comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the total for that plant type. Invasive species, as identified by the Missouri Department of Conservation's invasive species list, are prohibited. The use of plastic or other artificial plant materials is prohibited. Fifty (50) percent of all trees planted are required to be large to medium species and only thirty (30) percent of the large to medium trees can be of a single species. 
(4)  Minimum living materials. In all areas where landscaping is required, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the surface area shall be covered by living materials, rather than mulch, wood chips, bark, gravel, peat moss, or other non-living materials. 
(5)  Grading and drainage. All open areas shall be graded, properly drained, and maintained to encourage on-site water retention and percolation while minimizing ponding or standing water for periods of more than three (3) days. 
(6)  Minimum plant sizes. The minimum planting sizes for planting materials, at time of planting, shall be as set forth in Table 4.4-3 and in the city's guidelines for landscaping and screening: 
Table 4.4-3: Minimum Plant Sizes 
Plant Type 	Minimum Size 
Large Deciduous Shade Tree - mature height greater than 45 ft. 	Two inch caliper, measured six inches above the ground, as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
Medium Deciduous Shade Tree - mature height 30—45 ft. 	Two inch caliper, measured six inches above the ground, as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
Small Deciduous Shade Tree - mature height 20—30 ft. 	As specified by the American Association of Nurserymen, except for true dwarf species. 
Ornamental Tree - mature height less than 20 ft. 	Four feet in height, as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen, except for true dwarf species. 
Conifers 	Six feet in height. 
Shrubs 	Five gallon container size. 
Ground Cover Plants (crowns, plugs, containers) 	A species appropriate number to provide 50% surface coverage after two growing seasons. 
Grass Seeding or Sod 	Seed mix shall be at least 80% pure live seed and 99% weed free. 
 
(7)  Plant material spacing. 
(i)  In the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), plant material spacing shall comply with this section and with the requirements of section 29-4.20 (urban space standards). 
(ii)  In all other districts, plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet from any fence line or property line unless required to comply with the provisions of subsection 29-4.4(e) (property edge buffering). Where tree planting requirements are based on linear street frontage, areas occupied by driveways shall be included when calculating the number of trees required to be planted, and any trees that would otherwise be required in driveways shall be planted in other landscaped front yard areas unless prohibited by minimum spacing requirements for that species. 
(8)  Snow storage areas. Areas required for snow storage and areas required for landscaping shall not overlap, except that snow may be stored on ground cover landscape areas (e.g., turf) that do not contain required landscape trees or other plantings. 
(9)  Screening of outdoor storage areas. All exterior storage areas that are expanded or established following adoption of this chapter, except those on single- and two-family lots, shall be enclosed by a permanent screen at least eight (8) feet in height above the ground surface of the storage area, or of such additional height as necessary to screen the stored materials from public view, but non-vegetative screening materials shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. The required screening shall have a year round opacity of at least eighty (80) percent, and if landscaping is used, the eighty (80) percent opacity shall be achieved within four (4) full growing seasons. When a solid wall or any solid fence is used for screening, ornamental landscaping shall be placed between the fence and the adjacent property lines. 
(10)  Screening of rooftop mechanical equipment. In all R-MF and mixed use districts, rooftop mechanical equipment and appurtenances other than solar collectors located on the principal structure shall be screened on all sides with a structure equal to or exceeding the height of the mechanical equipment or appurtenance, measured from the rooftop. Screening enclosures shall use at least one of the predominant materials used in the façades of the principal structure and one of the predominant colors used in the principal structure. 
(11)  Vision clearance. Landscaping and screening shall not be allowed to obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or condition dangerous to the public safety upon any such street. 
(12)  City right-of-way. Tree selection, planting, removal, or pruning, in city rights-of-way and easements shall be in compliance with chapter 24, article V of the City Code or with approval from the city arborist. 
(13)  Installation due to season. 
(i)  Landscaping of the site shall be completed within one planting season (spring to fall) of the completion of the exterior of the building, in accordance with building permit requirements. 
(ii)  All landscaping work must be completed prior to the final inspection of a building or within one year of issuance of the land disturbance permit, whichever occurs later. If completion of the work or building is at such time of the year that the landscaping cannot be completed, a performance bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other acceptable financial instrument for completion of the work may be accepted by the director to allow the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Street frontage landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaping strip within private yards. All paved areas with more than forty (40) feet of length within twenty-five (25) feet of a street right-of-way shall have at least a six-foot wide landscaped buffer which shall be improved in accordance with the provisions of section 29-4.4(e)(2) within private yards separating parking areas from abutting street right-of-way. 
(2)  Street trees. Street tree landscaping shall be installed as follows and in accordance with chapter 24, article V of the City Code: 
(i)  One tree per forty (40) feet of street frontage. 
(ii)  Thirty (30) percent of the trees shall be large trees and thirty (30) percent shall be medium trees. 
(iii)  No more than thirty (30) percent of required trees may be from one tree species. 
(iv)  The medium and large trees shall be planted at least forty (40) feet on center. 
(v)  Street trees may be clustered and placed at uneven intervals, with approval from the city arborist. 
(vi)  If the public right-of-way does not contain or accommodate street trees meeting this requirement, then the property owner must install the required street trees within the private landscaping buffer. 
(vii)  Street trees may not be counted towards compliance with all other provisions of section 29-4.4. 
 
Figure 4.4-1: Street Trees
(3)  Driveways. Street frontage landscaping may contain driveways. 
(4)  Attached or detached residences. Lots that contain detached or attached residences and which have side or rear property boundaries abutting collector or arterial street right-of-way shall have screening either along such boundaries or around any patios on the lot which are visible from the right-of-way. The screening shall consist of landscape materials, ornamental fences or walls in combination with plant materials, properly stabilized earthen berms, or a combination of these methods. Screening shall be so designed that at least fifty (50) percent opacity is achieved, viewed horizontally, in the space between one foot and five feet above grade at the screening line, at the time of installation; provided that where plant materials are used for screening, these shall be selected and placed to achieve the same objective within four full growing seasons following planting. Screening shall be placed on private property. All screening material, including plant material, shall be continuously maintained in good condition to the above standards. 
(5)  Sight triangle. Except in the M-DT district (section 29-4.2), on any corner space or lot on which a front or side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, or other structure or no plant growth of a type within a sight triangle which would interfere with traffic visibility, in accordance with city policy based on the Missouri Department of Transportation's Engineering Policy Guide provided plant material reaching no more than three (3) feet or higher at maturity will be allowed. 
(e)  Property edge buffering. 
(1)  Buffering required. Where a property contains at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of area or more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of paved area or any vehicle loading/unloading areas, buffering shall be installed as required by Table 4.4-4. 
(i)  To use this table, an applicant identifies the proposed use of the property in Row 3, across the top of the table, and then reads down Column 2 to identify the zoning of the adjacent property along each property line. The box at the intersection of Column 2 and Row 3 identifies the screening and buffering requirement for the applicant on that property line. Different types of screening and buffering may be required on different property lines, as indicated in Table 4.4-4. 
(ii)  Transitional screening shall not be required for urban agriculture and farmer's markets. 
Table 4.4-4: Transitional Screening and Buffering 
Use of Subject Property 
Zoning of Adjacent Properties 	Adjacent Zone District 	Applicant's Use 	Single & Two-Family 	Multi-Family 	Mixed-Use 	Commercial 	Industrial 
	Zone District 	Structure Type 	Res. 	Non-Res. 	Res. 	Non-Res. 	Vert. 	Horiz. 	1—3 Stories 	3+ Stories 	— 
	Single & Two-Family 	Residential 	0 	2 	1 	2 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 
		Non-Residential 	0 	0 	2 	1 	1 	1 	1 	2 	
	Multi-Family 	Residential 	0 	2 	0 	2 	2 	2 	3 	3 	3 
		Non-Residential 	0 	0 	1 	0 	1 	1 	1 	2 	
	Mixed-Use 	Vertical 	0 	1 	2 	1 	0 	0 	1 	2 	3 
		Horizontal 	0 	1 	2 	1 	0 	0 	0 	1 	
	Commercial 	1—3 Stories 	0 	1 	3 	1 	1 	0 	0 	1 	3 
		3+ Stories 	0 	0 	3 	2 	2 	1 	0 	0 	3 
	Industrial 	— 	0 	0 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	0 
Level 0 does not require a screen or landscape buffer. 
Level 1 requires a six foot wide landscape buffer. 
Level 2 requires a four-foot wide landscape buffer and a six foot tall screening device. 
Level 3 requires a 10-foot wide landscape buffer and an eight-foot tall screening device. 
 
(2)  Landscape buffer location and design. 
(i)  The required landscape buffer shall be installed on the applicant's side of the screening device. 
(ii)  It shall be designed so that at least eighty (80) percent opacity is achieved, viewed horizontally, in the space between one foot and five (5) feet above grade at the screen line, at the time of installation. 
(iii)  The landscape buffer shall include the following plant mix: 
(A)  Four (4) of the categories of planting material contained in section 29-4.4(c)(6) and the guidelines for landscaping and screening, or as approved by the city arborist; 
(B)  One tree with a two-inch caliper that is ten (10) feet in height at the time of installation for each two hundred (200) square feet of buffer area; and 
(C)  Shrubs and flowering plants that cover a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the remaining area with a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of that plant material being in flowering shrubs. 
(3)  Screen location and design. 
(i)  The screen shall be located along the property line of the applicant's lot, and shall not extend into the established setback of the adjoining lot. 
(ii)  The screen shall be constructed of wood, masonry, brick, stone, wrought iron, compact evergreen hedging, an earth berm, or some combination of those materials. Chain link fence and railroad ties are prohibited. 
(iii)  The combined height of the screening methods identified in this subsection shall not be less than six (6) feet. 
 
Figure 4.4-2: Interior Parking Area
(f)  Parking area landscaping. 
(1)  All parking areas containing over one hundred (100) parking spaces shall include interior landscaping equal to at least ten (10) percent of the paved area. Landscaping required to meet the requirements of sections 29-4.4(d) (street frontage landscaping) or 29-4.4(e) (property edge buffering) above shall not be used to satisfy this requirement. 
  
  
  
 
Figure 4.4-3: Parking Area Curb Breaks
(2)  Interior landscaped areas to meet the requirements of subsection (1) above shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, shall contain at least one tree per forty (40) lineal feet of interior landscaped area or part thereof, and shall be designed lower than the paved area so that storm water from the paved parking areas shall flow into the landscaped areas. If curbs are used to prevent vehicle entry into these lowered landscaped areas, they shall have breaks to permit stormwater to enter the landscaped areas. 
 
Figure 4.4-4: Interior Landscaped Area
(3)  No parking areas shall contain more than one hundred fifty (150) spaces unless it is separated by a landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet in width from other areas containing parking spaces. The ten (10) foot wide landscaped area shall contain four (4) of the categories of planting materials listed in section 29-4.4(c)(6). In addition, trees shall be planted within the ten-foot wide landscaped area at the rate of one tree for each forty (40) lineal feet. Appropriately placed connections between parking areas are permitted. 
(4)  In addition to the above, paved areas developed after August 19, 1991, exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet in area, and additions exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet in area to paved areas that were developed prior to August 19, 1991, shall contain a minimum of one tree within a growspace/island of at least one hundred seventy (170) square feet within the interior for every four thousand (4,000) square feet of paved area. For every additional tree planted within the interior of a paved area required parking may be reduced by three (3) parking spaces. For every additional tree planted within a perimeter bump/bulb-out containing one hundred fifty (150) square feet required parking may be reduced by two (2) parking spaces. 
If there is no area on the site where required trees can be installed so that they do not interfere with the loading and unloading of large vehicles, the required trees may be placed at the perimeter of the paved areas or in other suitable locations on the site. 
(5)  Of the combined total number of trees required to be planted in the interior parking lot, no less than thirty (30) percent shall be of a species of medium shade trees, and no less than forty (40) percent shall be of a species of large shade trees, no single tree species shall make up more than forty (40) percent of the trees required to be planted in the interior of the parking area. 
(g)  Preservation of existing landscaping. 
(1)  Applicability. The standards of this subsection shall apply to all development and redevelopment on lots or parcels equal or greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and to all subdivisions approved after the effective date of this chapter. These standards do not apply to the construction of a single-family detached, single-family attached, or two-family residential structure. (See also section 29-4.4(i) (clearing of trees) for additional standards related to tree removal.) 
(2)  Credit for preserving existing mature/significant trees. Applicants that preserve mature, healthy trees as part of development or redevelopment may obtain credits toward trees required by this chapter including, but not limited to, street frontage, landscaping, and edge buffering. To obtain credit, the preserved trees must be on the same lot, at least five (5) inches in diameter breast height (DBH), and must be in healthy condition as determined by the city, and be part of the approved tree protection detail. 
Credit is not given for shrubs, or trees preserved as part of a stream buffer, tree preservation, or otherwise undevelopable area. Credit for preserved trees shall be granted as shown in Table 4.4-5 and may be applied to reduce the number of trees required to be installed pursuant to this section 29-4.4. Trees contained in an existing or proposed utility or other easement cannot be credited toward required tree preservation, screening, or landscaping requirements. 
Any preserved trees for which credit is given, and that are lost to damage or disease within two (2) years after the credit is awarded, shall be replaced by the property owner within six (6) months at a ratio of one tree per one inch of DBH lost. Replacement trees must be at least two (2) inch in caliper size. Other plantings that die within eighteen (18) months of preservation credit received shall be replaced in kind within six (6) months. 
Table 4.4-5: Tree Preservation Credits 
Caliper of Preserved Tree (in.) 	Reduction in Number of Required Trees 
Over 12 in. DBH 	3 
Over 8 in. to 12 in. DBH 	2 
5 in. to 8 in. DBH 	1 
 
(3)  Significant trees. 
(i)  Twenty-five (25) percent of significant trees shall be preserved during development or redevelopment. All vacant and undeveloped land and all property to be redeveloped, including additions and alterations that require a land disturbance permit, shall abide by this section. A "significant tree" means a tree that is not diseased, dying, or of a noxious invasive species and that is at least twenty (20) inches diameter at breast height (DBH) for a deciduous tree that is located outside of the tree preservation and stream buffer or utility easement. 
(ii)  When a significant tree is removed, the property owner shall replace such tree(s) on the lot as follows: 
a.  A significant deciduous tree that is removed shall be replaced by three (3) large to medium deciduous trees, each with a minimum size at planting of two (2) inches caliper. 
b.  A significant coniferous tree that is removed shall be replaced by two (2) coniferous trees, each with a minimum height at planting of eight (8) feet. 
c.  In lieu of planting replacement trees a payment of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per tree can be paid to the City of Columbia right-of-way landscaping planting budget for planting of public street trees. 
d.  Replacement trees shall be maintained by the property owner for at least three (3) years. 
(iii)  Exceptions. Plants that create a public nuisance, as determined by the city arborist, are not protected by the provision of this section. 
(4)  Tree and vegetation protection during and after construction. 
(i)  Tree protection shall be required prior to and during site disturbance and construction activities. No activities with the potential of causing damage to the root systems of trees shall be allowed within twenty (20) feet outside the drip line of the trees being preserved, protected or planted as part of the landscaping or tree preservation plan. 
(ii)  An orange construction fence or an equivalent shall be installed and "Tree Preservation - Keep Out" signs shall be posted every one hundred (100) feet along the perimeter of the tree preservation area, and the fencing and signs shall be maintained for the duration of all site disturbance and construction activities. 
(iii)  If site grading occurs within twenty (20) feet of the tree preservation area, the perimeter of the area must be trenched to a minimum width of two (2) feet and a minimum depth of two (2) feet. Tree roots shall then be pruned by the property owner. 
(iv)  The tree and vegetation protection fencing shall be clearly shown on the project approval documents. No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within the fenced area. All tree and vegetation protection measures shall be inspected and approved by the city arborist prior to start of any land disturbing activities. 
(h)  Alternatives and adjustments. 
(1)  This section is not intended to prevent the use of a material or method of construction not prescribed specifically by this section, especially whenever a stream, natural rock formation or other physiographic condition exists; provided that any such alternate material or method has been approved in writing or in plan and its use authorized by the director as providing at least equivalent quality, effectiveness, durability, hardiness, and performance to the specific requirements of subsections (a) through (g) above. 
(2)  The director may modify the property edge buffering standards of section 29-4.4(e) by up to ten (10) percent (increase or decrease in width and height) if necessary to provide adequate buffering of impacts or to respond to specific site conditions. 
(3)  The director may modify the property edge buffering standards of section 29-4.4(e) if the director determines that the design, height, location of uses, massing, and landscaping of the applicant's project mitigates potential adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
(4)  The director may modify the street frontage landscaping standards of section 29-4.4(d) for properties involving outdoor sales of vehicles or equipment if the director determines that strict application of these standards will significantly reduce visibility of the goods being sold from the fronting public street. 
(5)  Where the requirements of this section are applied to a redevelopment or reconstruction project, rather than a new development, the director may authorize a reduction of minimum off-street parking requirements established in section 29-4.3, by up to ten (10) percent, if necessary to accommodate street frontage landscaping required by subsection 29-4.4(d) above or the parking area landscaping required by subsection 29-4.4(f) above. 
(6)  Where the requirements of this section 29-4.4 are applied to a redevelopment or reconstruction project, rather than a new development, the scope of compliance shall be commensurate with the scope of redevelopment. 
(i)  Clearing of trees. 
(1)  The mechanized clearing of trees, logging of trees or clear-cutting of trees by any means on tracts of land of one acre or more shall be unlawful unless done in compliance with a land disturbance permit pursuant to chapter 12A of the City Code. 
(2)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of any climax forest area on any tract of land, one acre in size or greater, is subject to the land preservation standards shown in section 29-4.4(c)(1)(i)(d). When the tract of land includes a stream buffer, none of the required tree/land preservation shall be within the stream buffer. Trees retained will count toward screening requirements contained in section 24-4.4 (landscaping and screening). 
(3)  When logging is to occur prior to approval of a tree preservation plan or on property not otherwise subject to land disturbance requirements, a logging plan demonstrating compliance with tree preservation requirements must be submitted to the city arborist. This logging plan will include the area in square feet of forest land, the area in square feet of climax forest, and demonstrate that twenty-five (25) percent of the area of climax forest will be preserved after logging. Each logging operation on the same site will require a separate land disturbance permit. Under no circumstance shall successive logging remove greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the climax forest present upon the site before logging. 
(4)  An approved tree protection and preservation plan shall be required prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit and during the activities associated with the land disturbance permit in accordance with the administrative standards promulgated and enforced by the director of public works, but under no circumstances shall activities with the potential of causing damage to the root systems of trees be allowed within the perimeter of the drip line of the trees being preserved, protected or planted as part of the landscaping plan. 
(5)  Any land owner requesting annexation into the city shall abide by the tree preservation provisions of the City Code. Any land that did not follow the tree preservation provisions of the City Code shall wait five (5) years before they are able to obtain a permit for redevelopment or subdivision unless the provision of section 29-4.4(c)(1)(x) have been met.  
Sec. 29-4.5. - Exterior Lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section 29-4.5 is to enhance the attractiveness and livability of the community for its citizens, both during the day and at night without compromising the safety, security, and well-being of persons engaged in outdoor nighttime activities. It is the intent of this section to control the obtrusive aspects of excessive and careless outdoor lighting usage while preserving, protecting, and enhancing the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of property. Intended outcomes include: 
(1)  Insuring that parking areas, public gathering places, approaches to buildings, and other areas active at night have adequate outdoor illumination. 
(2)  Minimizing the adverse impacts on public safety and comfort due to excessive glare. 
(3)  Providing minimum and maximum light levels and establishing standards of lighting uniformity to enhance night vision and security. 
(4)  Minimizing spillage of light on adjacent or nearby property. 
(5)  Minimizing the effects of skyglow. 
(6)  Encouraging energy conservation through the use of efficient lighting technologies. 
(b)  IESNA standards and interpretations. The standards in this section 29-4.5 are based on the standards in the IESNA Lighting Handbook, 9th Edition and "Lighting for Exterior Environments: An IESNA Recommended Practice," RP-33-99 both published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. These publications shall be used in interpreting undefined terms and unclear provisions of this section. When new editions of these publications are available, the environment and energy commission shall prepare a report to the council setting forth any recommended changes in the standards of this section. 
(c)  Conformance with applicable codes. All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this section 29-4.5, the building code, the electrical code and section 29-4.8 (sign standards), as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. 
(d)  General standards and exceptions. 
(1)  This section applies to all new construction that includes outdoor lighting and to all replacement of outdoor lighting structures other than replacement of lighting fixtures, except that: 
(i)  Lighting structures installed lawfully before December 4, 2006, may continue in operation. Routine replacement and repair of lighting fixtures installed before December 4, 2006, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(ii)  Lighting installations in the M-BP or PD districts shown on development plans approved before December 4, 2006, shall comply with outdoor lighting standards adopted as part of those plans. 
(iii)  Additions to buildings, parking lots, and other site improvements approved before December 4, 2006, shall be exempt from the lighting plan submittal requirements of subsection (f) below, provided the addition does not increase either the size of a building or parking lot greater than fifty (50) percent of its existing gross floor area. 
(iv)  The addition of individual lighting structures shall not require submittal of a lighting plan pursuant to subsection (f) below provided the owner provides a certification that the additional lighting structures conform to the design criteria of this section, or the property owner obtains a special exception as provided in section 29-6.3(f). 
(v)  This section shall not apply to public street lighting. 
(vi)  Seasonal decorations that include illuminated displays are exempt from this section except that no light fixture that is part of a seasonal display shall be aimed or directed to create glare or light spillage. 
(vii)  This section shall not apply to the installation of an outdoor lighting structure if an application for a building permit involving the installation of that structure was received by the city on or before December 4, 2006. 
(2)  All outdoor facilities intended for nighttime use (5:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.) shall be illuminated and such illumination shall be maintained in compliance with the standards of this section. 
(3)  Searchlights and similar spot light fixtures, such as moving, flashing, chasing and strobe lights used to attract attention to a place are prohibited. 
(4)  For enhanced security, only light sources with a color rendering index (CRI) of greater than sixty (60) shall be used. See Table 4.5-1 for CRI range of lamps. 
(5)  Any light source or lamp that emits more than nine hundred (900) lumens (13 watt compact fluorescent or 60 watt incandescent) shall be concealed or shielded with an IESNA full cut-off style fixture with an angle not exceeding 90 degrees to minimize the potential for glare and unnecessary diffusion on adjacent property. 
Table 4.5-1: Color Rendering Index Range of Lamps 
Lamp Type 	Color Rendering Index (CRI) 
Fluorescent 
Lite White 	> 40 
Warm White 	> 50 
Warm White Deluxe 	> 70 
Cool White 	> 60 
Cool White Deluxe 	> 80 
White 	> 60 
Daylight 	> 70 
T12 Rare Earth Phosphor 	> 69 to > 80 
T8 Rare Earth Phosphor 	> 70 to > 90 
Natural 	> 80 
Incandescent 	> 80 
Compact T4, T5 	> 80 
C50, C70, DSGN 50 	> 90 
Mercury Vapor 
Clear 	15—25 
Coated 	40 to > 50 
Metal Halide 
Clear or Coated 	60 > 90 
High Pressure Sodium 
Standard 	> 20 
Color Improved 	> 60 
High Color Rendering 	> 80 
Low Pressure Sodium 	> 20 
From "Lighting for Parking Facilities," Report 20 - 98 of the IESNA 1998. For lamp types not listed above, the Manufacture's CRI for the lamp can be used to determine if the lamp meets the standard of a CRI > 60. 
 
(e)  Methods of measurement. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified, all footcandle values shall be measured horizontally and shall refer to maintained footcandles (initial values with a light loss ratio applied). 
(2)  Light spillage thresholds shall be determined by horizontal footcandles measured at ground level at the property line. 
(3)  Maximum height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the finished grade directly below a light fixture and the highest point on the light fixture. 
(4)  A light loss ratio of seventy-two tenths (0.72) shall be used to calculate lighting plans. 
(5)  Maximum-to-minimum is the highest horizontal illuminance point divided by the lowest horizontal illuminance point or area and should not be greater than the values shown. 
(f)  Photometric lighting plan requirements. All applications for building permits involving installation of outdoor lighting shall include the following information: 
(1)  A photometric plan, prepared by a lighting engineer at a scale of no smaller than one inch equals sixty (60) feet which consists of: 
(i)  An accurate site plan of the proposed development indicating the location of property lines, and all existing and proposed land improvements including but not limited to buildings, parking lots, aisles and driveways, streets, walkways, landscaped areas and accessory structures; 
(ii)  The estimated footcandles at ground level across the entire site, at minimum intervals of thirty (30) feet, including estimated footcandles at the property line; 
(iii)  Location and type of all lighting fixtures; 
(iv)  A table indicating the type, light source, wattage, output in lumens, light loss ratio, height of luminaires above grade and the maximum-to-minimum ratio. The maximum-to-minimum ratio shall be calculated using ninety-five (95) percent of the data point sources, excluding two and one-half (2.5) percent of the lowest values and two and one-half (2.5) percent of the highest values; and 
(v)  A certification by a lighting engineer that the lighting plan complies with the standards of this section. The director may rely on this certification for issuance of appropriate construction and occupancy permits. 
(2)  Manufacturer's catalogue specifications of all luminaires to be used, indicating the design, refractor (lens) type, cutoff angle (full, semi or non-cutoff), and any special features affecting the performance of the light. 
(g)  Parking lot lighting. The following standards apply to the illumination of parking lots: 
(1)  Minimum lighting and maximum illuminance. 
(i)  During business hours, parking lots shall be uniformly illuminated such that vehicular license plates, addresses and directional, instructional or regulatory signs are plainly visible without blind spots or excessive distortion of color. 
(ii)  The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is one-half (0.5) for residential and two (2) for non-residential, and maximum illuminance shall comply with Table 4.5-2. 
Table 4.5-2: Maintained Illuminance Values for Parking Lots 
	Basic (footcandles) 	Enhanced Security
(footcandles) 
Minimum horizontal illuminance 	0.2 footcandles 	0.5 footcandles 
Maximum-to-minimum ratio 	20:1 	15:1 
Minimum vertical illuminance 	0.1 footcandles 	0.25 footcandles 
From "Lighting for Parking Facilities," IESNA, RP-20-98, p. 3. 
 
(2)  Lighting control. Lighting shall have automatic controls capable of turning off lighting when sufficient daylight is available or when the lighting is not required during nighttime hours. Lighting not designated for dusk-to-dawn operation shall be controlled by an astronomical time switch or time switch and photo sensor with the following exceptions: 
(i)  Emergency lighting that is automatically off during normal building operation; 
(ii)  Lighting that is specifically designated as required by a health or life safety statute, ordinance, or regulation; or 
(iii)  Decorative gas lighting systems. 
(3)  Maximum height. The height of the light structure shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet above grade, except as required by section 29-4.7 (Neighborhood Protection Standards). 
(4)  Building mounted lighting. Areas of parking lots, circulation drives, loading areas and drive-thru lanes located near the perimeter of a building may be illuminated by building-mounted lights provided the design of the lights conform to the standards of section 29-4.5(j) below and as documented in the lighting plan. 
(h)  Service station canopy and apron lighting. The following standards apply to gasoline service stations in addition to the parking lot lighting regulations in subsection 29-4.5(g). 
(1)  Minimizing glare. To minimize glare, no drop, sag or convex lenses shall be used on lighting under the canopy unless the lenses are recessed within the canopy ceiling or shielded by appropriate glare shields. No lighting shall be mounted on building or canopy fasciae or rooftops unless the fixtures are full cutoff. The intent is to keep all the light under the canopy. This lighting shall be provided with low glare luminaires. 
(2)  Maximum illuminance. The maximum average illuminance levels are set forth in Table 4.5-3. 
Table 4.5-3: Service Station or Gas Pump Area Illuminance Levels 
Area Description 	Maximum Average Illuminance on Described Area (Footcandles) 
Approach with dark surroundings 	1.5 
Driveway with dark surroundings 	1.5 
Pump island area with dark surroundings 	5.0 
Building façades with dark surroundings 	2.0 
Service areas with dark surroundings 	2.0 
Landscape highlights with dark surroundings 	1.0 
Approach with light surroundings 	2.0 
Driveway with light surroundings 	2.0 
Pump island area with light surroundings 	10.0 
Building façades with light surroundings 	3.0 
Service areas with light surroundings 	3.0 
Landscape highlights with light surroundings 	2.0 
From "Lighting for Exterior Environments: IESNA Recommended Practice," RP-33-99, p. 43. 
 
(i)  Outdoor display area lighting. Illumination of outdoor display areas for sale of automobiles, recreational vehicles, and manufactured homes and other finished products customarily displayed outdoors shall be permitted in accordance with Table 4.5-4 and with the following: 
(1)  Maximum height of light fixtures same as parking lots. 
(2)  To minimize glare, no drop, sag or convex lenses shall be used on display-area lighting. Glare shields shall be used to eliminate visibility of the light source from the public roadway. 
(3)  The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is one-half (0.5) for residential and two (2.0) for non-residential, and maximum illuminance shall comply with Table 4.5-4. 
Table 4.5-4: Illuminance Levels for Outdoor Display Lighting 
Area 	Maximum Illuminance on Pavement (Footcandles) 	Maximum-to-Minimum Ratio 
Adjacent to roadway 	10—20 	5:1 
Other areas 	5—10 	10:1 
Entrances 	5—10 	5:1 
Driveways 	2—3 	10:1 
From "Lighting for Exterior Environment: IESNA Recommended Practice," RP-33-99, p. 43. 
 
(j)  Building lighting. Building lighting shall comply with the following standards. 
(1)  Location and direction. 
(i)  Building mounted lights shall be mounted and installed so that all light is directed downward, unless the lights are decorative lighting. 
(ii)  Fixtures shall be full cutoff or semi-cutoff. 
(iii)  No wall packs or similar lights shall be permitted unless the cutoff angle effectively eliminates visible glare from beyond the property lines. 
(iv)  No light fixtures shall be mounted above the parapet or, for pitched roofs, above the eave except motion-detection security lighting, decorative lighting and accent lighting. 
(v)  Functional lighting shall not exceed four hundred (400) watts of incandescent illuminance or the equivalent. Decorative or accent lighting shall not exceed one hundred (100) watts of incandescent illuminance or the equivalent. 
(vi)  The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is one-half (0.5) for residential and two (2.0) for non-residential. 
(vii)  If swivel mountings are used, lights may be raised a maximum of twenty (20) degrees from horizontal and may not be mounted above the buildings. 
(viii)  The maximum average illuminance levels for floodlighting buildings and monuments are set forth in Table 4.5-5. 
Table 4.5-5: Illuminance Levels for Floodlighting Buildings and Monuments 
Area Description 	Maximum Average Illuminance (Vertical)
(Footcandles) 
Bright surroundings and light surfaces 	5 
Bright surroundings and medium light surfaces 	7 
Bright surroundings and dark surfaces 	10 
Dark surroundings and light surfaces 	2 
Dark surroundings and medium light surfaces 	3 
Dark surroundings and medium dark surfaces 	4 
Dark surroundings and dark surfaces 	5 
From "Lighting for Exterior Environments: IESNA Recommended Practice," RP-33-99, p. 30. 
 
(2)  Decorative lighting. Decorative building lighting, in which the purpose is enhancement of building appearance, shall be permitted and may be directed toward the building, provided that all light is cast against the building surface. 
(i)  Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building Façade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets or roads. 
(ii)  Lighting fixtures mounted on the building and designed to wash the Façade with light are preferred. 
(k)  Landscape lighting. Landscape lighting shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Luminaires shall be mounted four (4) feet or lower to the ground. 
(2)  The photometric plan shall show the location of all landscape lighting fixtures and the landscaping feature each fixture is to illuminate. The plan shall demonstrate that the installation shall not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping into the night sky. 
(l)  Athletic field and outdoor arena lighting. The following standards apply to the illumination of athletic fields and outdoor arenas: 
(1)  Minimum and maximum lighting. Athletic fields, where nighttime activity is authorized, shall provide adequate illumination for the scheduled activities. The minimum and maximum light levels shall meet the standards for sports lighting set forth in "Sports and Recreational Area Lighting," RP-6-01, published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. Lighting shall use cutoffs so that light is primarily aimed at and directed to the activity area. 
(2)  Fixture height. Athletic field other than adult baseball fields and arena lighting fixtures shall not exceed seventy (70) feet above finished grade directly below the lighting fixture. Adult baseball field lighting fixtures shall not exceed eighty (80) feet above finished grade directly below the lighting fixture. 
(3)  Hours of operation. Lighting, except for lights reasonably necessary for security purposes, shall be turned off within two (2) hours after the event or closure of the facility, or when required by other regulatory ordinance. Dusk to dawn lights for security purposes shall not emit visible glare from the perspective of adjacent properties, internal access aisles and public streets. 
(4)  Maximum footcandles. The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is one footcandle on residential properties and four (4.0) footcandles on non-residential properties. 
(m)  Private street lighting. Private street lighting is permitted provided the fixtures, wattage and output, fixture height, and spacing are comparable to the public street lighting standards set forth in chapter 27 (utilities) sections 27-146 through 27-151 (street lighting) of the city's Municipal Code. 
(n)  Security lighting. Security lighting shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only to the designated area and not cast on other areas. Lighting shall not be directed above a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture, and the fixture shall include shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent roadways and properties. The use of general floodlighting fixtures is prohibited. 
(2)  The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is one-half (0.5) for residential and two (2.0) for non-residential. 
(o)  Sign lighting. Illumination of signs shall conform to section 29-4.8 (sign standards) of this Code. Location of illuminated signs and any lighting fixtures external to the signs shall be included on a lighting plan.  
Sec. 29-4.6. - Design standards and guidelines. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Allow full development of properties consistent with the dimensional standards established in Article 2 of Chapter 29 and Section 29-4.1 while establishing baseline requirements for building and site features that will create stable residential neighborhoods, mixed use, commercial, and industrial areas; 
(2)  Enhance the public realm; 
(3)  Reduce conflicts between existing and new structures; 
(4)  Encourage effective development of street frontages and other public elements that enable new projects to add value to existing communities; 
(5)  Encourage creative and sustainable design responses to contemporary opportunities; and 
(6)  Improve the overall design quality of the city through the use of objective standards that can be administered by the Community Development Department without the need for individualized design review of projects. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The standards of this section shall apply to all new development in any district except: 
(i)  Development or redevelopment in the M-DT District (Section 29-4.2). 
(ii)  Structures in which the principal use is one of the following use categories or subcategories as shown in Permitted Use Table 29-3.1. 
(A)  One-family Detached residential; 
(B)  One-family Attached residential; 
(C)  Two-family residential; 
(D)  Park or Playground; 
(E)  Utilities; 
(F)  Parking Lot or Structure (primary use); 
(G)  Urban Agriculture; 
(H)  Farmer's Market; or 
(I)  Industrial (except Artisan Industry). 
(iii)  A change in the principal use of an existing structure that does not alter the exterior of the structure, or only affects the signage on the exterior of the structure. 
(2)  In the case of a conflict between the design standards in this section and design standards applicable to a particular project because of its location in an overlay district listed in section 29-2.3 (Overlay Zoning Districts), or because of a use-specific standard in section 29-3.3 (Use-Specific Standards), the provisions of the overlay district or use-specific standard shall govern. 
(c)  Design standards and guidelines. 
(1)  Entries. Each principal building shall have one or more operating entry doors facing and visible from an adjacent public street. The location of the entry on the building façade shall be emphasized by the use of different materials, wall articulation around the entry, or foundation plantings around the entry. 
(2)  Transparency. 
(i)  When the primary use of the ground floor frontage of a structure categorized as food and beverage service, office, personal services, or retail in Table 29-3.1, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of each façade area that faces a public street shall be composed of transparent materials. 
(ii)  At least one-half (½) of this amount shall be provided so that the lowest edge of the transparent materials is no higher than four (4) feet above the street level. 
(iii)  If the director determines that transparent materials are not practical for security reasons or based on the nature of the permitted ground floor use, an alternative treatment providing equivalent or better visual interest may be approved. 
(3)  Wall plane articulation. When the primary use of the building is not categorized as industrial in Table 29-3.1, each façade greater than one hundred (100) feet in length abutting a public street shall incorporate architectural features such as wall plane projections, recesses, or other building material treatments and textures that visually interrupt the wall plane. No uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet. 
(4)  Roof shape. 
(i)  When the primary use of the building is not categorized as industrial in Table 29-3.1, and the building has a sloping roof, at least one projecting gable, hip feature, or other break in the horizontal line of the roof ridgeline shall be incorporated for each one hundred (100) lineal feet of roof. 
(ii)  When the primary use of the building is not categorized as industrial in Table 29-3.1 and the building has a flat roof, the design or height of the parapet shall include at least one change in setback or height of at least three feet along each one hundred (100) lineal feet of façade. 
(5)  Canopies and awnings. All canopies and awnings shall be mounted with a minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet between sidewalk grade and the bottom edge of the canopy or awning. 
(6)  Loading dock and delivery areas. Loading dock doors and delivery areas shall be located at the rear of buildings to separate customer and employee traffic from loading and service vehicles. The director may permit alternative locations when: 
(i)  Such location would result in docks or delivery areas being adjacent to R-1, R-2, or R-MF zoned lands; 
(ii)  Such location would result in excessive or unnecessary impervious surface on the development site; 
(iii)  Evidence can be shown that the alternative location will not impact public safety or site circulation; and 
(iv)  Alternative loading dock/delivery area are recessed from the building façade such that all loading/unloading activity occurs outside any adjacent public right-of-way.  
Sec. 29-4.7. - Neighborhood protection standards. 
(a)  Intent. This section is intended to preserve the residential neighborhood character of established homes within multi-family districts and adjacent to mixed use or special districts. 
(b)  Applicability. These standards apply: 
(1)  To all lots in the R-MF district that contain a principle use other than a single- or two-family dwelling; and 
(2)  To all lots located in any district other than the R-1 and R-2 districts that shares a side or rear lot line with a lot in the R-1 or R-2 district. 
(c)  Building height. Buildings constructed after the effective date of this Code with a height greater than thirty (30) feet shall reduce the perceived height of the building when viewed from abutting lots by using at least one of the following techniques: 
(1)  "Stepping down" building height of any portion of the building within twenty-five (25) feet of the contiguous side and rear lot lines to a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet. 
(2)  Increasing the contiguous side yard and rear yard setbacks a minimum of ten (10) feet beyond that otherwise required in the district where the property is located. 
(d)  Screening and buffering. The standards of section 29-4.4(e) shall apply. 
(e)  Lighting height. The maximum height of any lighting pole within fifty (50) feet of the side or rear lot lines shall be twenty (20) feet. All lighting shall be directed downward or otherwise situated as to prevent visible glare from beyond the property lines. 
(f)  Building orientation. 
(1)  All newly constructed non-accessory structures erected shall provide front entrances, windows and any porches oriented to the street from which it is addressed. 
(2)  For the purposes of applying setback regulations, the following shall be applied: the front shall be toward the street or access corridor from which the lot is addressed; the rear is opposite to the front or as nearly so as the lot shape permits; and the sides are ninety (90) degrees to the front or as nearly so as the lot shape permits. 
(g)  Lot lines. No building or structure shall be constructed across an existing lot line. 
(h)  Lot combination. No lot in any existing subdivision may be combined with another lot without complying with the requirements of section 29-5.2.  
Sec. 29-4.8. - Sign standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of these sign regulations are: 
(1)  To allow the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; 
(2)  To maintain and enhance the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  To minimize possible adverse effects of signs on nearby property; 
(5)  To bring all signs into compliance with adopted regulations; 
(6)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations; 
(7)  To maintain and enhance the appearance of the community; and 
(8)  To comply with all applicable federal and state laws regarding the First Amendment and free speech. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The standards of this section 29-4.8 apply to the erection of any sign of any type within the city, unless specifically exempted or excluded by a provision of this Code. In addition to the provisions of this section 29-4.8, all properties must comply with any sign regulations contained in any use-specific standard in section 29-3.3 applicable to the property. In the event of a conflict between the standards of this section 29-4.8 and the sign standards in any approved PD district, the standards in the approved PD district shall apply. 
(2)  Any sign authorized to be displayed by this Code may contain any non-commercial message. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, the standards of this section relating to non-commercial signs shall in all instances be construed to operate in a content neutral manner. Any description of the type of message or content of any non-commercial sign authorized by this section shall not be construed to be a prescription of or limitation on the type of non-commercial message or content that can be displayed, rather, any such description shall be construed as merely illustrative of the type of non-commercial sign that potentially may be deployed. 
(c)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it will or reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse, distract or mislead traffic, or be considered obscene or a nuisance to the general public. 
(2)  No person, except a public officer or an employee in the performance of a public duty, shall fasten any sign or notice of any kind on any curbstone, lamppost, street or sidewalk surface, pole, bridge or tree upon a public street, except for any banner attached to a city street light standard for which an attachment permit has been issued. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, advertisements and announcements of buildings or land for sale or rent, garage sales, private picnics and election campaign posters. This prohibition is not to be construed as prohibiting signs or notices indicating danger or aids to service or safety, or subdivision identification signs, to be erected with written permission from the director. 
(3)  No signs painted on buildings, walls or fences shall be allowed. 
(4)  No wind signs shall be allowed. 
(5)  No freestanding, on-premises commercial sign, including the supporting structures, shall be allowed to remain on any property more than six (6) months after the business or uses advertised on the sign have been discontinued. 
(6)  No sign shall be erected or maintained in a location or in such a manner that any portion of the sign will be within ten (10) feet, measured either horizontally, vertically or at any intermediate angle, of any electric power line wire carrying a voltage in excess of two hundred forty (240) volts, nor shall any sign be within ten (10) feet of a vertical line extended upward from such an electric power line wire. 
(7)  No portable signs shall be allowed, except for sandwich board signs in the M-DT district. 
(8)  No animated signs shall be allowed. 
(9)  No off-premise signs or billboards shall be allowed, except as provided in section 29-4.8(e)(2). 
(10)  No commercial signs shall be allowed except as provided for in this section 29-4.8. 
(11)  No commercial flags shall be allowed except that a business may display one flag no larger than forty (40) square feet which bears the symbol or trademark or name of the business. No further advertising shall be permitted on such flags. 
(12)  No digital signs shall be allowed. 
(d)  Regulations based on use and area. 
(1)  Residential use signs. 
(i)  Table 4.8-1 sets forth signs standards for identification and sale, rental, or lease signs permitted for certain residential uses and land areas. 
Table 4.8-1: Residential Use Signs - Identification (ID) & Sale/Rent 
	Single- or Two-family 	Multiple-Family 	Manufactured Home 	Land 
Type 	ID 	Sale/Rent 	ID 	Sale/Rent 	ID 	Sale/Lease 
Maximum Number 	1/each street frontage 	See section 29-4.8(e) 	1/lot 
Maximum Area 	7.5 sq. ft. 	7.5 sq. ft. 	15 sq. ft. 	7.5 sq. ft. 		Lots greater than 1 acre: 12 sq. ft./acre; 32 sq. ft. (max.) 
Lots less than 1 acre: 12 sq. ft. 
Location 	On premises 					
Other 						
 
(ii)  Identification of subdivision or neighborhood area. Identification signs for subdivisions and residential areas are regulated by section 29-4.8(f)(1). This type of sign may be situated on private property adjacent to the entrance or, by special permission of the council, may be located on median strips that divide public streets leading into the named subdivision area. If the sign is permitted to be located in the public right-of-way, the design and location of the sign shall first be approved by the director and the following criteria shall be met: 
(A)  Minimum setback at an intersection shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(B)  Minimum width of an island on which a sign is to be located shall be eight (8) feet. 
(C)  Location on the island or median strip shall be along the centerline of the median parallel to the entrance street. 
(D)  Signs shall be designed and located so as not to interfere with the visibility of traffic at any location. 
(iii)  Table 4.8-2 sets forth standards for various general sign types allowed on all residential lots. 
Table 4.8-2: Residential Use Signs - Other 
	Open House/Model Home 	Solicitation 	Garage Sale 	Real Estate Sales Office (Temporary) 
Type 	Advertise open house 	Prohibit solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, or transient vendors from entering private property 	Advertise garage sale conducted on premises 	Identify a temporary real estate sales office 
Maximum Number 	3/property 	1/property 	1/each street abutting the premises 	1/property 
Maximum Area 	4 sq. ft./sign 	1 sq. ft. 	4 sq. ft./sign 	6 sq. ft. 
Maximum Height 				4 ft. 
Location 	On or Off premises 	On premises 	On premises 	On premises 
Other 	Signs shall be permitted 48 hours prior to the time the house is open for viewing and removed one hour after closure of viewing time. 		Signs are only permitted during the time of the sale 	
 
(2)  Business use signs outside the M-DT district and within urban general west building form standard. The following standards apply to all signs that are related to a use that is not a residential use or an industrial use, as shown in Table 29-3.1 (Permitted Use Table) and that is not located in the M-DT district (section 29-4.2). 
(i)  Table 4.8-3 sets forth standards for wall, projecting, and roof signs for all business uses outside the M-DT district including businesses within the urban general west building form standard, with the exception of shopping centers, office buildings, theaters, automobile service stations, hotels and motels. 
(ii)  Table 4.8-4 sets forth standards for sale or lease, identification, and directional signs for all business uses outside of the M-DT district including businesses within the urban general west building form standard. 
Table 4.8-3: Business Use Signs Outside M-DT including Urban General West
Building Form Standard by Number & Type 
	Wall 	Projecting 	Roof 	Freestanding 
Sign Combinations 	Each property may have 2 of the 4 signs in this table, but a business may not to have both a freestanding and a roof sign 
Number 	Any combination of wall, canopy, or awning signs, not to exceed the maximum surface area 	1 	1 	1 for each adjacent street R-O-W, per the regulations in section 29-4.8(e) 
Maximum Area 	• See section 29-4.8(f)(2) 
• 1 rear entrance sign; 10 sq. ft. max. size 		2 sq. ft./linear ft. of building frontage 	
Location 	On premises 	• On premises 
• Not to exceed 8 ft. in projection from the building wall on each wall facing a street 
• If a 1-story building, the sign may extend 10 ft. above the roof line or parapet of the building 	Roof of a 1- or 2-story building 	
Other 		Sign shall not extend above the roof line or parapet of the building, except for a one-story building 	Sign shall not extend beyond the highest point of the roof on which it is located 	
 
Table 4.8-4: Business Use Signs - Sale/Lease, etc. 
	Sale or Lease 	Development Identification 	Directional 
	Building 	Land 		
Type 	Advertises office or commercial space for sale, rent, or lease 	Advertises land for sale or rent 	Identifies a commercial development, except for shopping centers (see Table 4.10-5) 	
Maximum Number 	1 	1 	1 	1 
Maximum Area 	12 sq. ft. 	•  Greater than one acre: 12 sq. ft./acre; 32 sq. ft. (max) 
•  Less than one acre: 12 sq. ft./acre (max.) 	32 sq. ft. 	32 sq. ft. 
Maximum Height 			6 ft. 	3 ft. (measured from the grade immediately below the sign) 
Location 	On premises 	On premises 		On premises, at each automotive entrance and exit of any business, in any development, except ATMs regulated under section 29-4.8(12) 
 
(iii)  As an alternative to the signs permitted in subsections (i) through (ii) above, Table 4.8-5 sets forth standards for signs permitted if the property is a shopping center: 
Table 4.8-5: Shopping Center Signs 
	Shopping Center 	Each Separate Business 	Businesses with a Rear or Side Entrance 
		Wall Canopy, Awning 	Roof 	
Maximum Number 	1 freestanding master sign/adjacent street ROW 			1 wall or awning sign/entrance 
Maximum Surface Area 	• 64 sq. ft./acre 
• 288 sq. ft. or ½ sq. ft. in area/linear ft. of adjacent street ROW the sign is oriented toward, whichever is greater 	•  Wall facing a street: See section 29-4.8(f)(2) 
•  Wall facing main shopping center parking area: 64 sq. ft. 	All signs located above any one wall: 4 sq. ft./linear ft. of wall length occupied by the business 	10 sq. ft./ 
entrance 
Maximum Height 	30 ft. 			
Location 	Adjacent street ROW 	On premises 	On premises and located above a wall 	
Other 	If adjacent street is an arterial street designated for collector street provisions then the freestanding sign must comply with section 29-4.8(e) 		A roof sign shall not extend beyond the highest point of the roof on which it is located 	
 
(3)  Signs in M-DT district excluding urban general west building form standard. The M-DT district (section 29-4.2) is intended to be attractive, historic and pedestrian friendly. Accordingly, signs should be smaller in scale and fewer in number. This will enhance the attractiveness of the area, reduce visual clutter, increase property values and encourage tourism and other business. 
(i)  Applicability. This section regulates signs within the M-DT district excluding the urban general west building form standard and with the exception of theaters, which are subject to section 29-4.8(e)(10). 
(ii)  General standards. 
(A)  Table 4.8-6 sets forth standards for business signs permitted at different building levels within the M-DT excluding buildings within the urban general west building form standard. 
Table 4.8-6: M-DT Business Signs by Building Level, excluding the Urban General West Building Form Standard[1] 
	Awning 	Projecting 	Wall 	Window 
Aggregate Size Limitation 	15% of the wall space of one building elevation. All signs identified in this Table and Table 4.10-7, except for Building Directories and Identification Signs, contribute to this aggregate amount. 
Lower Level 
Maximum Number 	1/elevation 
Maximum Area 	18 sq. ft. 	8 sq. ft. 	24 sq. ft. 	18 sq. ft. 
Placement 		• Shall not project more than 3 ft. from face of wall 	• No higher than the bottom of a second level window 	
		• Bottom of sign must be at least 8 ft. from ground 		
		• Top of sign must be no more than 12 ft. from ground 		
Street Level [2] 
Maximum Number 	2/elevation 
Maximum Area 	32 sq. ft. 	8 sq. ft. 	32 sq. ft. 	32 sq. ft. 
Placement 		See lower level standards above 	• Below the bottom of the second level window on multi-story buildings 	
Second Level 
Maximum Number 	1/elevation 
Maximum Area 	18 sq. ft. 	8 sq. ft. 	•  Street Level: 24 sq. ft. 	18 sq. ft. 
			•  Second Level: 18 sq. ft. 	
Placement 			•  Street Level: No higher than the bottom of a second level window 	
			•  Second Level: No higher than the bottom of a third story window 	
Upper Level (Third level and above) 
Maximum Number 	1/elevation 
Maximum Area 	18 sq. ft. 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	18 sq. ft. 
Other 			• If now higher level windows exist, placement may be 40 inches above finished floor level (max.) 	Signs spread 
across multiple windows will be counted as 1 sign 
[1] Single-use Building: A business that occupies an entire building with a frontage equal to or greater than 48 ft. may choose to install only 1 sign per elevation. In that case, the maximum size of the single sign is the lesser of 64% of the wall space of 1 elevation, provided all other criteria are met. Wall sign placement is not restricted to below the second story window sill. 
[2] Large Businesses: Street level tenants with 48 feet or more of frontage and located in multiple-tenant buildings may choose to install only 1 sign per elevation as an alternative to any 2 sign types. In that case, the maximum size of the single sign is the lesser of 48 sq. ft. or 15% of the wall space of 1 elevation, provided all other criteria are met. Wall signs must be placed no higher than the bottom of the second story window sill. 
 
(B)  Table 4.8-7 sets forth standards for other business signs permitted in the M-DT district. 
Table 4.8-7: Other M-DT excluding Urban General West Building Form Standard - Business Signs 
	Building Directories 	Building Identification 	Mobile 	Directional 	Signs Adjacent to Providence Road 
Aggregate Size Limitation 			15 % of the wall space of one building elevation. 
All signs identified in this table, except building directories and identification signs, and Table 4.8-6 contribute to this aggregate amount. 
Maximum Number 	1/Building Entrance 	1/Building 	1/street level entrance 	1/automotive entrance and exit 	Signs on any building elevations adjacent to Providence Road, except for city-owned property or vacant property greater than 150 ft. in depth between the building elevation and the road ROW are subject to the sign regulations outside of the M-DT district in section 29-4.8. 
Maximum Area 	6 sq. ft. 	18 sq. ft. 	8 sq. ft. 	8 sq. ft. 	
Maximum Height 				3 ft. (measured from grade immediately below sign) 	
Location 			• On the sidewalk directly in front of the business; 
• Provided that a straight, unobstructed pathway at least 60 inches wide is maintained on the sidewalk. 		
Other 			Shall not be attached to any property not owned by the business owner to whom the sign is permitted. 		
 
(4)  Industrial use signs. 
(i)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign may be allowed per adjacent street right-of-way and further regulated by section 29-4.8(f)(1). 
(ii)  Wall signs. In addition to the freestanding sign permitted above, each business shall be allowed on-premises wall, canopy and awning signs not to exceed the maximum surface area allowed under section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(iii)  Sale or lease of land. For lots of one acre or larger, one on-premises sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in sign surface area per acre, with a maximum sign surface area of thirty-two (32) square feet, is allowed to advertise land for sale or rent. For lots of less than one acre in size, one sign of not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in signs area is allowed. 
(iv)  Sale or lease of building. One on-premises sign, not exceeding thirty-six (36) square feet in sign surface area, shall be allowed to advertise the sale, lease or rent of industrial space. 
(v)  Industrial parks. In industrial parks, one industrial park master sign, shall be allowed for each adjacent street right-of-way, in accordance with section 29-4.8(f)(1). 
(e)  Regulations based on type of sign. 
(1)  Banners. 
(i)  Downtown community improvement district. The downtown community improvement district may attach banners to city street light standards located on public rights-of-way, or within public utility easements, adjacent to public rights-of-way, within an area defined in the petition approved by Ordinance No. 20866. Attachment of the banners shall be done under the following conditions: 
(A)  The message conveyed relates to cultural, civic or other city-wide activities. 
(B)  The downtown community improvement district, after executing an attachment agreement with the city, shall have the exclusive right to install banners on city street light standards in the above-described area. The attachment agreement shall set out requirements for the design of attachment brackets and installation, removal, maintenance, and responsibility for such attachment brackets and banners. Said requirements shall be set out in banner regulations promulgated by the city manager and reviewed annually and approved by the council. 
(C)  Banners shall conform to design specifications established by the downtown community improvement district. 
(ii)  College, university, or hospital. A college, university or hospital may attach banners to city street light standards located on public rights-of-way, or within public utility easements, adjacent to the campus of the college, university or hospital. Attachment of the banners shall be done under the following conditions: 
(A)  The banners shall be limited to identifying the name of the college, university or hospital or conveying a message related to cultural, civic or city-wide activities. 
(B)  The college, university or hospital, after executing an attachment agreement with the city, shall have the exclusive right to install banners on the city street light standards described in the agreement. The attachment agreement shall set out requirements for the design of attachment brackets and installation, removal, maintenance, and responsibility for such attachment brackets and banners. 
(iii)  Library. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section 29-4.8, a public library may display banners subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  Attachment to city street light standards. Upon entering into an attachment agreement with the city, a public library may attach banners to city street light standards located on public rights-of-way, or within public utility easements, adjacent to the library premises, including library parking lots. The library, after executing the attachment agreement with the city, shall have the exclusive right to install banners on the city street light standards described in the agreement. The attachment agreement shall set out requirements for the design of attachment brackets and installation, removal, maintenance and responsibility for such attachment brackets and banners. 
(B)  Attachment to library light standards and sign poles. A public library may attach banners to library light standards and to library sign poles. 
(C)  Parking lot sign poles. Each library parking lot shall be allowed up to four (4) banner sign poles for each adjacent street right-of-way. The banners on the poles shall be the same height as the banners on the library light standards in the lot. The poles shall be located at least four (4) feet from the street right-of-way. 
(D)  Banner content. The banners shall be limited to identifying the name of the library or library facility or conveying a message related to a cultural, civic or city-wide activity. No banner can carry a political or nonsecular message. 
(E)  Banner number and size. There is no limit on the number of banners, however, banners shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign surface area per side or a total of thirty-two (32) square feet per banner. 
(F)  Banners other than for library identification. If a banner is for a purpose other than identifying the library or library facility, the banner shall not remain in place for more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Billboards. 
(i)  Locations. Billboards shall be allowed in areas zoned M-N, M-C, M-DT, or a PD district permitting commercial uses, M-BP, or IG, provided that the location is within sixty (60) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of: 
(A)  Any interstate (I-70); or 
(B)  Any freeway (U.S. 63); or 
(C)  Any other highways where the city is mandated by law to allow billboards. 
(ii)  Regulations. All billboards shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Billboards shall be oriented toward traffic on the interstate, freeway or highway. 
(B)  No billboard along any interstate shall be erected closer than two thousand (2,000) feet from another billboard. No billboard along any freeway shall be erected closer than four thousand (4,000) feet from another billboard. No billboard along any highway shall be erected closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from another billboard. 
(C)  No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet from any area zoned R-1, R-2, R-MF, R-MH, A, a PD district that allows residential uses, or any equivalent county zoning. 
(D)  No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet from any residential structure. 
(E)  No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet from any religious institution, elementary/secondary school, or public park, playground or golf course. 
(F)  No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet from any historical site or historical district so designated by the federal, state or city government. 
(G)  No billboard shall be erected closer than one hundred (100) feet from any on-premises freestanding sign. 
(H)  No billboard shall be erected within five hundred (500) feet of an interchange or intersection at grade. The five hundred (500) feet shall be measured from the beginning or ending of the pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way. 
(I)  The maximum height of a billboard along any interstate is forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of a billboard along any freeway is thirty (30) feet. The maximum height of a billboard along any highway is twelve (12) feet. 
(J)  The maximum surface area of a billboard along any interstate is two hundred eighty-eight (288) square feet. The maximum surface of a billboard along any freeway is one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. The maximum surface area of a billboard along any highway is seventy-two (72) square feet. 
(K)  Billboards shall have only one sign surface area except that billboards may have two (2) sign surface areas if the surface areas are oriented in opposite directions. No V-shaped billboards are allowed. 
(L)  External lighting of billboards, such as floodlights, thin line and gooseneck reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed upon the face of the sign and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed toward any residential structure or into any portion of the main traveled way of the interstate, freeway, or highway, and the lights are not of such intensity so as to interfere with the residential use of property or to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(M)  No billboard shall have wind-actuated elements or any material that glistens or sparkles. 
(N)  No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet from a city greenspace access easement, greenspace conservation easement or greenspace trail easement. 
(O)  No billboard shall have any revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated characteristics. 
(P)  No billboard shall have any electronic, digital, tri-vision or other changeable copy display. 
(3)  Civic signs. One on-premises freestanding sign shall be allowed for any religious institution or governmental entity per street block in accordance with section 29-4.8(f)(1). One on-premises illuminated wall sign for each street frontage shall be allowed in accordance with section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(4)  Construction signs. One on-premises unilluminated construction sign, a wall or freestanding sign, which may indicate the names of architects, engineers, builders, contractors, owners and financial institutions shall be allowed at the site of construction, provided such signs shall be erected only after the issuance of a city building permit and removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the City. The maximum height shall be eight (8) feet and the maximum size shall be sixty-four (64) square feet. 
(5)  Hotel signs. Motels and hotels shall be allowed the following signs: 
(i)  Wall signs. Motels and hotels shall be allowed on-premises wall, canopy and awning signs on each wall facing a street, with the sign surface area not to exceed the maximum surface area allowed under section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(ii)  Projecting sign. Except in the central business district, one on-premises projecting sign not to exceed eight (8) feet in projection from the building wall shall be allowed on each wall facing a street. In the case of a one-story building, such signs may extend ten (10) feet above the roof line or parapet of the building. In all other cases such signs shall not extend above the roof line or parapet of the building. 
(iii)  Freestanding signs. One on-premise freestanding sign in accordance with section 29-4.8(f) (except that only one shall be allowed). 
(iv)  Supplemental signs. Supplemental signs, not to exceed three (3) for each street frontage, may be used to advertise additional facilities and services (restaurant, bar, night club, etc.) available at the motel or hotel. Such supplemental signs shall be wall signs and shall have a maximum sign surface area of one hundred (100) square feet per street frontage. 
(v)  Marquee Signs. Hotels with an entrance marquee shall be permitted one marquee sign with a maximum sign surface area not to exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of frontage for the marquee. 
(6)  Light vehicle service and repair signs. Light vehicle service and repair establishments shall be allowed a total of three (3) of the following four (4) signs: 
(i)  One freestanding sign, indicating the name, emblem or symbol of the company, in accordance with section 29-4.8(f)(1). 
(ii)  One on-premises freestanding sign, indicating services available, in accordance with section 29-4.8(f)(1). 
(iii)  On-premises wall, canopy and awning signs not exceeding the maximum surface area allowed under section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(iv)  One on-premises roof sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in sign surface area per linear foot of building frontage. No roof sign shall extend beyond the highest point of the roof upon which it is located. 
(7)  Noncommercial signs. Except as otherwise allowed or restricted in this section 29-4.8, noncommercial signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(i)  They shall be ground or wall signs, except when placed in a location where other types of signs are allowed. 
(ii)  They shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign surface area per premises; provided that any noncommercial sign may have a sign surface area as large as that of any allowable sign in the same location. 
(iii)  They shall not exceed a maximum height of ten (10) feet; provided that any noncommercial sign may be as high as any allowable sign in the same location. 
(iv)  The area and height limitations of this section 29-4.8(e)(7) shall not apply to any noncommercial message placed on a structure that has existed as a nonconforming billboard. 
(v)  Any structure that may be lawfully used for an on-premises commercial sign may be used for a noncommercial sign. 
(vi)  The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to banners on the campus of any college, university or hospital. 
(8)  Parking lot signs. On-premises wall or freestanding signs designating the conditions of use or identity of an automobile parking area and not less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in dimension, nor greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in sign surface area, shall be allowed. Freestanding signs shall not be more than eight (8) feet in height, and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line. 
(9)  Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) signs. 
(i)  Directional signs. One on-premises sign, not exceeding eight (8) square feet in sign surface area, and not exceeding three (3) feet in height as measured from the grade immediately below the sign, shall be allowed at each automotive entrance and exit to the ATM. 
(ii)  Stand-alone signs. A stand-alone automatic teller machine shall be allowed a total of seventy-five (75) square feet of wall or canopy sign surface area. The sign surface area shall be determined as the area of the basic geometric shape that encloses the message. Sign area for an automated teller machine located within the footprint of an occupied building shall be considered as part of the permitted wall sign surface area for the occupied building. 
(10)  Theater signs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section 29-4.8, theaters and drive-in theaters shall be allowed any two (2) of the following five (5) types of signs: 
(i)  One marquee sign not to exceed two (2) square feet for every linear foot of building frontage. 
(ii)  One wall sign not to exceed the maximum surface area allowed under section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(iii)  One freestanding sign with a maximum of two hundred eighty-eight (288) square feet in area and thirty (30) feet in height. However, no sign shall be greater in area than thirty-two (32) square feet for each screen in the theater, plus thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(iv)  Each establishment of one or two (2) stories may be allowed one on-premises roof sign for each wall facing a street. The maximum sign surface area shall be determined at the rate of two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage. No roof signs shall exceed the highest point of the roofs upon which they are located. 
(v)  One awning sign not to exceed the maximum surface area allowed under section 29-4.8(f)(2). 
(11)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs may be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  A permit in accordance with section 29-6.4(f) shall be required. 
(ii)  Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size or four (4) feet in height. 
(iii)  The sign setback requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
(iv)  No person shall be allowed to display a temporary sign or signs on a parcel of land for more than fourteen (14) days in a calendar year. 
(12)  Time and temperature signs. Time and temperature signs with a maximum sign surface area of thirty (30) square feet may be placed in any commercial or industrially zoned district, subject to all other restrictions on signs in the commercial or industrially zoned district in which they are placed. 
(f)  Area, height and placement standards. 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
(i)  Freestanding signs shall be regulated by the standards in Table 4.8-8 as modified by the provisions of subsection (ii) or (iii), below, and by other regulation of this subsection. 
Table 4.8-8: Freestanding Sign Regulations 
Street Class 	R-1, R-2, and A-1 	R-MF and R-MH 	M-OF 	M-N, M-C, M-BP 	I-G 
Local residential 	For buildings originally designed and constructed for residential occupancy; only 1 sign per site. 16 sq. ft. max. area, 4 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 
All other buildings: 32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 	For buildings originally designed and constructed for residential occupancy; only 1 sign per site. 16 sq. ft. max. area, 4 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 
All other buildings: 32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. 
Collector or
local
nonresidential	For buildings originally designed and constructed for residential occupancy; only one sign per site. 16 sq. ft. max. area, 4 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 
All other buildings: 32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument or pylon sign 	For buildings originally designed and constructed for residential occupancy; only one sign per site. 16 sq. ft. max. area, 4 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument sign. 
All other buildings: 32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. Must be a monument or pylon sign 	48 sq. ft. max. area, 10 ft. max. ft. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht. 
Arterial 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. (Must be a monument or pylon sign) 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. (Must be a monument or pylon sign) 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht., for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft./128 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 30 ft. max. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht., for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft./128 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 30 ft. max. 
Expressway 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ht. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht., for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft./128 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 30 ft. max. 	64 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht., for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft./128 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 30 ft. max. 
Interstate freeway 	32 sq. ft. max. area, 6 ft. max. ft. 	128 sq. ft. max. area, 12 ft. max. ht. 	128 sq. ft. max. area, 30 ft. max. ht. 	128 sq. ft. max. area, 30 ft. max. ht., for each 2.00 ft. setback, add 10.65 sq. ft./288 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 45 ft. max. 	128 sq. ft. max. area, 30 ft. max. ht., for each 2.00 ft. setback, add 10.65 sq. ft./288 max. and 1 ft. ht. to 45 ft. max. 
 
(ii)  Notwithstanding the existing street classifications, the area, height and placement of freestanding signs on property adjacent to the following arterial streets, because of their proximity to existing or planned residential neighborhoods and environmentally sensitive areas, shall be regulated by the collector street provisions of the Table 4.8-8. 
(A)  Stadium Boulevard (State Rt. E) north of Interstate 70. 
(B)  Creasy Springs Road. 
(C)  Paris Road south of Business Loop 70. 
(D)  Waco Road. 
(E)  Mexico Gravel Road/Brown Station Road. 
(F)  Ballenger Lane. 
(G)  Clark Lane, east of Olympic Boulevard. 
(H)  Broadway, east of Tenth Street and west of Sixth Street. 
(I)  New Haven Road. 
(J)  Old 63. 
(K)  College Avenue. 
(L)  Rangeline Street from Rogers Street to Business Loop 70. 
(M)  Providence Road between Stewart Road and Stadium Boulevard; and, north of Bear Creek. 
(N)  Nifong Boulevard, west of Monterey Drive and east of Buttonwood Drive. 
(O)  Forum Boulevard. 
(P)  West Boulevard. 
(Q)  Scott Boulevard. 
(R)  Chapel Hill Road. 
(S)  Sinclair Street. 
(T)  Old Plank Road. 
(U)  Vandiver Driver, east of Parker Street. 
(iii)  The area, height and placement of freestanding signs on property adjacent to the following collector and local, non-residential streets, because they serve established business areas or are near an interstate or expressway, shall be regulated by the arterial street provisions of the Table 4.8-8: 
(A)  I-70 Drive Northwest from Stadium Boulevard to Garden Drive. 
(B)  I-70 Drive Southwest. 
(C)  I-70 Drive Southeast. 
(D)  West Worley Street from eight hundred (800) ft. east of Bernadette Drive to one thousand five hundred (1,500) ft. west of Stadium Boulevard. 
(E)  West Ash Street from eight hundred (800) ft. east of Bernadette Drive to one thousand five hundred (1,500) ft. west of Stadium Boulevard. 
(F)  Bernadette Drive from Stadium Boulevard to West Worley Street. 
(G)  Fairview Road between Bernadette Drive and Bernadette Place. 
(H)  Bernadette Place. 
(I)  Knipp Street. 
(J)  Hutchens Drive. 
(K)  Beverly Drive. 
(L)  Green Meadows Road from Providence Outer Roadway to one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Green Meadows Way. 
(M)  Parkade Boulevard from Business Loop 70 to Interstate 70. 
(N)  Garth Avenue from Business Loop 70 to Interstate 70. 
(O)  Indiana Avenue. 
(P)  Grand Avenue from Business Loop 70 to Dakota Avenue. 
(Q)  Colorado Avenue. 
(R)  Dakota Avenue. 
(S)  Illinois Avenue. 
(T)  Nebraska Avenue. 
(U)  7th Street from Business Loop 70 to Interstate 70. 
(V)  Commerce Court. 
(W)  Hathman Place. 
(X)  Bowling Street, south of Business Loop 70. 
(Y)  Belmont Street. 
(Z)  Peach Tree Drive. 
(iv)  The interstate and freeway category in Table 4.8-8 shall apply only to property within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 70 and U.S. 63 and property, either in whole or in part, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the mid-point of the intersections with Interstate 70 and U.S. 63. 
(v)  Street classifications are defined by the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Columbia and the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Columbia. 
(vi)  Freestanding signs located on interior lots shall be set back from each side lot line a distance equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width. On corner lots, the side setback shall be equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width and applied only to the side lot line not adjacent to a street right-of-way. 
(vii)  Freestanding signs shall, at a minimum, be set back ten (10) feet from the right-of-way line, except that freestanding signs located on through lots shall be set back from the right-of-way lines no more than one-half (½) the lot depth. Freestanding signs located on corner lots abutting three (3) or more street rights-of-way shall be set back from the front and rear lot lines no more than one-half (½) the lot depth. 
(viii)  Where increased sign area and height are allowed by reason of increased setback, the setback shall be measured from the point of minimum setback. 
(ix)  In any PD district that allows non-residential uses, freestanding sign area, height, placement and number shall be subject to review and approval of development plans or final development plans. Specific regulations shall be recommended to and approved by the council as part of a development plan or final development plan, or in the case of minor revisions, by the commission or the director changes to specific sign regulations within a development plan shall only be approved through compliance with zoning ordinance procedures for review and approval of development plans and final development plans and changes to them. 
(x)  Within M-DT district (section 29-4.2), signage shall be regulated by the provisions of section 29-4.8(d)(3). 
(xi)  Freestanding sign regulations for R-1, R-2, R-MF and R-MH districts found in Table 4.8-8 shall only be applicable to signs for identification of manufactured home parks and subdivisions or neighborhood areas regulated under section 29-4.1029-4.7. Any non-residential uses allowed in the A, R-1, R-2, and R-MF districts shall be allowed freestanding signage in accordance with Table 4.8-8. 
(2)  On-premises wall, canopy and awning signs. 
(i)  On-premises wall, canopy and awning signs shall be regulated by the following Table 4.8-9 of sign regulations in accordance with the more detailed regulations of this section: 
Table 4.8-9: On Premise Wall, Canopy, and Awning Signs 
Street Class 	R-1, R-2, and A-1 	R-MF and R-MH 	M-OF 	M-N, M-C, M-DT, M-BP 	I-G 
Local Residential 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 
Collector or Local Non-Residential 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	48 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area; except that if the business does not have a freestanding sign, for each 1.25 feet of setback, add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 128 sq. ft. max 	64 sq. ft. max. area; for each 1.25 setback add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 128 sq. ft. max. area 
Arterial 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area; for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 192 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area; for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 192 sq. ft. max. area 
Expressway 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area; for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 256 sq. ft. max. area 	64 sq. ft. max. area; for each 1.25 ft. setback, add 3.55 sq. ft. to a 256 sq. ft. max. area 
Interstate Freeway 	32 sq. ft. max. area 	128 sq. ft. max. area 	128 sq. ft. max. area 	128 sq. ft. max. area; for each 2.00 ft. setback, add 10.65 sq. ft./288 max. 	128 sq. ft. max. area; for each 2.00 ft. setback, add 10.65 sq. ft./288 max. 
 
(ii)  Arterial streets listed in section 29-4.8(f)(1) shall be regulated by the collector street provisions of Table 4.8-9. 
(iii)  Collector and local, non-residential streets listed in section 29-4.8(f)(1) shall be regulated by the arterial street provisions of Table 4.8-9. 
(iv)  The interstate and freeway category in Table 4.9-9 shall apply only to property within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 70 and U.S. 63 and property, either in whole or in part, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the midpoint of the intersections with Interstate 70 and U.S. 63. 
(v)  Street classifications are defined by the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Columbia and the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Columbia. 
(vi)  Where increased sign area is allowed by reason of increased setback, the setback shall be measured from a point thirty-five (35) feet from the curb or, if there is no curb, then thirty-five (35) feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(vii)  The surface area of any wall sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the area of the wall or twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall if the business does not have a freestanding sign. 
(viii)  In any PD district that allows nonresidential uses, on-premises wall, canopy and awning sign surface area shall be subject to review and approval of development plans or final development plans. Specific regulations shall be recommended to and approved by the council as part of a development plan or final development plan, or in the case of minor revisions, by the commission or director. Changes to specific sign regulations within a development plan shall only be approved through compliance with zoning ordinance procedures for review and approval of development plans and final development plans and changes to them. 
(ix)  When an establishment has frontage on more than one street, the sign surface area for wall, canopy and awning signs shall be determined separately for each street.  
Sec. 29-4.9. - Operation and maintenance standards. 
(a)  Maintenance requirement. 
(1)  General. When the standards and procedures of this chapter or by conditions attached to any permit, approval, or variance require that any building or site feature be constructed or installed, the property owner is responsible for maintaining those building or site features in good repair, and for replacing them if they are damaged or destroyed or, in the case of living materials, if they become diseased or die after installation. In addition, property owners shall be responsible for each of the additional maintenance, replacement, and operating standards set forth in this section 29-4.9. 
(2)  Landscape maintenance. 
(i)  The trees, shrubs, fences, walls and other landscaping materials depicted on approved plans shall be considered as elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials and other elements. The property owner and any agents who are authorized to maintain the property shall be responsible for the continued maintenance of those items. Plant material that exhibits evidence of insect pest disease or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season. All landscaping will be subject to periodic inspection by the city to ensure compliance. 
(ii)  Any trees required to be installed by this chapter that are lost to damage or disease within two (2) years after installation, shall be replaced by the property owner within six (6) months at a ratio of one tree per one inch of DBH lost. Replacement trees must be at least two (2) inch in caliper size. Shrubbery or other plantings that die within eighteen (18) months of installation shall be replaced in kind within six (6) months. 
(3)  Parking area maintenance. All surface parking areas and parking structures shall be maintained in clean and neat condition. Potholes, surface damage, and other hazardous conditions shall be promptly repaired, and litter and debris shall be removed on a regular basis. 
(4)  Sign maintenance. 
(i)  Any private sign that has become damaged, dilapidated, or dangerous shall be immediately, or within the time frame mandated by the director, repaired or removed. If the paint on any sign has checked, peeled, or flaked to the extent that the sign cannot be read in whole or in part, the sign shall be repainted or removed. Signs that contain messages that have become obsolete because of the termination of the use or business or product advertised, or for some other reason, shall have such message removed within sixty (60) days of its becoming obsolete. 
(ii)  If maintenance to meet the standards in subsections (i) is neglected, the city shall notify the sign owner in writing of the type of maintenance required. If the maintenance is not provided within sixty (60) days, the city may revoke the permit and, confiscate the sign face, or take any other action authorized by section 29-6.6 (violations, enforcement, and penalties). 
(b)  Operating standards. All structures, uses, and activities in all districts shall be used or occupied so as to avoid creating any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition that would create adverse impacts on the residents, employees, or visitors on the property itself or on neighboring properties. Uses and activities that operate in violation of applicable state or federal statutes or this chapter are presumed to be a violation of this section 29-4.90. Property owner responsibilities under this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following standards: 
(1)  Glare. Direct or reflected glare, including glare from exterior lighting, shall not be visible at the property line. 
(2)  Noise. All activities shall comply with state statutes and be conducted so as to avoid the creation of any noise that would create a public nuisance or a nuisance interfering with the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties. Any amplified sound equipment shall be mounted so as to direct sounds inward from properties, rather than outward towards property boundaries. Amplified sounds shall not be allowed to cross property lines unless a temporary use permit has been issued for that purpose in connection with a special event. 
(3)  Odors. All activities shall comply with state statutes and regulations. No operation shall cause or allow the emission of any odorous air contaminant that is a nuisance, hazard or exceeds applicable federal or state regulations. Detailed plans for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be required before the issuance of a development or building permit. 
(4)  Smoke. All activities shall comply with state statutes and regulations. No operation shall discharged into the atmosphere any contaminant for which threshold limit values are listed for working atmosphere by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists in such quantity that the concentration of the contaminant at ground level at any point beyond the boundary of the property shall at any time exceed the threshold limit established by such conference or by any state or federal law or regulation. Visible emissions of any kind at ground level past the lot line of the property on which the source of the emissions is located are prohibited. 
(5)  Vibration. No use or activity shall cause inherent and recurring generated vibration perceptible without instruments at any point along the property line. Temporary construction is excluded from this restriction. 
(6)  Hazardous materials. All uses and activities shall comply with state statutes and regulations regarding the use, storage, handling, and transportation of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases, explosives, hazardous materials, hazardous wastes, toxic materials and solid wastes, as those terms are defined by applicable statutes, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
(7)  Materials and waste handling. All materials or wastes that might cause fumes or dust or that constitute a fire hazard or that may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed, impermeable trash containers that are screened in accordance with the requirements of this Code. Lubrication and fuel substances shall be prevented from leaking and/or draining onto the ground. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and disposed of in compliance with the water quality standards applicable of the state and federal government. 
(8)  Electromagnetic radiation. No use or activity shall create or operate an intentional source of electromagnetic radiation that does not comply with the then current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding that type of electromagnetic radiation source. In case of governmental communications facilities, governmental agencies, and government owned plants, the regulations of the interdepartmental radio advisory committee shall take precedence over the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. 
(9)  Nuclear radiation. No use or activity shall cause radiation at any property line that violates any regulation of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
(10)  Nuisance prohibited. All structures and land uses within the city shall be constructed, used, operated, and maintained in such a manner so as to be free of nuisances, as defined in state law and by City Code.  
ARTICLE 5. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 29-5.1. - Subdivision standards. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The standards in this article 5 shall apply to land in all districts except the M-DT district whenever land is subdivided or re-subdivided to create, change, or establish the boundaries of parcels for development or redevelopment, unless this chapter provides an exception. 
(2)  In the M-DT district, all subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of the regulating plan and other applicable standards in section 29-5.1, including but not limited to requirements for blocks, through connectivity, intersections, terminating streets, alleys, and sidewalks, and shall also comply with the M-DT district recommended street cross-sections in appendix A to the greatest degree practicable. If the requirements of section 29-4.2 conflict with the provisions of this section 29-5.1, the provisions of section 29-4.2 shall apply. If the provisions of section 29-4.2 are silent on a topic addressed by this section 29-5.1, the provisions of this section 29-5.1 shall apply. 
(b)  Avoidance of sensitive areas. Except under approved special safeguards, land shall be neither subdivided nor developed, where there is a finding by the council that a proposed subdivision or development poses a threat to the safety, health and general welfare of inhabitants of the land or surrounding areas due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations, topography, utility easements or other adverse conditions. Portions of the proposed subdivision or development that cannot be developed without damage to sensitive areas shall be set aside for such use as shall not pose an undue hazard to life and property. 
(1)  Land analysis map. 
(i)  Each application for subdivision or re-subdivision of a land area of five (5) acres or more, either alone or contiguous with another subdivision by the same applicant, shall prepare and submit a land analysis map identifying sensitive lands to be protected from development. Such map shall be provided at the time of concept review for property proposed to be preliminarily platted regardless of the parcel size. In preparing such land analysis map, those areas shown on the future land use map of the city's comprehensive plan as "sensitive" shall be identified as well as other areas which through reasonable investigation should be known to be sensitive areas. 
(ii)  The land analysis map shall identify, as sensitive lands to be protected from development, all of the following: 
(A)  Stream corridors, which shall include all land from top-of-bank to top-of-bank of any waterway, shown as a solid blue or dashed blue line on the corresponding USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map and further defined within chapter 12A of the City Code; 
(B)  Steep slopes, which shall include all land with a natural undisturbed average vertical slope of twenty-five (25) percent or more and height of ten (10) feet or greater, measured from top-of-slope to foot-of-slope, plus an additional ten (10) feet or additional setback as required by chapter 12A as it relates to stream buffers; and 
(C)  Any lands designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for the City of Columbia or FIRMs for unincorporated Boone County if the subject subdivision or re-subdivision is not inside the city's boundary. In instances where the designated floodway has been modified or amended by action of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and is not reflected on the adopted FIRM Maps, proof of such modification or amendment shall be provided at the time of land analysis map submission and shall be recognized as the official boundary of the floodway. 
(iii)  The land analysis map shall further identify that portion of a site located within the flood plain (i.e. flood fringe) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for the City of Columbia or FIRMs for unincorporated Boone County if the subject subdivision or resubdivision is not inside the city's boundary. Such areas shall not be considered restricted from development; however, they are subject to the development standards of the FP-O (floodplain overlay) district. Preservation and avoidance of such areas in the course of site development may qualify for a "preservation bonus" in accordance with the provisions provided below. 
(2)  Avoidance of sensitive lands. The applicant shall lay out the subdivision or re-subdivision so that: 
(i)  To the greatest degree practicable, no lot intended for development shall include land features designated as sensitive lands, as indicated in section 29-5.1(b)(ii), unless such inclusion is supported by: 
(A)  Written and graphical documentation that avoidance was not possible and the corresponding code provision(s) requiring such inclusion, to meet the regulatory requirements of this chapter, are cited, and 
(B)  Written certification by a Missouri Licensed Professional Engineer that such inclusion will not pose a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the surrounding land. 
(ii)  If any lot intended for development includes designated sensitive lands, construction of permanent structures shall be restricted to a designated building envelope that does not include any designated sensitive land areas. The sensitive lands on the lot shall be permanently protected by designation within a preservation easement or located on a separate common lot; and 
(iii)  Street crossings of sensitive land areas are minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Adjustment of minimum lot sizes. If the avoidance of designated sensitive lands except floodways results in a subdivision containing fewer buildable parcels than would have been allowed if sensitive lands were not avoided, the applicant may adjust the minimum lot size and/or lot width in the subdivision by up to fifteen (15) percent to recapture as many lots as would have been possible if sensitive lands were not avoided. This reduction shall not be combined with any other lot area or width reduction permitted elsewhere within this chapter. 
(4)  Preservation bonus—Floodplain/flood fringe avoidance. If a property owner or developer chooses to voluntarily restrict subdivision development from those areas shown on the land analysis map as floodplain/flood fringe, in addition to those areas identified as "sensitive features", the following shall be permitted: 
(i)  For developments zoned R-1, R-2, R-MF, M-OF, and M-N, where single- or two-family lots are created, minimum lot size and/or lot width may be reduced up to twenty-five (25) percent of that required by this chapter. This reduction shall not be combined with any other lot area or lot width reduction permitted elsewhere within this chapter. 
(ii)  For developments zoned R-MF, M-OF, M-N, M-C, or IG parking may be reduced by a maximum of ten (10) percent from that required by Table 4.3-1, unless otherwise restricted within this chapter. 
(c)  Streets. 
(1)  Street improvements generally. 
(i)  Streets, curbs and gutters shall be improved to comply with the standards in this chapter, the adopted city street and storm sewer specifications and design standards, and all design standards and specifications promulgated by the director of public works or adopted by the council, and in accordance with the final construction plans required to be approved prior to final plat approval. 
(ii)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter or standards listed in subsection (i), if land is subdivided in the R-1 district or subdivided for single-family residential development in a PD district, and the minimum size of each lot is two (2) acres or more in size: 
(A)  The subdivision shall not be required to install sidewalks along roadways classified below collector status, or curbs or gutters, but may manage street-related stormwater through the use of bioswales or natural areas designed to allow infiltration of stormwater into the soil, rather than transmitting it to a piped stormwater system. 
(B)  The director of public works may approve alternative construction standards for road surfaces and lane widths to reflect anticipated low traffic volumes and preserve rural character while protecting traffic safety and emergency service access. 
(2)  Responsibility for improvements costs. Except as otherwise provided herein, the costs of construction of required public improvements shall be paid by the applicant. It is the policy of the city to participate in or contribute only to certain additional costs of construction of major thoroughfares over and above the normal costs of local standard streets, when streets are designated at higher standards by the city. Such participation, and its timing, is not mandated and is solely at the discretion of the council, according to the needs of the community. 
(3)  Connectivity. 
(i)  Streets. Streets shall comply with the following standards: 
(A)  Local streets shall be designed to provide convenient and safe access for all modes of transportation, including bicycles and pedestrians, to all properties and to permit efficient drainage and utility systems. 
(B)  Through streets shall be designed as shown in Figure 5.1-1. The street alignment shall be determined at the time of platting, but the plat shall include at least the number of direct connections between arterials or collectors as shown in Figure 5.1-1. If the provisions of section 29-5(c)(1)(ii) regarding large lot residential development apply, then only the provisions of Figure 5.1-1 applicable to arterial and collector streets apply. 
 
Figure 5.1-1. Required street layouts
(C)  As an alternative to complying with the through street requirements of subsection (B) above, the applicant may prepare a connectivity index calculation that divides the number of street segments within the plat (i.e. sections of streets between intersecting streets) by the number of intersections within and at the boundaries of the plat to achieve a connectivity index of 1.65 or more. An example of a connectivity index calculation is shown in Figure 5.1-2 below. 
(D)  Straight streets more than eight hundred (800) feet long shall be avoided to discourage speeding, but may be approved by the director in the event a shorter street is impracticable due to terrain or other unique site constraints. 
(E)  Individual local residential street segments should serve no more than thirty (30) dwelling units without additional street connections unless otherwise permitted for by this chapter. 
(F)  Cul-de-sacs and loop (U-shaped) streets should not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length but may be approved in unique circumstances to avoid steep slopes, major creeks, floodplains, wetlands and other sensitive environmental areas. 
 
Figure 5.1-2: Connectivity Index
(G)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing arterial street or highway having limited access, lots abutting such roadways shall be arranged such that the rear yards abut the arterial street or highway, or access to such lots is provided from an adjacent frontage road or other street design which provides for adequate protection of residential properties, affords separation of through and local traffic, provides a safe route for all modes of transportation, and provides for suitable access to the property involved. 
(H)  When a new subdivision adjoins unplatted or undeveloped land, the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such land unless vehicular access is unnecessary or inappropriate due to existing or proposed development with incompatible traffic generation on the adjacent platted or unplatted lands or designation of sensitive areas. A temporary turnaround approved by the director of public works shall be installed at the point where the properties connect, except when the terminus of the street is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from an intersecting street right-of-way. 
(I)  Where street connections to adjoining land are not provided and there is a need for non-vehicular public access to a school, park, trail or other area or use, the city may require the dedication and improvement of a green space access easement or trail easement to serve the needs of the proposed development. Whenever such public improvements are required, the city shall accept ownership and maintenance in the form of fee title or an easement, as determined in the best interest of the public. 
(J)  Permanent terminal streets shall not be longer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet, measured from the center of any cul-de-sac to the right-of-way line of the nearest through street from which it derives. 
(K)  Four-way intersections of local streets will be platted and constructed according to the standards set forth in appendix A unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
(ii)  Blocks. Streets shall intersect at intervals not exceeding six hundred (600) feet or less than two hundred fifty (250) feet. Blocks shall have sufficient depth to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. The director may approve exceptions to block depth when blocks are adjacent to major streets, railroads, waterways, or other sensitive environmental areas (e.g., steep slopes, waterways). 
(4)  Widths. 
(i)  The right-of-way width required to be dedicated and the pavement width required to be constructed for streets shall comply with the standards in appendix A for each street classification. 
(ii)  Proposed subdivisions that include existing street right-of-way narrower than required by appendix A shall provide for dedication of additional right-of-way width along one or both sides of the street. Proposed subdivisions abutting only one side of such streets shall provide for dedication of additional right-of-way width to constitute one-half (½) of the right-of-way width required. 
(5)  Grades. 
(i)  The grades of streets shall comply with the standards and design criteria in appendix A. 
(ii)  Where it is impracticable to comply with the standards set forth in appendix A, written approval to deviate from the specific standards which cannot be met must be obtained from the director of public works, who shall make a determination as to whether the requested deviation is necessary and consistent with protection of the public and traffic safety. 
(6)  Curves. Curves shall comply with the design criteria in appendix A unless the director of public works determines that a more restrictive requirement is necessary to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare from potentially hazardous street design. 
(7)  Alleys. 
(i)  Residential alleys shall be permitted in all residential districts. 
(ii)  Nonresidential alleys shall be provided in mixed use and special districts when off-street loading and parking are not otherwise provided. 
(iii)  The right-of-way width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet and the pavement width shall be sixteen (16) feet, except in the M-DT district, where alley improvements and new alleys should be designed in accordance with the M-DT district alley cross-section in appendix A, when feasible. 
(iv)  When alleys intersect, the intersection right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a curve with a radius of at least five (5) feet in length. 
(8)  Transportation impact analysis. The city may require that a transportation impact analysis (TIA) be prepared as part of the approval process for any new development. An estimate of the trips generated by a proposed development will be completed to determine if a TIA is required. Any proposed development that would produce one hundred (100) or more trips in and out of the development site at peak hour shall be required to submit a TIA in accordance with the provisions contained in the UDC Administrative Manual. The purpose of the TIA is to estimate the traffic impacts created by the new development on the surrounding street system. Any significantly adverse traffic impacts identified in the TIA must be mitigated by the applicant. 
(d)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(i)  The following standards apply to any subdivision that receives final plat approval after the effective date of this chapter and any subdivision platted before 2001 that is less than twenty-five (25) percent built-out. Any subdivision platted before 2001 and built-out by twenty-five (25) percent or more shall complete construction in accordance with the sidewalk standards in place at the time of final plat approval. 
(ii)  Undeveloped lots shown on subdivision plats that received final approval before January 1, 2001 shall install sidewalks in compliance with the city street and storm sewer specifications and design standards now applicable or later issued by the director of public works or adopted by the council, along their respective street frontage(s), unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Standard requirements. 
(i)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of a new building or additions to buildings on property located on an arterial or collector street unless: 
(A)  A sidewalk exists adjacent to the property along the arterial or collector street; or 
(B)  The plans for the building provide for the construction of such a sidewalk; or 
(C)  Otherwise specified as a note on the plat or in a performance contract between the developer and the city. 
(ii)  The requirements of subsection (i) do not apply to construction of accessory buildings. 
(iii)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building described in subsection (i) if the building plans provide for construction of a sidewalk along an arterial or collector street unless the sidewalk has been constructed or the property owner has provided a bond, letter of credit or other instrument acceptable to the director of public works guaranteeing construction of the sidewalk within six (6) months of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(iv)  Sidewalks are not required along streets classified as freeways. 
(v)  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of expressways and frontage roads unless the council determines that potential or existing pedestrian volumes do not necessitate sidewalks to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(vi)  Sidewalks shall be constructed within all pedestrian easements and on both sides of all internal streets and on the abutting side of any adjacent street unless otherwise specified in this UDC. 
(vii)  A sidewalk shall not be required along a residential access street that is less than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length and terminates in a cul-de-sac. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width along all other streets. 
(viii)  Where a final plat creates a common lot or a non-buildable lot, a sidewalk shall be constructed along the portion of each street abutting the lot at the same time the abutting street is constructed or within three (3) years of such lot being created when such lots abut an existing street. No street shall be accepted for public maintenance upon which a common lot or non-buildable lot fronts without first having such sidewalk located adjacent to such lot being installed. This subsection shall not apply to any subdivision that received final plat approval before January 1, 2006. 
(ix)  Sidewalks shall be constructed to comply with the standards contained in this section 29-5.3(d)(2) and with the city design standards and specifications established by the director of public works or adopted by the council. 
(x)  Whenever a permit is issued to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any sidewalk curb, curb cut, driveway or street, handicapped ramps shall be required to be installed in accordance with design standards included in the city's standard plan and specifications at all curb and driveway crossings to be constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered; provided, that the director of public works may waive said requirement if he determines that requirement of handicapped ramps is impractical under all the circumstances. 
(xi)  The council may require a sidewalk to be constructed to standards higher than the minimum standards of this section 29-5.1(d)(2) provided that the city compensate the property owner for the additional cost of constructing the sidewalk. 
(e)  Bike lanes and pedways. Bicycle lanes and pedways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with appendix A and all applicable design standards and specifications promulgated by the director of public works or adopted by council. 
(f)  Lots. 
(1)  Lot arrangement. Lots shall be arranged to comply with building permit requirements of this chapter as to minimum size and width in the zone district where the property is located, as well as access, relation to topography, provision of utility service, or other conditions specified in this chapter or in other standards and specifications adopted by the city. Lots in subdivisions that qualify for the solar access density bonus in section 29-4.1(b)(2) or the cluster subdivision density bonus in section 29-4.1(b)(3), and lots that are organized to avoid sensitive lands as described in section 29-5.1(b) shall comply with the minimum lot size and width in the zone districts where the lots are located, as adjusted by the provisions of those sections of this chapter. 
(i)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient width for compliance with front and side yard building setback requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(ii)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines should generally be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets. 
(iii)  Tier lots (aka flag lot or stem lot). The commission may allow tier lots on previously unplatted land when the following criteria are met: 
(A)  Tier lot design is the only feasible means to access lots due to extreme topographic conditions; 
(B)  The stem of a tier lot, that is, the portion of the lot which connects its required yard area and its buildable area with its public access, shall not be less than twenty (20) feet nor more than fifty-nine (59) feet in width and not shorter than twenty-five (25) feet nor longer than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length and may not be included within any required yard area set forth in this chapter; and 
(C)  The allowance of tier lots will not endanger the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(iv)  Frontage. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided and specifically authorized under this chapter, all lots, tracts or parcels shall have actual frontage upon a street, which provides direct vehicular access to the lot. In context sensitive situations (e.g., topography, existing or proposed development patterns) where actual street frontage is not feasible, the director may permit a lot with an irrevocable access easement suitable to the city counselor, or designee, rather than actual street frontage, if the public health, safety, and general welfare is not compromised. 
(B)  Common lots for the purposes of storm water management features may be created without having actual street frontage provided that such lots have an established means of ingress/egress by an irrevocable access easement suitable to the city counselor, or designee. 
(C)  Common lots created for recreational purposes (active or passive) shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of street frontage. Such frontage may be actual lot frontage or provided through an irrevocable access easement suitable to the city counselor, or designee. 
(D)  Newly platted or re-subdivided non-residential lots that propose direct driveway connection to an arterial or collector street shall have a minimum of three hundred (300) feet of frontage along the street right-of-way. Shared access for parking and driveways may be required to promote internal development connectivity. 
(v)  Shape. Lots in mixed use or special zone districts shall not be created with protrusions, extensions or stems of less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
(2)  Lot access. 
(i)  Each lot shall have access allowing vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles to pass from a public street directly onto the lot, or from a public street to the lot over an irrevocable access easement approved by the city counselor, or designee. 
(ii)  A maximum of thirty (30) lots or units shall be permitted to be accessed from a single point of ingress/egress unless otherwise specified by the most current adopted edition of the International Fire Code or authorized by the City of Columbia Fire Department. 
(iii)  Private residential driveways are prohibited on arterial or collector streets unless the director determines that no alternative access is practicable. 
(iv)  Non-residential driveway spacing shall conform to the provision of the most current edition of the Missouri Department of Transportation Access Management Guidelines or access management standards promulgated by the city. 
(v)  Streets that dead-end or "stub" into property that is adjacent to the property being subdivided shall not count as a second access until such time as the dead-end or "stub" street is connected to a through street and constructed to city standards. 
(3)  Lot lines. No building or structure shall be constructed across an existing lot line. 
(4)  Lot combination. No lot in any existing subdivision may be combined with another lot without complying with the requirements of section 29-5.2. 
(g)  Public improvements. 
(1)  Standards and specifications. All required public improvements, including but not limited to streets and utilities, shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the procedural requirements in section 29-5.2, or in related public improvements standard specifications or policies established by the city department or other entity responsible for the design, operation, or maintenance of that type of improvement. 
Upon notice that the improvements have been completed in accordance with the city's requirements, the designing engineer shall, under his seal and signature, submit as-built tracings for the street, storm sewer and sanitary sewer construction. 
(2)  Drainage and storm sewers. 
(i)  Flood-prone areas. Any portion of land being subdivided that is located within the limits of maximum flooding of the one hundred (100) year flood, as determined by the Boone County Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM), released March 17, 2011, and amendments to that map on file with the director, shall be developed so as not to endanger the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(ii)  Storm sewers. Storm sewers with curbs and gutters shall be provided for lots unless the director of public works approves open channels with design features, such as vegetated swales and check dams to reduce runoff velocity and allow infiltration. Sidewalks and pedways shall not be located between the street and open channel. Improvements shall conform to standards contained in the city street and storm sewer specifications and design standards, and the city storm drainage standards, and all applicable design standards and specifications promulgated by the director of public works or adopted by the council. 
(iii)  Driveways across drainage features. Driveways that cross drainageways or ditches, to connect to public streets, shall be constructed as required by the director of public works to protect traffic safety and avoid traffic congestion. 
(iv)  Streets crossing streams. Streets that cross streams shall be designed and constructed to minimize the disruption to the stream channel and buffer zone. Streams should be crossed only when necessary to connect the street network. 
(3)  Street trees. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 29-4.4(b), installation of street trees shall comply with the provisions of section 29-4.4(d)(2). 
(4)  Utilities. Utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, natural gas, electric and telephone lines, and fire hydrants, shall be provided to lots in accordance with standards and specifications governing the construction and installation of such utilities adopted by council or promulgated by the city departments or utility companies responsible for those utilities. 
Easements for public and private utilities shall be provided adjacent to all street right-of-way and in other locations in accordance with facility requirements and design standards. To the maximum extent feasible, utilities shall be located in designated easements and not in the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 23524 , § 1, 5-7-18)  
Sec. 29-5.2. - Subdivision of land procedures. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this section 29-5.2 shall apply to all divisions of land within the city into new or different lots for development, except as noted in subsection (ii) below or as exempted by state or federal law or court decisions interpreting those laws. 
(2)  A transaction involving the sale or exchange of small tracts or parcels of land to or between adjoining properties where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots or parcels for development does not reduce any area designated as a common lot or as common ground on a plat and does not otherwise violate this chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of this section 29-5.2. Transactions involving the sale or exchange of tracts or parcels of land which increase or decrease the total square footage of either the conveying or receiving lot by more than three (3) percent shall not be considered "small" for the purposes of this subparagraph. Small area transfers shall not involve any land which has been included in an approved preliminary plat but not final platted. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  No street shall be constructed nor shall any street be accepted or maintained by the city, nor shall any street lighting, water or sewer service be extended to or connected, nor shall any building, electrical, plumbing, occupancy or other permit or license be issued for the construction of any building or improvement on land which does not meet the definition of "lot" in section 29-1.11. This requirement shall not apply to alterations of existing buildings that increase the gross floor area or building footprint by less than ten (10) percent of the existing footprint. 
(2)  All persons are hereby notified of the existence of the comprehensive plan of the city, as amended, and of any sites or areas within any proposed subdivision that may be designated on the comprehensive plan, as amended, as sites or areas for possible acquisition by condemnation or purchase by the city for public uses and purposes. 
(3)  The council may allow the subdivider to place notes on the plat that are explanatory or that impose obligations on the property owner or that restrict use of the property. Obligations and restrictions set forth in notes on a plat may be eliminated only by ordinance or resubdivision, and such obligations and restrictions shall not be eliminated unless the council determines that the elimination will not be detrimental to any land in the subdivision, to any neighboring property, or the general public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(4)  The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or sound like the name of any other subdivision, any existing or platted street, or any established business or development in Boone County. 
(5)  The criteria for approval of a major, minor, or administrative subdivision is whether the proposed preliminary or final plat conforms to this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and to all other city ordinances and regulations. 
(6)  An application for subdivision of land shall include all land that the subdivider proposes to subdivide. All contiguous unplatted land, up to 80 acres, under single ownership or control shall be included as part of the preliminary plat. Nothing herein is intended to limit a subdivider from platting more than eighty (80) acres. 
(7)  An application for a final plat shall: 
(i)  Include either the entire subdivision, or a section thereof, which derives access from an existing road; 
(ii)  Be in substantial compliance with the preliminary plat, as approved; 
(iii)  Be accompanied by final construction plans for the requisite public improvements, drawn under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and attested to by his signature and seal, all in accordance with the applicable standards; and 
(iv)  Be accompanied by an improvements guarantee offered for acceptance by the Council, in a form satisfactory to the city counselor, or designee. 
(8)  Any request for deviation from the subdivision standards of section 29-5.1 shall be included in the preliminary plat application as a request for a "design adjustment". A recommendation on any request for design adjustment shall be made by the director and the commission, and shall be decided by council, simultaneously with review and final decision on the plat. 
(9)  If a design adjustment is requested, the director or commission may recommend approval of the design adjustment if it determines that the following criteria have been met, and the council shall consider these criteria in making a decision on the requested design adjustment: 
(i)  The design adjustment is consistent with the city's adopted comprehensive plan and with any policy guidance issued to the department by council; 
(ii)  The design adjustment will not create significant adverse impacts on any lands abutting the proposed plat, or to the owners or occupants of those lands; 
(iii)  The design adjustment will not make it significantly more difficult or dangerous for automobiles, bicycles, or pedestrians to circulate in and through the development than if the subdivision standards of section 29-5.1 were met; 
(iv)  The design adjustment is being requested to address a unique feature of the site or to achieve a unique design character, and will not have the effect of decreasing or eliminating installation of improvements or site features required of other similarly situated developments; and 
(v)  The design adjustment will not create adverse impacts on public health and safety. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Sequence of subdivision process. 
(i)  An applicant for a minor subdivision shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision through a two-step process including: (1) concept review, and (2) final plat. 
(ii)  An applicant for a major subdivision shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision through a three-step process including: (1) concept review, (2) preliminary plat, and (3) final plat. 
(iii)  An applicant for an administrative subdivision shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision through a one-step process including: (1) administrative plat approval. 
(iv)  A tract split is an alternative to subdivision which is intended to allow for the initial division of large tracts of land and requires completion of the subdivision process (preliminary and final platting) prior to development of the property. An applicant for a tract split shall apply for and secure approval of the split through a two-step process including: (1) concept review, and (2) tract split. 
(2)  Coordination with PD zoning. Whenever a proposed development plan for a PD district requires a subdivision of land, approval of the subdivision of land shall be required in addition to approval of the PD district and development plan. Subdivision review may be carried out simultaneously with the review of the development plan, and the required information may be included in a single document that serves as both a development plan and a preliminary plat, as described in the following procedure: 
(i)  An application for approval of a development plan for a PD district shall include all information normally required for submission and approval of a preliminary subdivision plat. 
(ii)  Commission review and recommendation of the preliminary plat shall be accomplished at the time of, and as a part of, its review and recommendation of the PD development plan. 
(iii)  Approval of the PD development plan shall constitute approval of the preliminary subdivision plat. 
(3)  Procedures by platting action. 
 
(i)  Concept review. Before preparing the preliminary plat of a major subdivision or the final plat of a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall discuss with the director the procedure for adoption of a subdivision plat and the requirements for general layout of streets, reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, utilities, the availability of existing services, and other similar requirements of this chapter or other city ordinances or regulations. The director shall also advise the subdivider, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those city officials who must recommend approval of certain aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction. The geographic scope of the review shall include the whole property held in common ownership for which whole or partial subdivision platting is desired by the subdivider, as well as the surrounding property that might reasonably be affected by subdivision of the subject property. The concept review is an informal discussion made available to the subdivider, and the subdivider may, after meeting with the director, proceed to prepare and submit a preliminary plat for a major subdivision or a final plat for a minor subdivision. 
(ii)  Preliminary plat. 
(A)  The director shall refer each application for approval of a preliminary plat to the appropriate city departments, together with an indication of its tentative agenda placement before the commission, and shall receive reports from other departments as to the conformance of the proposed plat with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the departments may comment on the proposed design adjustment. 
(B)  The director shall request the subdivider to make such changes to the plat as are necessary to comply with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations, or to address any adverse impacts of a proposed design adjustment. 
(C)  The director shall forward the plat to the commission and advise the commission of the conformance or nonconformance of the plat with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the director may advise the commission on any potential impacts of the requested design adjustment. 
(D)  The commission shall hold a public meeting on the preliminary plat and shall make a decision to recommend the plat (including any requested design adjustments) to council for approval, conditional approval, or denial. The applicant shall be advised in writing of the commission's recommendation. 
(E)  Within sixty (60) days after submission of a completed application for approval of a preliminary plat to the commission, the commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the plat to the council, otherwise the plat is deemed a recommendation for approval by the commission (including any requested design adjustments), except that the director or commission, with the consent of the subdivider, may extend the sixty-day period. 
(F)  The council shall take action on the preliminary plat by resolution; however, an ordinance shall be required if any design adjustments have been requested. If the commission has recommended denial of the preliminary plat, the council, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership, may overrule the disapproval. The council shall take action on an application for approval of a preliminary plat within forty-five (45) days after submission of a commission recommendation, otherwise the recommendation of the commission shall be deemed to be the recommendation of the council. 
(G)  Approval of a preliminary plat by the council shall confer upon the applicant for a period of five (5) years, beginning at the effective date of council approval, the following rights: 
1)  The terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat was given approval shall not be changed except as required in subsection 3) below. 
2)  The subdivider may submit on or before the expiration date a final plat for the whole or any part of the subdivision for approval. 
3)  Each final plat for land included in the preliminary plat application shall comply with any new technical or engineering standards or requirements adopted by council between the date of the preliminary plat approval and the date of each final plat application for land included in the preliminary plat. 
4)  If the subdivider fails to submit a combined total of one-fourth (¼) of the preliminarily approved lots (in either a single or multiple) final plats before the expiration date, the preliminary plat approval shall expire and be of no force or effect. 
5)  The director may grant a one-year extension if no change to a city ordinance would require a change in the plat. Appeal for an adverse decision shall be made to the council. Any subsequent extensions shall be made to council for a specified period on such terms and conditions as the council may approve. 
(iii)  Final plat. Following the approval of the preliminary plat of a major subdivision or completion of the concept review for a minor subdivision, the subdivider may file an application for final plat approval in order to complete the subdivision process. The application shall be in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat. 
(A)  For a minor subdivision: 
 
1)  The director shall refer the application for approval of a final plat to the appropriate city departments, together with an indication of its tentative agenda placement before the council, and shall receive reports from the departments as to the conformance of the proposed plat with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the departments may comment on the proposed design adjustment. 
2)  As a result of review by the other departments, the director shall request the subdivider to make such changes necessary to cause the plat to be in conformance with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the director may advise the commission on any potential impacts of the requested design adjustment. 
3)  The commission shall make a decision to recommend the plat (including any requested design adjustments) to council for approval, conditional approval, or denial. The subdivider shall be advised in writing of the commission's recommendation. 
4)  The council shall take action on the plat (including any requested design adjustments) by ordinance within sixty (60) calendar days after its submission to the council, and failure of the council to act within that time period shall be deemed approval, except that the director or council may extend the sixty-day period to a stated future date with the consent of the subdivider. If the commission has recommended denial of any requested design adjustments, the council, by a vote of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its entire membership, may overrule the denial. 
(B)  For a major subdivision: 
1)  The director shall refer the application for approval of a final plat (including any requested design adjustments) to the appropriate city departments, together with an indication of its tentative agenda placement before the council, and shall receive reports from the departments as to the conformance of the proposed plat with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the departments may comment on the proposed design adjustment. 
2)  As a result of review by the other departments, the director shall request the subdivider to make such changes necessary to cause the plat to be in conformance with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. If a design adjustment has been requested, the director may advise the commission on any potential impacts of the requested design adjustment. 
3)  When a subdivider has requested a design adjustment in conjunction with a request for major subdivision approval, the commission shall make a recommendation on the adjusted plat to council for approval, conditional approval, or denial. If there are no requested design adjustments, the plat shall be submitted directly to the city manager for council consideration. The subdivider shall be advised in writing of the commission's recommendation on the adjusted plat. 
4)  The director shall forward the plat to the city manager for council consideration and advise the council as to its conformance or nonconformance with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. 
5)  The city manager shall certify to the council whether the final plat is in accordance with the approved preliminary plat, whether the subdivider has requested any design adjustments which have been considered by the commission, and whether all conditions precedent established by the council have been met. 
6)  Following certification by the city manager to the council, the council shall take action on the final plat (including any requested design adjustments). The council shall take action by ordinance on the final plat within sixty (60) calendar days after its submission to the council, and failure of the council to act within that time period shall be deemed approval, except that the council may extend this period to a stated future date with the consent of the subdivider. If the commission has recommended denial of any requested design adjustments, the council, by a vote of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its entire membership, may overrule the denial. 
(iv)  Signing and recording. After council approval of a final plat, the mayor shall affix his signature thereto, and this shall be attested to by the city clerk, and the seal of the city affixed thereto. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to file the plat with the office of the county recorder of deeds. Simultaneously, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded all other documents required to be recorded with the plat, pursuant to council approval and as determined by the city counselor, or designee. 
(d)  Resubdivision or replat. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(i)  A change to an approved or recorded final plat shall require resubdivision if the change affects any street layout, any area reserved for public use, any area designated as a common lot, any condition imposed by council, or create any additional residential lots, combine more than two (2) lots, or any combination of lots which would result in excess of one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage will require review and approval of a resubdivision of the property in accordance with subsections (2) or (3) and (4), below. Only that portion of the plat being changed must be resubdivided. If approved, the applicant shall be required to prepare a revised final plat and the city clerk shall record the revised final plat before the revisions shall be in effect. 
(ii)  A change to an approved or recorded plat that does not affect any street layout, any area reserved for public use, any area designated as a common lot, any condition imposed by council, or create any additional residential lots, combine more than two (2) lots, or any combination of lots which would result in excess of one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage may be approved by the director as an administrative plat if it complies with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  Procedure for a major subdivision. 
(i)  If the director determines the proposed resubdivision is in substantial conformance with a valid approved preliminary plat, the subdivider shall apply for and secure approval of a revised final plat from council. 
(ii)  If the director determines that proposed resubdivision is a substantial change from the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider shall apply for and secure approval of a revised preliminary plat from the commission, and then approval of a final plat from council, to complete the resubdivision. At the subdivider's option, the preliminary and final plat documents may be submitted at the same time and may be reviewed and considered for approval by council at the same time. 
(3)  Procedure for a minor subdivision. The subdivider shall apply for and secure approval of a revised final plat from council, to complete the resubdivision. 
(4)  Criteria for approval. A resubdivision of land shall only be approved by the council if the council determines that: 
(i)  The resubdivision would not eliminate restrictions on the existing plat upon which neighboring property owners or the city have relied, or, if restrictions are eliminated, the removal of such restrictions is in the best interest of the public; 
(ii)  Adequate utilities, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electricity, and other infrastructure facilities are provided to meet the needs of the resubdivision, or, there will be no adverse effect on such infrastructure facilities caused by the resubdivision; and 
(iii)  The replat would not be detrimental to other property in the neighborhood, or, if alleged to be detrimental, the public benefit outweighs the alleged detriment to the property in the neighborhood. 
(e)  Administrative plat. 
(1)  Applicability. The subdivider may file an administrative plat with the director, if the plat meets the following criteria: 
(i)  The plat does not create, vacate, or change the location and/or size of streets; 
(ii)  The plat does not create any additional residential lot or mixed use lots that will contain residential uses; 
(iii)  The plat does not combine more than two (2) lots; 
(iv)  The plat does not result in excess of one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage; 
(v)  The plat does not alter any area reserved for public use or any area designated as a common lot; and 
(vi)  The plat does not eliminate any condition imposed by council. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(i)  The director may approve the administrative plat if the director determines that the revised lots and application materials, including but not limited to any utility construction documents, easements, and performance guarantees, have been approved and comply with this chapter and all other city ordinances and regulations. 
(ii)  On approval of the administrative plat, the director shall sign the plat and cause it to be recorded with the recorder of deeds. 
(iii)  No occupancy permit shall be issued for property included in the administrative plat unless and until the requirements of this section 29-5.2(e) are met and all required utility work is completed. 
(f)  Tract split. 
(1)  Applicability. The tract split procedure is intended to simplify the orderly subdivision of large tracts of land for separate parcel sale through an administrative approval process. Preparation of a formal subdivision plat, commission review, and council approval are not required for a tract split, but will be required when the parcels resulting from a tract split are further divided into individual lots or prior to development. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(i)  The director shall complete a concept review of the application and consult with other city departments and public or quasi-public agencies as he may deem necessary to confirm compliance with this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. 
(ii)  The director shall approve or disapprove the request, and notify the subdivider in writing of the decision, within fourteen (14) calendar days after application filing. 
(iii)  If the director determines that the application does not qualify for approval as a tract split, the application shall be treated as a minor or major subdivision, depending on the number of parcels being created and the need for improvements or dedication of land. 
(iv)  The director, on approval of a tract split, shall certify to the recorder of deeds that the tract split survey complies with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(v)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no permit for street or utility extension, nor permit for building development shall be issued for any of the parcels resulting from an approved tract split unless or until such parcel or portion of a parcel has been approved as a major or minor subdivision. 
(3)  Criteria for approval. The director may approve a tract split if the director determines that the following criteria have been met: 
(i)  The property shall be divided into not more than five (5) parcels. 
(ii)  Adequate provision has been made for future subdivision of the resulting parcels for development, for the opening of future streets to serve the parcels, and for the extension of utilities or related public improvements and facilities, as required by the procedures, and subject to the standards and criteria, in this chapter. 
(iii)  The resulting parcel configuration does not adversely affect development of the balance of the tract or parcels, or of adjoining properties, and does not conflict with any provision of the comprehensive plan, this chapter, or other city ordinances or regulations. 
(g)  Monuments. 
(1)  Monuments shall be selected from the types described by the "Minimum Standards for Property Boundary Surveys" of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. 
(2)  Monuments shall be set or confirmed at all controlling corners on the boundary of the subdivision and all block corners, points of intersections, points of curvature and points of tangency within the subdivision. 
(3)  On an individual lot within a subdivision, monuments shall be set or confirmed at all the corners of the lot. 
(h)  Completion and dedication of improvements. 
(1)  Requirement. The subdivider shall be required to complete all public improvements and utilities required by the council, and upon completion shall dedicate such public improvements and utilities to the city, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property, unless the existence of such liens and encumbrances are approved by the city. The subdivider shall construct and complete all required public improvements and utilities before approval of the final plat unless the subdivider provides adequate security to ensure completion of the subdivision improvements as set forth herein. 
(i)  If completion and dedication of improvements and utilities as described in subsection (a) above has not been completed prior to final plat approval, the Council may require a surety bond, escrow secured with cash, irrevocable letter of credit deposited with the city, or performance agreement to secure actual construction and installation of the improvements and utilities to be completed within a reasonable period specified by the council and expressed in the bond or other security, in an amount and with reasonable conditions satisfactory to the council. 
(ii)  All required public improvements, including but not limited to streets and utilities, shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the design standards and requirements in this chapter and set forth in related public improvements standard specifications or policies established by the city departments charged with responsibility for those improvements. 
(iii)  Required improvements shall be inspected during construction and installation to ensure satisfactory completion of those improvements, in accordance with inspection requirements adopted by the council or by the city departments charged with responsibility for those improvements. 
(iv)  Approval of a final plat, and acceptance of improvements shown on that plat by the council, shall not prevent the council from causing public improvements to be enhanced, enlarged or upgraded, in order to accommodate a higher level of service demand resulting from any subsequent change in the use of land within the subdivision, whether by benefit assessment, agreement among the parties or by such other mechanism as may be available now or may subsequently become available to the council. 
(2)  Failure to complete improvements. If any improvement or utility is not completed or installed and duly accepted for dedication within the time period specified in the performance agreement or other security instrument, either by reason of incompletion or by reason of substandard construction, the council may, at its option: 
(i)  Declare any bond or other approved security instrument to be forfeited, pursue legal and equitable action to obtain necessary funds from the sureties, and cause satisfactory completion and installation of all improvements and utilities previously required; 
(ii)  Declare an applicable improvements guarantee agreement to be breached and pursue legal and equitable action to cause satisfactory completion and installation of the improvements and utilities; 
(iii)  The council may extend the time limit set for satisfactory completion of the improvements and utilities for one year upon the request of the subdivider and showing of a reasonable necessity for such extension. The council may approve no more than three (3) one-year extensions, and may approve no extension without a reasonable showing of the necessity for the extension. In the event that an extension of the time limit is granted, the council may require further financial assurances for completion in the form of a performance bond or other acceptable security instrument; or 
(iv)  Pursue any legal or equitable action necessary to ensure satisfactory completion of the improvements or utilities. 
(3)  Reduction or release of guarantees. In those cases where a performance bond or other security instrument guarantee has been made to secure construction of public improvements, the amount of guarantee may be reduced upon public acceptance of dedicated portions of the required improvements. The amount of surety shall not be reduced to an amount less than the estimated cost of constructing the required improvements which have not yet been accepted by the city. In no case shall the amount retained by the city be less than five (5) percent of the original amount, pending completion and acceptance of all of the required improvements. Upon acceptance of the dedication of the final portion of the improvements, the city shall authorize the release of the remaining portion of the improvements guarantee.  
ARTICLE 6. - PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 29-6.1. - Reviewers and decision-making bodies. 
This article 6 of chapter 29 identifies officers and bodies authorized to review, recommend, or make decisions regarding required applications, permits, and approvals under this chapter. Any reference to an officer or body includes any agents, employees, subordinates, or others to which the named individual or body has lawfully delegated power to take the action. 
(a)  City council. The city council is the governing body of the city. In connection with this Unified Development Code, the council's responsibilities include approving amendments to the city's adopted comprehensive plan, approving amendments to the text of this chapter, and approving amendments to the official zoning map, appointing the members of the commission and board, and performing any additional duties set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Planning and zoning commission (P&Z). 
(1)  Continued existence, membership, and qualifications, attendance. 
(i)  The city planning and zoning commission ("commission") established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue in existence. 
(ii)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the council for staggered terms of four (4) years. All members shall be appointed as provided for in this article for terms beginning on the first day of June. Six (6) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(iii)  The members of the commission shall be qualified voters, residents of the city at least one year immediately prior to the date of their appointment, and shall hold no other office or position in the city administration. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. All members shall serve without pay. 
(iv)  The chair of the commission is authorized to excuse any member from attendance at a commission meeting; provided, that the member requested to be excused before the meeting. Any member who is absent, without being excused, from three (3) regular meetings in any twelve-month period shall automatically forfeit their office. Furthermore, any member who has a combination of five (5) or more excused or unexcused absences from regular meetings within any twelve-month period shall automatically forfeit their office. It shall be the duty of the chair to promptly notify the council of the vacancy. 
(2)  Powers and duties. The commission shall: 
(i)  Prepare and submit to the council for its adoption a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and uses of land in the city. The plan may include the general location and character of residential, commercial, mixed use, industrial and other areas, the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds, and spaces, together with the general location of public buildings and other public property, public utilities, and the extent and location of any public housing or slum clearance projects. 
(ii)  Make recommendations in connection with the execution and detailed interpretation of the comprehensive plan. 
(iii)  Act as a zoning commission, in accordance with the provisions of present or future state zoning enabling acts. 
(iv)  Prepare and recommend to the council rules controlling the subdivision of land. 
(v)  Make recommendations regarding the approval or disapproval of plats for land subdivision. All such plats shall be referred to the commission before the council takes any action. Failure of the commission to act within sixty (60) days shall be deemed a recommendation for approval. 
(vi)  Recommend to the council such amendments or revisions to this chapter as the commission shall deem necessary or desirable for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Such provisions may include regulations as to the location, width, height, and bulk of buildings; the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces surrounding buildings; and the use of buildings and land. The commission shall hear applications for amendments, modifications or revisions of this chapter and shall forward such applications to the council with its recommendations on the application. The recommendations of the commission shall not be binding upon the council, which may approve or disapprove the commission's findings; however, no plan or ordinance related to zoning, nor any modification, amendment or revision of such a plan or ordinance, shall be finally considered by the council unless it has been first submitted to the commission for its examination and recommendation. 
(vii)  Recommend from time to time any other legislation which may be desirable to further the purposes of city planning. 
(viii)  Make such reports to the council as it may deem proper or as required by the council. 
(ix)  Assume any other powers and perform any other duties as are provided for by the Charter of the city or by council action. 
(x)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its business that are consistent with the purposes of the commission and the requirements of this chapter, which shall be approved by council ordinance. 
(c)  Board of adjustment (BOA). 
(1)  Continued existence, membership, and qualifications. 
(i)  The city board of adjustment ("board") established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue in existence. 
(ii)  The board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city. The terms of office of the members of the board shall be for five (5) years, except that the five (5) members first appointed shall serve respectively for terms of one, two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years. Thereafter all members shall be appointed by the council for terms of five (5) years each. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(iii)  Three (3) alternate members, who shall be residents of the city, shall be appointed by the council to serve in the absence of, or disqualification of, the regular members. The first three (3) alternates appointed shall serve for terms of three (3), four (4), and five (5) years, respectively. Thereafter, all alternates shall be appointed for five-year terms. 
(iv)  The vacancy of any member or alternate member shall be filled by appointment of the council for the unexpired term only. 
(v)  All members and alternates may be removed for cause by the council, upon written charges after public hearing. 
(2)  Powers and duties. The board shall have the following authority and duties: 
(i)  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this chapter, as described in section 29-6.3(f). 
(ii)  Variances. To hear and decide applications for variances from the terms or conditions of this chapter under section 29-6.4(d) (variances). 
(iii)  Other powers. 
(A)  Assume any other powers and perform any other duties as are provided for by the Charter, City Code, council action, or state law. 
(B)  The board may adopt rules for the conduct of its business that are consistent with the purposes of the board and the requirements of this chapter, which shall be approved by council ordinance. 
(3)  Meetings and voting. 
(i)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(ii)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(iii)  The board shall keep minutes of the proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(iv)  All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for that purpose and who shall receive reasonable compensation for such from the city. The reporter shall furnish to any person or persons a transcript of all or part of such proceedings upon payment to him of a fee equal to that set forth in RSMo 492.590(2). 
(v)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter before the board. 
(d)  Historic preservation commission. The membership, terms, powers, and duties of the historic preservation commission are listed in section 29-2.3(c)(2) as part of the historic preservation overlay district. 
(e)  Community development department. 
(1)  Continued existence and purpose. 
(i)  The community development department ("department") established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue in existence. 
(ii)  The purpose of the department is to plan for the present and future development and improvement of the city in all phases of its activities in coordination with other departments of the city which may have either primary or secondary roles in such planning and development. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, traffic, transportation, playgrounds, parks, public buildings, housing, public monuments, works of art, public streets, public utilities, parking, and parking facilities. 
(2)  Powers and duties of department. The department shall have the following authority and duties: 
(i)  Advise the city manager and the council with respect to the planning affairs of the city, and shall furnish to the city manager and council at any time upon request, such information and particulars concerning planning as may be desired. 
(ii)  Act upon all matters referred to it by the city manager or the council and shall, if required or deemed necessary, report on those matters to the city manager or the council. 
(iii)  Be the advisor and consultant to the commission, and shall prepare and furnish to the commission such reports, studies, plans, surveys or other data as may be necessary in aiding and assisting the commission in the discharge of its duties. 
(iv)  Be the advisor and consultant to the board, and shall prepare and furnish to the board such reports, studies, plans, surveys or other data as may be necessary in aiding and assisting the board in the discharge of its duties. 
(v)  Assume any other powers and perform any other duties as are provided for by the Charter, City Code or by council action.  
Sec. 29-6.2. - Regulatory procedures table. 
Table 6.2-1: Approval Procedures Table 
H = Public Hearing D = Decision R = Recommendation A = Decision on Appeal
DCD = Department of Community Development DPW = Department of Public Works
Where an Appeal body is not shown, appeal is to the courts 
Procedure 	Section 29- 	Department 	Board of Adjustment 	Planning & Zoning Commission 	Historic Preservation Commission 	City Council 
Zoning Compliance 	6.4(a) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Building Permit 	6.4(b) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Demolition Permit 	Chapter 6 City Code 	D-DCD 			R 	
Certificate of Occupancy 	6.4(c) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Variance [1] 	6.4(d) 		D 			
Adjustment of Form-based Standards 	6.4(e) 					
Minor 		D-DCD 	A 			
Major 			D 			
Sign Permit 	6.4(f) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Sign Plan Approval 	6.4(g) 		D 			
Temporary Parking Permit 	6.4(h) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Floodplain Development Permit 	6.4(i) 	D-DCD 	A 			
Optional Development
Standards Approval 	6.4(j) 		D 			
Certificate of Appropriateness 	6.4(k) 		A 		D 	
Landmark and Historic District Designation 	6.4(l) 			R 	R 	D 
Conditional Use Permit 	6.4(m) 			R 		D 
Subdivision of Land 	5 					
Tract Split 		D-DCD 				
Administrative Plat Review 		D-DCD 				
Minor Subdivision - Concept 		R 				
Minor Subdivision - Final 				R 		D 
Major Subdivision - Concept 		R 				
Major Subdivision - Preliminary 				R 		D 
Major Subdivision - Final 				R 		D 
Ordinance Text or Map Amendment 	6.4(n) 					
Concept Review 		R 				
Zoning Text or Map Amendment 				R 		D 
Comprehensive Plan Amendment 	6.4(o) 			R 		D 
Tall structures in the M-DT District 	6.4(p) 				R 	D 
[1] Exceptions: Decisions on variances from Subdivision Regulations are decided by the Commission; variances from the HP-O are decided by the Historic Preservation Commission; variances from some stream buffer standards are decided by the Director of Public Works. 
  
Sec. 29-6.3. - Standard regulatory procedures. 
All applications under this chapter are subject to the procedural requirements in this section 29-6.3 unless exempted by the terms of this chapter. 
(a)  Application: Materials and fees required. 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated by a specific provision of this chapter, the applicant for a permit or approval under this chapter must be the owner of the property that is the subject of the application or a duly authorized agent of the owner. An applicant who is the purchaser of the subject property under a contract must provide proof that the applicant is an authorized agent of the owner of the subject property for purposes of the application. 
(2)  Unless otherwise indicated by a specific provision of this chapter or another city ordinance or regulation, applications for permits and approvals under this chapter shall be submitted to the community development department. 
(3)  An applicant for a permit or approval under this chapter shall be required to file an application containing all information required for that type of application by the department, as those requirements may be revised from time. 
(4)  Each applicant for a permit, approval, or appeal under this chapter shall be required to file an application fee as established by the council from time to time. 
(5)  Schedule of fees. The following processing fees are established: 
(i)  Preliminary plat ..... $600.00 + $10.00 per lot 
(ii)  Final plat (in addition to recording fee) ..... $400.00 + $10.00 per lot 
(iii)  Replat (in addition to recording fee) ..... $300.00 + $10.00 per lot 
(iv)  Rezoning (in addition to advertising): 
0 to 2 acres ..... $300.00 
Greater than 2 acres to 5 acres ..... $450.00 
Greater than 5 acres to 10 acres ..... $600.00 
Greater than 10 acres to 15 acres ..... $900.00 
Greater than 15 acres to 20 acres ..... $1,200.00 
Greater than 20 acres ..... $1,500.00 
(v)  Planned district development plan or major revision to a development plan (in addition to advertising): 
0 to 2 acres ..... $300.00 
Greater than 2 acres to 5 acres ..... $450.00 
Greater than 5 acres to 10 acres ..... $600.00 
Greater than 10 acres to 15 acres ..... $900.00 
Greater than 15 acres to 20 acres ..... $1,200.00 
Greater than 20 acres ..... $1,500.00 
(vi)  Minor revisions to planned district development plan ..... $200.00 
(vii)  Vacation of public easement, street or alley (in addition to recording fee) ..... $350.00 
(viii)  Variance from subdivision regulations ..... $350.00 
(ix)  Rezoning from any district to district R-1, (advertising fee shall apply) ..... No application fee 
Rezoning from district R-3 or R-4 to district R-2, (advertising fee shall apply) ..... No application fee 
Rezoning to district H-P ..... No application or advertising fee 
Waiver of the advertising costs for any rezoning application for which there is no application fee may be authorized by the city council upon written request of the applicant. Any such waiver shall be requested and granted or denied prior to the filing of the rezoning application. 
(x)  Annexation petitions (voluntary or agreement) ..... $250.00 (in addition to advertising) 
(xi)  Rezoning to equivalent or lesser intensity Boone County zoning concurrent with annexation petition ..... No fee 
(xii)  Hearing Continuance (applicant request after advertising) ..... $100.00 
(xiii)  Administrative Plat ..... $200.00 + $10.00 per lot 
(xiv)  Plat Vacation (abrogation) ..... $300.00 
(xv)  Cell Tower (new) ..... $1,500.00 
(xvi)  Cell Tower (co-locate) ..... $250.00 
(xvii)  Zoning review letter, per requested address ..... $75.00 
(xviii)  Board of Adjustment: 
Appeal, variance and conditional use application fees, per request ..... $250.00 
Public notice fee (refundable), per request ..... $150.00 
(b)  Complete application required. No application for a permit, approval, or appeal under this chapter shall be reviewed by city staff, or scheduled for a public hearing before the applicable board or commission, and no permit or approval under this chapter shall be issued, until the department has confirmed that required application materials are complete and required fees have been paid. The burden of providing complete and accurate information required by the department for that type of application shall be on the applicant. 
(c)  Notice of public hearing. 
(1)  General. 
(i)  When this chapter requires that a board or commission hold a public hearing prior to making a recommendation or decision, the types of public notice set forth herein shall be provided. 
(ii)  The provisions of this subsection (c) shall be considered met if the city or the applicant has attempted to comply with the standards and has achieved substantial compliance and the requirements of due process have been satisfied, as determined in the sole discretion of the city. Unintentional mistakes in notice due to inaccurate records or failures of notification systems shall not require the delay or cancellation of a public hearing if substantial compliance and due process have been achieved. 
(iii)  The city may decide to provide additional notice beyond that required by this chapter, and no mistake or omission in providing any additional notice will require the delay or cancellation of a public hearing. 
(iv)  When the application that is the subject of the public hearing involves one or more specific lots, tracts, parcels, or areas of land (as opposed to an ordinance text amendment that affects all land in the city or in specific base or overlay zone districts, or affects all development of a certain type), the required notice shall contain an address or description of the general location of the real property to be affected, and a map of the real property to be affected and the surrounding area. 
(v)  Where the required notice will require publication or mailing expenses, those expenses (or a deposit sufficient to cover the expenses) shall be paid by the applicant before the public hearing may be held. 
(vi)  Unless otherwise indicated by a specific provision of this chapter or another city ordinance or regulation, all required notices under this chapter shall be the responsibility of the community development department. 
(2)  Published notice. 
(i)  If the application is for an text or zoning map amendment, a conditional use permit, variance, an appeal, or other request for relief or action from the board or commission, or for any action authorized in this chapter for which public notice is required under applicable law, the director shall cause a notice of the date, time, and location of the public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. The public notice shall include the action requested, including the current and proposed zoning district for each rezoning request, the telephone number of the department, and all other information required under City Code or applicable law. 
(3)  Posted notice. 
(i)  If the application is for a zoning map amendment, a conditional use permit, or a variance, from the board or commission, the director may, as a courtesy, place conspicuous notification signs facing each street abutting the property that is the subject of the application. The failure of the director to place notification signs shall not affect the validity of any action taken on the aforementioned items. 
(ii)  When the application is for a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship under section 29-2.3(c) (historic preservation overlay) the director shall place a conspicuous notification sign facing a public street abutting the property that is the subject of the application. The sign face of notification signs shall be at least five (5) square feet. Notification signs shall contain, or have attached to them, information on the proposed change to the property, the date and time of the historic preservation commission meeting, and the telephone number of the department. 
(4)  Mailed notice. If the application is for a zoning map amendment, a conditional use permit, or an appeal, variance, or other request for relief or action from the board or commission, the department shall send first class mail notice of the public hearing to the addresses of the residences of the land proposed to be rezoned and to the owners of all land within lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet from the boundaries of the land which is the subject of the requested action. 
(5)  Electronic notice. The director may, as a courtesy, send electronic notice to any persons or organizations in the city, or to any governmental, public, or quasi-public organization regarding any matter related to this chapter that may affect the interests of that person or organization, or on any matter on which any such person or organization has requested notice. The failure of the director to send such notice or the failure of any resident or property owner to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any ordinance affecting such land. 
(d)  Decisions under this chapter. 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated in a specific provision of this chapter, the director, department, board, commission, or council authorized to make a decision under this chapter may approve the application, deny the application, or approve the application subject to conditions as stated in subsection (e) below. 
(2)  When this chapter authorizes a director, department, board, commission, or council to make a decision under this chapter, that decision shall be made pursuant to the specific criteria applicable to the application in section 29-6.4 (specific regulatory procedures). If section 29-6.4 does not include specific criteria for that type of decision, the director, department, board, commission, or council shall make the decision based on whether the application complies with this chapter and any regulations authorized by this chapter, and will protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, or unless a different condition is attached to a permit or approval, permits and approvals granted under this chapter are not affected by changes in ownership or tenancy of the property. 
(e)  Conditions on approvals. 
(1)  The department, board, commission, or council may attach conditions to any permit or approval under this chapter, provided that the condition is required to bring the development proposed in the application into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  In addition, the board, commission or council may attach conditions to any permit or approval under this chapter, provided that the condition is required to bring the development proposed in the application into compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city or to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(f)  Appeals. Decisions of the director or the department in the application of the subdivision standards of section 29-5.1 may not be appealed to the board, but requests for design adjustments to the subdivision standards may be made to the commission and/or the council during the subdivision of land process in section 29-5.2. 
(1)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of an administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal, including the section of this chapter that is inconsistent with the decision being appealed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An applicant shall deposit a sum sufficient to pay the costs of advertising as required by statute and ordinance. The director shall inform an applicant of the estimated cost of advertising and require a deposit sufficient to meet the costs upon filing. All unexpended portions of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant after the actual costs of advertising have been met. 
(2)  An appeal stays all proceedings related to the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the officer, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(3)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice of the hearing, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
(4)  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 23277 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 24011 , § 1, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 29-6.4. - Specific regulatory procedures. 
(a)  Zoning compliance. Each application under this chapter that does not require one or more of the specific regulatory procedures in subsections (b) through (q) below shall be reviewed for zoning compliance. Zoning compliance checks shall be conducted by the department, and applications shall be approved if they comply with this chapter. The department's decision may be appealed to the board pursuant to section 29-6.3(f). 
(b)  Building permit. 
(1)  No erection, alteration, or enlargement of a building may begin until the owner of the property on which the building is or will be located, or the owner's authorized agent, has applied to the director for a building permit and the director has issued a building permit authorizing the proposed erection, alteration, or enlargement. The director shall issue a building permit if the application is consistent with the requirements of this chapter, all adopted and applicable building codes of the city, and all other regulations of the city. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be good cause for the revocation of any building permit by the director. A record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the department. 
(2)  Building permits may not be issued for a tract or parcel of land consisting of two (2) or more adjacent lots or one lot and a portion of another lot. 
(3)  A building permit shall only be issued on a lot as defined in section 29-1.11. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new building on a lot that does not have access allowing vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles to pass from a public street directly onto the lot, provided non-residential lots within a unified development may obtain access to a public street to the lot over an irrevocable access easement approved by the city counselor, or designee. 
(5)  No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new building on a lot until the director determines sufficient infrastructure exists, or will exist at the time the building is completed and occupied, to support the proposed use, including, but not limited to adequate utilities, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electricity, streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Requirement. No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural uses, and no building erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with this chapter and with all the building and health laws and ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Vacant land. A certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or the change in the character of the use of land, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Buildings. A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall be applied for in writing coincident with the application for a building permit, and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building or part of the building has been completed in conformity with this chapter. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the director for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. The temporary certificate shall not be construed as altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the property owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises, or any other matter covered by this chapter, and the temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will ensure the safety of the occupants. 
(d)  Variance. 
 
(1)  Procedure. 
(i)  An applicant may apply for a variance from the zoning regulations of this chapter, but no variance may change the review and approval procedure for any type of application set forth in this chapter. 
(ii)  An application for a variance shall be decided by the board pursuant to the criteria shown in subsection (2) below, with the following exceptions: 
(A)  No variances from the subdivision standards in section 29-5.1 are permitted. Requests for deviations from the subdivision standards shall be considered by the commission and decided by council during the subdivision of land procedures in section 29-5.2. 
(B)  Variances in the historic preservation overlay district shall be approved as described in section 29-2.3(c)(14) (variances). 
(C)  Variances in the floodplain overlay district shall be approved as described in section 29-2.3(d)(15) (variance procedures) and section 29-2.3(d)(16) (conditions for variances). 
(D)  Variances from sign regulations shall be approved as described in section 29-6.4(d)(2)(ii) (sign variances). 
(iii)  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, any taxpayer, or any officer or director of the city, may appeal a decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Criteria for approval. The board may approve an application for a variance from the terms and provisions of this chapter if it determines that all of the following are true. 
(i)  General criteria. 
(A)  The variance is required to address practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships related to the shape, size, terrain, location or other factors of the applicant's site, those difficulties or hardships are not generally applicable to property in the area, and the difficulties or hardships were not created by the actions of the applicant; 
(B)  The variance will not have the effect of permitting a use of land that is not indicated as a permitted or conditional use in section 29-3.1 (permitted use table) in the zone district where the property is located, nor shall a variance be granted to modify a standard that operates as part of the definition of any use; 
(C)  The variance will not permit a development that is inconsistent with the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(D)  The variance is the least change from the requirements of this chapter necessary to relieve the difficulty or hardship; and 
(E)  The variance will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the area where the property is located. 
(ii)  Sign variance. The board may only grant a variance to the sign regulations in section 29-4.8 if it also determines (in addition to the criteria in subsection (i) above) that variance will not change both the maximum size and the maximum height of freestanding signs. 
(iii)  Floodplain regulations. In addition to the findings in subsection (i) above, no variance to the floodplain overlay district regulations in section 29-2.3(d) shall have any effect unless the record of the proceeding before the board contains a written opinion of a registered professional engineer that the granting of the variance would not result in any increase in quantity or velocity of flow, degradation of water quality, or negative impacts upon adjoining or downstream properties, nor upon the stormwater system, which shall be accompanied with supporting documentation used by the engineer in rendering the opinion required by this section. 
(e)  Adjustment of form-based controls. 
 
(1)  Minor. An applicant for a permit or approval in the M-DT district may apply for an adjustment to the form-based controls in section 29-4.2 and the director may approve the adjustment if the director determines that all of the following criteria have been met: 
(i)  The proposed adjustment will not result in development that is inconsistent with the intended character of the M-DT district or the regulating plan for the block face including the applicant's property or the block face(s) immediately across the street(s) from the applicant's property; 
(ii)  The proposed adjustment will result in a building and site design of equal or superior quality and visual interest to that required by the application of the form-based controls in section 29-4.2; and 
(iii)  The proposed adjustment will not result in any of the following: 
(A)  Change a minimum or maximum height requirement by more than five (5) percent; 
(B)  Change a finished floor elevation requirement by more than five (5) percent; 
(C)  Change a street wall height, length, or access gate requirement by more than ten (10) percent; 
(D)  Move a required building line further from the street; 
(E)  Move a required building line more than six (6) inches closer to the street; 
(F)  Reduce a minimum percentage of a building frontage that must be built to the required building line by more than five (5) percent of the required length; 
(G)  Move a parking setback line more than five (5) feet closer to any street; 
(H)  Increase the maximum average spacing of building entrances by more than ten (10) percent; 
(I)  Change a minimum or maximum fenestration requirement by more than five (5) percent; or 
(J)  Change the minimum or maximum depth of a building projection by more than five (5) percent. 
(2)  Major. All other variances from the form-based controls in section 29-4.2 shall require an approval by the board, after a public hearing, following the procedure in section 29-6.4(d) but based on the criteria in section 29-6.4(e)(1)(i) and (ii) above instead of the criteria in section 29-6.4(d). 
(f)  Sign permit. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(i)  A permit is required prior to the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving, conversion or maintenance of any sign, except those signs listed in subsection (ii) below or signs otherwise exempted in this chapter or other ordinances or regulations of the city. 
(ii)  The following types of signs may be erected without the issuance of a permit or payment of a permit fee, but each such sign shall meet all the standards and requirements for that type of sign in section 29-4.8 (signs): 
(A)  Signs indicating a home or apartment or non-residential building or structure, or part of a home, apartment, building or structure, for sale, rent, or lease; 
(B)  Construction signs; 
(C)  Memorial signs or tablets when cut into masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material; 
(D)  Government building signs erected on a municipal, state or federal building that announce the name, nature of the occupancy and information as to use of or admission to the premises.; 
(E)  Official signs furnished by the superintendent of the Missouri State Highway Patrol designating an official vehicle inspection station in accordance with RSMo 307.365. One such sign shall be allowed for each street frontage at all such official vehicle inspection stations, in addition to the signs allowed by the following provisions; 
(F)  Noncommercial signs; 
(G)  Commercial flags allowed under section 29-4.8(c)(11); 
(H)  Signs prohibiting peddlers, solicitors, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, when placed upon private residential property; 
(I)  "No Parking" signs that comply with section 29-4.8(e)(8) or section 14-561 of the City Code; provided the sign does not exceed eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in dimension; and 
(J)  Garage sale signs. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(i)  The director shall approve the application if the director determines that it complies with this chapter and all other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(ii)  No permit shall be issued for erection of a sign on property on which a sign plan has been approved under section 29-6.4(g) (sign plan approval), where the sign does not conform with the requirements of that plan, without the removal at the applicant's expense of all signs permitted by the plan and not otherwise permitted. 
(iii)  A permit issued under this section 29-6.4(f) shall become null and void six (6) months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been completed. 
(iv)  The director may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section 29-6.4(f) if the permit holder does not comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Sign plan approval. The owner or lessee of the premises upon which a sign is to be erected may file an application with the board for approval of a sign plan upon forms provided by the city and the board may approve a sign plan allowing different numbers and types of signs permitted on a property if it determines that the following criteria are met. Sign plans are not allowed in a PD district. An adjustment to a permitted sign in a PD district requires an amendment to the PD district approval. 
 
(1)  No unlawful signs shall be permitted; 
(2)  Each sign meets the size, setback and other limitations and requirements for that type or class of sign in section 29-4.8; 
(3)  The sign plan reduces the number of signs that would otherwise be permitted on the property; 
(4)  The sign plan reduces the total square footage of signs that would otherwise be permitted on the property; 
(5)  The sign plan does not violate the spirit or intent of section 29-4.8; and 
(6)  All nonconforming signs on the property or premises shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Temporary parking permit. 
(1)  Procedure. The director may issue temporary permits to allow parking of motor vehicles in a yard area as prohibited in section 29-4.3(f)(3) (parking-use of yards), for a period of up to forty-eight (48) hours on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, if the director determines that the criteria in subsection (2) have been met. 
(2)  Criteria for approval. 
(i)  The parking is necessary for an event of city-wide or area-wide concern that will attract traffic that cannot be effectively served by existing accessible parking facilities; and 
(ii)  The permit will not permit parking in the yard area of a one-family, one-family attached or two-family dwelling. 
(i)  Floodplain development permit. Floodplain development permits shall be approved as described in section 29-2.3(d) (floodplain overlay district). 
(j)  Optional development standards approval. 
(1)  Applicability. 
 
(i)  The provisions of this section apply to: 
(A)  Property owners in the R-2 district that apply to have the development of their property subject to the "cottage" development standards rather than the "current" development standards as shown in Table 29-2-3 and Table 4.2-1. 
(B)  Property owners in the M-N district that apply to have the development of their property subject to the "pedestrian" development standards rather than the "current" development standards as shown in Table 29-2-7 and Table 4.1-2. 
(C)  Property owners in the M-C district that apply to have the development of their property subject to the "transit" development standards rather than the "current" development standards as shown in Table 29-2-8 and Table 4.1-2. 
(ii)  Any such application shall request that the city approve the application of all of the optional development standards available for the zone district in which the property is located, as listed in Tables 29-2-3, 29-2-7, 29-2-8, 4.1-1, and 4.1-2 respectively. The board may not approve an application requesting application of some but not all of the optional development standards listed in the applicable tables for the zone district where the property is located. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(i)  The department shall review the application and make a recommendation to the board, which shall hold a public hearing on the application. 
(ii)  If approved by the board, the applicability of the optional development standards shall be indicated by recording a notice with the recorder of deeds. 
(iii)  The owner of property for which optional development standards have been approved subject to this section 29-6.4(j) may apply to have the "current" development standards reapplied to the property, and the board may approve that application, through the same process and using the same criteria used to approve the optional development standards. 
(3)  Criteria for approval. The board may approve an application for optional development standards if it determines that the following criteria have been met: 
(i)  The use of optional development standards is consistent with the intended character of the area as shown and described in the city's adopted comprehensive plan; 
(ii)  The use of the optional development standards will provide adequate off-street parking for the permitted uses available in the zone district where the property is located, and will not result in significant increases in off-site parking on sections of local neighborhood streets other than those immediately fronting the applicant's property; and 
(iii)  The use of the optional development standards will not create additional traffic congestion or risks to public health and safety in the surrounding area. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness in the HP-O district shall be approved as described in section 29-2.3(c)(8). 
(l)  Landmark and historic district designation. Designation of landmark and historic districts shall be approved as described in sections 29-2.3(c)(5) and (6). If designated, the district shall be added to the list of approved districts in section 29-2.3(c)(7). 
(m)  Conditional use permit. 
(1)  Procedure. 
 
(i)  Except as otherwise specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, the department shall review the application and shall forward a recommendation to the commission based on the criteria listed in subsection (2) below. 
(ii)  The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and shall make a recommendation to the council. The commission's recommendation shall be based on the criteria in subsection (2) below and shall be in writing. 
(iii)  After the public hearing in front of the commission, the commission may make a tentative recommendation and direct the department to draft a proposed written recommendation to be presented to commission at its next meeting. The applicant may also submit a proposed recommendation to the commission. The commission may accept, reject, amend or modify any proposed recommendation and shall submit a proposed recommendation to the council. 
(iv)  The council shall take final action on the application after considering the criteria in subsection (2) below. The council's decision shall be in writing. The council may accept, reject, amend or modify any written recommendation of the commission and adopt such recommendation as its final written decision. 
(v)  An application for a conditional use permit may be combined with an application for a variance, but the board shall decide the application for a variance based on the criteria for approval in section 29-6.4(d) (variance) before the commission holds its public hearing on the conditional use permit. 
(vi)  A conditional use permit is to allow that use on a specific site and may not be transferred to any other site. 
(2)  Criteria for approval. After giving due consideration to the following criteria, the commission may recommend and the council may grant a conditional use permit which may include any conditions deemed necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter. 
(i)  General criteria. 
(A)  The proposed conditional use complies with all standards and provisions in this chapter applicable to the base and overlay zone district where the property is located; 
(B)  The proposed conditional use is consistent with the city's adopted comprehensive plan; 
(C)  The proposed conditional use will be in conformance with the character of the adjacent area, within the same zoning district, in which it is located. In making such a determination, consideration may be given to the location, type and height of buildings or structures and the type and extent of landscaping and screening on the site; 
(D)  Adequate access is provided and is designed to prevent traffic hazards and minimize traffic congestion; 
(E)  Sufficient infrastructure and services exist to support the proposed use, including, but not limited to, adequate utilities, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electricity, and other infrastructure facilities are provided; and 
(F)  The proposed variance will not cause significant adverse impacts to surrounding properties. 
(ii)  Criteria for communication antennas and towers. When considering a conditional use permit application for a communications antenna or tower, the application shall be submitted to the board and the board shall consider the following criteria in addition to those listed in subsection (i) above, and its decision shall be based on substantial evidence in the written record: 
(A)  Whether or not existing towers are located within the geographic area necessary to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(B)  Whether or not existing towers, structures or buildings within the applicant's required geographic area are of sufficient height to meet system engineering requirements; 
(C)  Whether or not existing towers or structures have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(D)  Whether or not the fees, costs, or other contractual terms required by the owner(s) of existing tower(s), structure(s) or building(s) within the required geographic area of the applicant or to retrofit the existing tower(s) or structure(s) are reasonable; 
(E)  Whether or not there are other limiting conditions that render existing towers, structures or buildings within the applicant's required geographic area unsuitable; 
(F)  Whether or not the proposal minimizes the number and size of towers or structures that will be required in the area; 
(G)  Whether or not the applicant has previously failed to take advantage of available shared use opportunities provided by this section or otherwise; and 
(H)  Whether or not the applicant has provided sufficient evidence indicating that the tower will be made available for use by others, subject to reasonable technical limitations and reasonable financial terms. 
(n)  Text and zoning map amendments. 
(1)  General zoning map and text amendments. 
(i)  Applicability. 
 
(A)  Any person, firm, or corporation owning real property within the city, the commission, or the council may file an application to change the text of this chapter. 
(B)  Any person, firm, or corporation owning real property within the city, or the commission, or the council, may file an application to change the boundaries of any base or overlay district on the zoning map, including, but not limited to, proposed changes in the regulating plan for the M-DT district; provided that no person, firm, or corporation may file an application to change the boundaries of a base or overlay zone district or any portion of the regulating plan for property not owned by that person, firm, or corporation. 
(C)  No application for a general zoning map or text amendment shall request changes in the alternative; the requested text and/or boundary change shall be stated as a single proposal to the city. An applicant may include separate requests for changes to more than one section of the chapter, or to the zoning map as applied to more than one lot, tract or parcel in common ownership, so long as no changes are presented in the alternative. 
(D)  No application to amend the zoning map may be filed if it is the same or substantially the same as an application submitted within the previous twelve (12) months that was denied by the council or withdrawn by the applicant after a negative recommendation from the commission. The council may, in its sole discretion, authorize a resubmittal within the twelve-month period after reviewing a written request from the applicant that provides justification for the early resubmittal. 
(ii)  Procedure. 
(A)  The department shall review the application and shall forward copies of the application and supporting documents to other city departments and public or quasi-public agencies affected by the requested change. The departments or agencies to which the application is sent shall, within ten (10) days of receipt of the application and supporting materials, forward their recommendations to the department. The failure of a department or agency to respond within ten (10) days shall be construed as that department or agency having no objections to the proposed change. 
(B)  The department shall make a written recommendation to the commission as to whether the proposed change conforms to the city's adopted comprehensive plan, whether adequate utilities, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electricity, and other infrastructure facilities are available to support development that would be enabled by a proposed zoning map change, and the expected results of the proposed change. 
(C)  The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and shall make a recommendation to the council. 
(D)  The council shall take final action on the application. The council shall not approve a change to the chapter text or zoning map that allows less restrictive development, or that enlarges the area to be rezoned beyond the area that was the subject of the public notice and commission public hearing. 
(E)  If a protest against a change to the zoning map duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of thirty (30) percent or more, either of the area of land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change, or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distant from the boundaries of the area proposed to be changed, the zoning map change amendment shall only be adopted if it receives the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the council then in office and not disqualified from voting under section 2-53.1 of the City Code. An abstention shall not be counted either for or against the amendment. In order to be valid, protest petitions must be filed with the city clerk no later than noon on the Wednesday before the council meeting at which the proposed amendment is scheduled to be considered for passage. 
(F)  The city manager may place a council bill that changes the zoning map, including but not limited to a proposed change in the regulating plan for the M-DT district, or approves a development plan, or amends this chapter, on the council consent agenda if the city manager determines that the following criteria have been met: 
1)  The commission has recommended approval of the application and less than twenty-five (25) percent of the commissioners present voted against the motion to recommend approval; 
2)  The applicant agrees with the commission recommendation, including but not limited to any conditions, limitations, or restrictions to the application as originally filed; 
3)  No protest petition has been timely filed with the city clerk; and 
4)  The commission has not recommended that the proposal be considered under old business. 
(G)  Any council bill to change the zoning map including but not limited to proposed changes in the regulating plan for the M-DT district; placed on the consent agenda shall be removed and placed under old business at the request of any council member. The council may remove any such bill from the consent agenda and place it under old business at the council meeting at which the council bill is scheduled to be considered for passage. 
(2)  Zoning map amendments to PD district. 
(i)  Applicability. 
 
(A)  Applications to change the zoning map to designate land into a PD district, or to modify a PD district, shall be made, reviewed, and decisions made as described in section 29-6.4(n)(1) above, except to the extent those requirements are modified in this subsection. 
(B)  Rezoning to a PD district requires council approval of a zoning map amendment, a statement of intent for the proposed development, and a development plan for the property. The statement of intent and development plan shall be binding on the owner and its successors and assigns. Later development applications must be consistent with the approved statement of intent and development plan, or the development plan will need to be modified by council action. 
(ii)  Approval procedure. 
(A)  Before filing an application, the applicant must first meet with the director for a concept review of the proposal. The concept review is an informal discussion to discuss land use and development concepts, consistency with the city's adopted comprehensive plan, applicable sections of this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations, and other concerns about the impacts of the proposed change that may be raised. 
The application shall be accompanied by a statement of intent including, at a minimum, those items listed below and a development plan meeting the city's requirements as defined within the UDC Administrative Manual. The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the department and commission, and shall be the subject of final action by council, simultaneously. No application for a zoning map change to a PD district shall be approved without approval of an accompanying statement of intent or development plan. The required statement of intent shall, at a minimum, include the following items: 
1)  The uses proposed in the PD district using the same names for uses, or combinations of those names, shown in Table 29-3.1. Such list may not contain any use that is not shown in Table 29-3.1 as that table appears at the time of the application; 
2)  The type(s) of dwelling units proposed and any accessory buildings proposed; 
3)  The maximum number of dwelling units and bedroom mix (multi-family only) proposed and the development density (net and gross); 
4)  Minimum lot sizes, if applicable, maximum building height, minimum building setbacks from perimeter and interior streets, other property lines and minimum setbacks between buildings; 
5)  The total number of parking spaces proposed (on-site or off-site) and the parking ratio per dwelling unit. Where off-site parking is proposed documentation shall be provided showing compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
6)  The minimum percentage of the entire site to be maintained in open space, shown by the percent in landscaping and the percent left in existing vegetation; and 
7)  Any amenities proposed, such as swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts, hiking trails or club houses. 
(B)  The application materials shall document whether adequate utilities, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electricity, and other infrastructure facilities are available to support the proposed development. 
(C)  If the proposed PD development will require subdivision or resubdivision of land, the requirements of section 29-5 regarding subdivision of land shall apply, but the application for a PD district and subdivision of land may be completed simultaneously as described in section 29-5.2(c)(2). Any design modifications to the subdivision regulations proposed as part of the PD application shall be clearly stated on the PD development plan. Such design modifications shall be considered along with commission and council review of the plan. 
(D)  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in a PD district until the development plan has been approved by the council. 
(E)  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in a PD district that requires subdivision or resubdivision of land until a final subdivision plat for the property on which permits are requested has been approved by council. 
(F)  If the PD includes buildings other than single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings, with each such dwelling located on an individual platted lot, no building or footing and foundation permit shall be issued until the site plan filed with the application for a building permit has been reviewed by the director for compliance with the approved development plan. 
(G)  If construction consistent with the approved development plan has not begun within three (3) years after council approval of the development plan or a major modification of the development plan, the development plan shall expire and be of no force or effect, and no permit for development within the PD district shall be approved until a new development plan is approved pursuant to the same procedures used to approve the initial PD district. Prior to expiration of the PD development plan, the council may extend the time for a one-year period, on a one-time-only basis. A request for a time extension must be made in the form of a letter signed by the property owner or his agent. 
(iii)  Modification procedure. 
(A)  Minor changes to an approved development plan may be approved by the director. If the PD district contains any single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings, minor changes are those that: 
1)  Comply with the original statement of intent; 
2)  Do not increase the project density in total or in areas of the PD; 
3)  Do not change the dwelling unit type (attached, detached, multi-family) being altered; 
4)  Do not increase the height or size of any building; 
5)  Do not change the size or nature of public or private infrastructure; 
6)  Do not change the project amenities such as landscaping, open space, common area or recreational facilities; 
7)  Do not rearrange the locations of buildings; 
8)  Do not increase any parking area; 
9)  Do not change the permitted use of any structure; and 
10)  Do not create a potential increase in traffic. 
(B)  If the PD district contains does not contain any single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings, minor changes are those that: 
1)  Do not increase the height or size of any building; 
2)  Do not increase any parking area; 
3)  Do not rearrange the locations of buildings; 
4)  Do not change the size or nature of public or private infrastructure; and 
5)  Do not change the project amenities such as landscaping, open space, common area or recreational facilities. 
(C)  Changes that do not meet the criteria for a minor change under subsection (a) or (b) above, as applicable, shall follow the same procedure as if it were a new development plan for the PD district. 
(3)  Zoning map amendment to UC-O district. Applications to change the zoning map to designate land into a UC-O district, or to modify a UC-O district, shall be made, reviewed, and decisions made as described in section 29-6.4(n)(1) above, except to the extent those requirements are modified in section 29-2.3(a) (UC-O district). 
(4)  Zoning map amendment to SR-O district. Applications to change the zoning map to designate land into a SR-O district, or to modify a SR-O district, shall be made, reviewed, and decisions made as described in section 29-6.4(n)(1) above, except to the extent those requirements are modified in section 29-2.3(b) (SR-O district). 
(5)  Zoning map amendment to R-MH district. 
(i)  Applicability. 
(A)  Applications to change the zoning map to designate land into an R-MH district, or to modify an R-MH district, shall be made, reviewed, and decisions made as described in section 29-6.4(n)(1) above, except to the extent those requirements are modified in this subsection. 
(B)  Applications to change the zoning map to designate land into an R-MH district require council approval of both a zoning map amendment and a development plan for the property that shall be binding on the owner and its successors and assigns. Later development applications must be consistent with the approved development plan, or the development plan will need to be modified by council action. 
(ii)  Procedure. 
(A)  Before filing an application, the applicant must first meet with the director for a concept review of the proposal. The concept review is an informal discussion to discuss land use and development concepts, consistency with the city's adopted comprehensive plan, applicable sections of this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations, and other concerns about the impacts of the proposed change that may be raised. 
(B)  The application shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan meeting the city's requirements, and the application and development plan shall be reviewed by the department and commission, and shall be the subject of final action by council, simultaneously. No application for a zoning map change to an R-MH district shall be approved without approval of an accompanying preliminary development plan. 
(C)  If council approves the zoning map change ordinance and the preliminary development plan, with or without conditions, the applicant shall submit a final R-MH development plan to the director. The director shall approve the application if it complies with this chapter, all other city ordinances and regulations, and is consistent with the preliminary development plan as approved by council. 
(D)  If the proposed R-MH development will require subdivision or resubdivision of land, the requirements of section 29-5 regarding subdivision of land shall apply, but the application for a R-MH district and subdivision of land may be completed simultaneously as described in section 29-5.2(c)(2). Any design modification to the subdivision regulations proposed as part of the R-MH application shall be clearly stated on the development plan. Such design modification shall be considered along with commission and council review of the plan. 
(E)  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in an R-MH district until the final development plan has been approved by the director. 
(F)  No electrical permit shall be granted for a manufactured home located in an R-MH district with an approved final development plan unless the placement of the manufactured home is in compliance with the approved final development plan. 
(G)  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in an R-MH district that requires subdivision or resubdivision of land until a final subdivision plat for the property on which permits are requested has been approved by council. 
(iii)  Enlarging existing manufactured home parks. An application to enlarge manufactured home parks existing on the effective date shall be subject to all provisions of this section relating to requirements for adoption of a new R-MH district. When a final development plan is approved for an extension of a manufactured home park existing on the effective date the screening requirements of section 29-4.4 shall apply to the entire manufactured home park. 
(o)  Comprehensive plan amendment. 
 
(i)  Applicability. This procedure may be used to amend the city's adopted comprehensive plan or to adopt a new comprehensive plan. An application to amend the comprehensive plan may be filed by the commission, the council, or any resident of the city. An application to adopt a new comprehensive plan may be filed by the commission or the council. 
(ii)  Procedure. 
(A)  The director shall review the application and make a report to the commission regarding the areas of change from the adopted comprehensive plan and the anticipated long-term impacts of those changes on the growth, development, and sustainability, and affordability of the city, the investment climate in the city, and the efficiency of city administration. 
(B)  The commission shall review the application, hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, and make a recommendation to council. 
(C)  The council shall take final action on the application. 
(p)  Tall structures in the M-DT district. 
(i)  Applicability. This procedure shall apply to proposed construction of buildings located upon frontages designated as urban general/urban general storefront on the M-DT regulating plan that seek to exceed the permitted maximum building height as defined within section 29-4.2 of this chapter. 
(ii)  Procedure. All proposed buildings that exceed the maximum building height shall require council approval. Requests for tall structure approval in district M-DT shall require a petition on a form provided by the director and shall be referred to the commission for a recommendation and council consideration of an ordinance approving the tall structure in the same manner and following the same procedural steps as described in section 29-6.4(n) of this chapter. 
Petitioners shall provide the planning and zoning commission with preliminary building plans (elevations and representative floor plans), site plan including adjacent streets and alleys, and a shade study. A "shade study" represents, in graphic form, the shade cast by the tall structure on adjacent properties and streets, by time of day and by season. An example of adverse impacts revealed by a shade study would be complete shading of rooftop solar panels mounted on an adjacent, lower building. 
A tall building may be approved by the council if it satisfies the following criteria: 
(A)  The height is consistent with adopted city plan recommendations for maximum building height in the specific location; 
(B)  The additional height will not have an adverse impact on the availability of air and light to adjacent buildings and public streets; adequate spacing exists between the proposed building and openings in the walls of an adjacent building or between the proposed building and rooftop spaces used as amenities to allow the penetration of sunlight to those openings or rooftop spaces; 
(C)  The additional height will not create demand on any public utility or public infrastructure in excess of available capacity, as concluded by an engineering analysis of the projected utility loads and the existing and planned capacities of infrastructure to accommodate it; and 
(D)  Public sidewalks, crosswalks, and streets adjacent to the site are of sufficient capacity to handle the anticipated pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by the tall structure, as concluded by a traffic impact analysis.  
Sec. 29-6.5. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Continuation, changes, and discontinuance. 
(i)  Any use of land or buildings that was legally created, or that was legal in Boone County on the date that land was annexed into the city, may be continued, and may be transferred or sold to other owners or tenants, whether or not that use complies with the provisions of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located, subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  A nonconforming use of land outside of a building shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of land on which it occurred on the date it became nonconforming or the annexation date. 
(B)  A nonconforming use of land inside a conforming building may be extended throughout the building that existed on the date the use became nonconforming or the annexation. The board may grant permission for an extension of a conforming building to allow expansion of a nonconforming use in that building by up to twenty-five (25) percent upon a showing that relocation of the use to a district in which it would be a permitted or conditional use would be impossible or impracticable. 
(C)  If a nonconforming use of land or buildings is discontinued for any reason for a period of more than twelve (12) months, any future use of such premises shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such time period may be extended upon application to the board. 
(D)  A nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use that the director determines will have fewer negative impacts on the surrounding area than the use it replaces, provided, that the original nonconforming use shall not be restarted. 
(ii)  A nonconforming use of land or buildings, if changed to a conforming use, may not be thereafter changed to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of buildings that is changed to a nonconforming use that the director determines will have fewer negative impacts on the surrounding area may not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming use that the director determines will have more negative impacts on the surrounding area. 
(b)  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Continuation and change. Any structure that was legally constructed, or that was legal in Boone County on the date that land was annexed into the city, may continue in use, and may be transferred or sold to other owners or tenants, whether or not that structure complies with the provisions of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located, subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  Any expansion of a nonconforming structure shall conform to the building setbacks and all other dimensional standards applicable to new construction on the site. 
(ii)  In the M-DT district, where a legal nonconforming building is located off the required building line, additions shall conform as nearly as practicable. Additions are not required to extend to the required building line. Existing building facades are not required to be retrofit to conform to M-DT fenestration or other M-DT façade requirements. 
(iii)  If the structure is occupied by a nonconforming use, any expansion of the nonconforming use into the building expansion area will require approval of the board pursuant to section 29-6.5(a) above. 
(2)  Damage and destruction. 
(i)  If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, an act of God, nature, or a public enemy, and the damage to the structure does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of its reasonable value, excluding foundations, the structure may be reconstructed in substantially the same configuration as before the damage or destruction. If the damage to the structure exceeds seventy-five (75) percent of its reasonable value, excluding foundations, the structure may only be reconstructed in compliance with this chapter, as applied to the zone district where the structure is located. 
(ii)  The provisions of subsection (i) shall not apply to structures containing only residential dwelling units (and permitted home occupations in those dwelling units), which may be reconstructed in substantially the same configuration as before the damage or destruction, regardless of the amount of damage or destruction. 
(c)  Nonconforming lots. 
(1)  A lot that does not conform to the standards in this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located may nevertheless be used for any use for which a conforming lot may be used, but must comply with all dimensional standards in section 29-4.1, all form-based controls in section 29-4.2, and all other provisions of this chapter applicable to property in that zoning district. 
(2)  If the State of Missouri or the city acquires a portion of a tract or parcel of land for right-of-way and the remaining property thereby becomes nonconforming for the zoning district in which it is located, the property shall be treated as a conforming property. 
(d)  Nonconforming site features. Conforming land uses and structures on parcels or tracts of land that do not comply with one or more of the standards in section 29-4.3 (parking and loading), 29-4.4 (landscaping and screening,) or 29-4.5 (exterior lighting), may be expanded, revised, or redeveloped subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The expansion, revision, or redevelopment must be to land uses and structures permitted in the zoning district where the property is located; 
(2)  The expansion, revision, or redevelopment must not increase any nonconformity with the standards in section 29-4.3, 29-4.4 or 29-4.5; 
(3)  Any expansion or change in land uses that increases the amount of parking required on the property shall require that the net increase in required parking be provided on-site; and 
(4)  Any redevelopment of the property that results in the demolition of an existing principal structure, as defined by the adopted building code or is more than seventy-five (75) percent of the building, and/or construction of new principal structures shall require that the property be brought into compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  All signs which have been lawfully erected shall be deemed to be legal and lawful signs and may be maintained subject to the provisions of this section 29-6.5(e). 
(2)  Nonconforming signs that become deteriorated or dilapidated to the extent of over sixty (60) percent of the physical value they would have if they had been maintained in good repair must be removed within sixty (60) days. Nonconforming signs that are damaged to the extent of sixty (60) per cent or less of their physical value must be repaired within sixty (60) days from date of notification, or must be removed. Nonconforming signs that are damaged, other than by vandalism, to the extent of over sixty (60) per cent of their physical value must be removed within sixty (60) days of receiving such damage or brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming signs that are damaged by vandalism to the extent of over sixty (60) percent of their physical value must be restored within sixty (60) days or removed or brought into compliance with the provisions of this section 29-6.5(e). 
(3)  Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged or increased in height. Nonconforming signs that are enlarged or increased in height in violation of this section must be removed. 
(4)  Nonconforming signs may not be relocated except when such relocation brings the sign into compliance with this section 29-6.5(e). Nonconforming signs that are relocated in violation of this section must be removed. 
(5)  The sign face of a nonconforming sign may be altered if the sign face is not enlarged beyond the maximum area allowed by this section 29-6.5(e).  
Sec. 29-6.6. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this chapter to: 
(1)  Use any land or structure for a purpose or in a manner not permitted by this chapter, or without any permits or approvals required from the city before commencing that use of land or structure; 
(2)  Subdivide any land whether through deed, survey, or other means, without compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Expand, redevelop, or renovate any area of land or structure for which a permit or approval is required by this chapter without first obtaining those permits and approvals; 
(4)  Operate any business or land use for which the city or the state or federal government requires a license, permit, or approval, without first obtaining those permits and approvals; 
(5)  Park a motor vehicle in the residential yard in violation of section 29-4.3(f)(3) and fail to remove it within two business (2) days after notice from the city to do so, unless the property owner has first obtained a temporary permit for such parking under section 29-6.4(h); 
(6)  Improve land or construct or modify structures in a manner that does not comply with any permits, approvals, or development plans, or that does not comply with any conditions on such permits, approvals, or development plans approved pursuant to this chapter; 
(7)  Use land or construct or modify structures in any PD district in a manner that is inconsistent with the statement of intent for that zoning district; 
(8)  Obtain any permit or approval required under this chapter based on false statements or misrepresentation of facts in any application, documents, correspondence, testimony, or verbal communications with the city; 
(9)  Continue a land use or construction, modification, use, or occupancy of a land or structures after the city has suspended a permit or approval or issued a stop work order, until the city reinstates the permit or approval or withdraws the stop work order; 
(10)  Fail to install improvements required by this chapter or by an agreement between the city and the property owner or subdivider by the times required by this chapter or the agreement; and 
(11)  Take any other act that is prohibited by this chapter, or fail to act when that act is required by this chapter. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  In order to enforce compliance with this chapter, the director and the director of public works, as applicable, are empowered to take the following actions: 
(i)  Cause a building or premises to be inspected for violations of this chapter, with such inspection occurring during normal business hours unless there is an imminent threat to public health or safety; 
(ii)  Order in writing that the owner or occupant of the property on which a violation of this chapter is found correct that violation within a reasonable time; 
(iii)  Take action to prevent or to stop any use of land or structures, construction or repair of structures, or any division of land that constitutes a violation of this chapter, and/or to prevent the occupancy of the land or structure on which or in which the violation has occurred; 
(iv)  Revoke or suspend any permit or approval obtained through a false statement or misrepresentation of fact, or if the permit holder fails to comply with the terms or conditions of the permit or approval, with reinstatement of the permit or approval to occur only after the violation of this chapter has been remedied; 
(v)  Refuse to issue any permit or approval, including but not limited to a building permit or certificate of occupancy, for any land use or structure that would violate this chapter, or that contains an existing violation of this chapter that has not been remedied after notice from the city; 
(vi)  Remove any unlawful signs on street rights-of-way and property owned by the city; 
(vii)  Authorize the city's legal officers to file a lawsuit or court proceeding to require compliance with this chapter and/or correction of any violation of this chapter or to require performance of claim damages for any failure to perform duties required by an agreement between the city and a property owner or subdivider related to a permit or approval under this chapter; 
(viii)  Bring an action to require the owner of any property designated as a landmark or located in a landmark district who performs work in violation of this chapter or the requirements of section 29-2.3(c) to return the landmark or property to its appearance and setting prior to the violation, to the greatest extent practicable, and to impose a "demolition without a permit fee" under chapter 6 of the City Code; and 
(ix)  Take any action permitted by state law or the city's charter to abate a violation of this chapter that constitutes a nuisance, including without limitation taking those actions listed in sections 12A-201 through 12A-207 (nuisances). 
(2)  The enforcement actions set forth in subsection (1) above are cumulative and not exclusive. The city may pursue any available civil remedies, in any order, and may pursue more than one remedy at a time, and the city's choice to pursue one type of enforcement does not limit its ability to pursue different or additional enforcement actions until the violation has been corrected. 
(3)  Any decision by the director or the director of public works to pursue any of the enforcement actions listed in subsection (1) (except orders for inspection, removal of signs on public rights-of-way and city owned property, and decisions to file an action in court) may be appealed by the board pursuant to section 29-6.3(f) if filed within ten (10) days after notice of that decision. A timely appeal suspends the enforcement action pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Generally. The following provisions apply to all violations of this chapter unless an alternative penalty for a specific type of violation is listed in subsection (c)(2) below: 
(i)  The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of this chapter has occurred, or the lessees or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has occurred, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation occurred, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(ii)  A first misdemeanor under subsection (c)(1)(i) above shall be punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every day that such violation continues or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(iii)  For the second and subsequent offenses involving the same violation at the same building or premises, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue, by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(iv)  Any such person who, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of this chapter in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(2)  Special penalties. 
(i)  Violations of section 29-5 (subdivision standards). 
(A)  Any person violating the provisions of section 29-5 shall pay to the city a penalty not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each lot transferred or sold; the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the penalty. 
(B)  Any transfer or sale of land in violation of section 29-5 shall be deemed to be null and void and the city may enjoin or vacate the transfer or sale by legal action, and may recover the penalty in such action. 
(C)  Any person violating the provisions of section 29-5, in a manner that does not involve the transfer of lots or parcels of land shall pay to the city a penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue, or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(ii)  Violations of climax forest requirements. Every one thousand (1,000) square feet of climax forest removed, destroyed or damaged in violation of section 29-4.4 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(iii)  Violations of section 29-4.8 (sign standards). 
(A)  The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of section 29-4.8 exists, or the lessees or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where a violation of section 29-4.8 exists, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any sign or premises in which a violation of section 29-4.9 exists, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall pay to the city a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that such violation continues, unless subsection (b) below applies. 
(B)  If the violation of section 29-4.8 is or was willful, the penalty for violation shall be a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue or imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(C)  Any such person who, having been served with an order, within ten (10) days after such service shall continue to violate any provision of section 29-4.8 in the manner named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(iv)  Violation of section 29-4.3(F)(3) (parking - use of yards). Any person found in violation of section 29-4.3(f)(3) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  
APPENDIX A. - STREET STANDARDS 
 
Sec. A.1. - Design standards for streets, sidewalks and bikeways. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The 2025 Transportation Plan established a functional classification system consisting of major arterials, minor arterials, major collectors and neighborhood collectors. In developing new design standards, it was determined that local residential and local non-residential streets should also be included. This provides for an integrated street system. 
(2)  A roadway system must balance the conflicting goals of traffic movement and access to land. Arterials are primarily for the movement of through traffic; collectors provide equal attention to land access and through traffic; and local streets provide access to individual parcels of land at the expense of through traffic. Selecting the proper roadway design for each functional classification is vital to development of a system of roadways which provides the needed connectivity between all areas of the city as well as the capacity to handle future traffic volume. 
(3)  Design elements encompassing right-of-way width, pavement width, number of travel lanes, bike lane width, use of curb and gutter, sidewalk and pedway width, parking, driveways, buffer strip width, and utility easements must be appropriately selected to provide the function, character, traffic volume and speed desired. 
(4)  Major streets serve a development pattern that ranges from low density residential to intensely developed commercial centers and corridors. To meet such varied conditions and address neighborhood livability factors requires an array of design approaches. A "one standard fits all" is not consistent with traffic needs or the wide variety of situations encountered. 
(5)  In several of the street types, an alternative design will be considered or may be required when conditions specified in the standards are found to exist. This language was drafted specifically to allow a design appropriate for the land use and traffic conditions being created by a proposed development. The alternative design may be requested by the developer or recommended by city staff or the commission. Criteria are included to provide guidance in selecting the proper street design to match the expected conditions. If the alternative design exceeds the standard design for a particular street type, it shall be presumed to satisfy these requirements. In all other cases, the final decision shall rest with the council. 
(b)  Application of design standards. 
(1)  The design standards are intended to result in a more predictable and acceptable outcome for street improvements. Due to the wide range of circumstances, however, the standards need to be applied with a certain amount of flexibility. Street construction activity consists of building completely new streets as well as making minor improvements to existing streets. Many existing streets will not be changed at all in the next several years while others will be candidates for additional lanes, intersection reconfiguration, or major reconstruction. Unlike new streets, existing streets have physical constraints to being retrofitted to meet new standards due to a narrow right-of-way or the proximity of buildings, utilities or mature trees. Additionally, adjacent property owners often voice concern about more traffic, speeding, noise, storm water runoff, and other issues. 
(2)  To deal with the application of design standards, two (2) categories of improvements have been developed. Major projects consist of significant improvements to the street system and the design standards are to be interpreted as requirements. In situations where it is not feasible, practical or desirable for a proposed street improvement to meet the required standards, a design exception may be considered and approved by the council as part of the public hearing process. Major projects include: 
(i)  Construction of a new street; 
(ii)  Major reconstruction of an existing street (e.g. upgrade to city standards); and 
(iii)  Major widening of an existing street (e.g. addition of one or more lanes). 
(3)  For minor improvements the design standards are regarded as a guideline rather than an absolute requirement. In such cases, if the standards are not attainable a design exception will not be required. Minor projects include: 
(i)  Resurfacing or partial reconstruction of the pavement; 
(ii)  Installation of traffic calming devices; 
(iii)  Intersection improvements (e.g. traffic signals, turn lanes, etc.); 
(iv)  Reconstruction resulting in incidental widening; and 
(v)  Installing bike lanes or sidewalks on existing streets. 
(4)  Major projects typically entail significant citizen input in evaluating location and design alternatives. Meetings are held with interested parties such as property owners and residents followed by public hearings by the council. Citizen input on minor projects varies. 
(5)  Resurfacing usually involves public notice but little citizen involvement whereas traffic calming measures can entail extensive citizen participation in the location and design process. 
(6)  In regards to private development, the proposed standards would normally only apply to undeveloped land that is being platted for the first time. The standards could, however, apply to a previously developed area under two (2) circumstances: 
(i)  The area is being replatted to create a different street and lot layout for redevelopment and the construction of new buildings; or 
(ii)  The area is being rezoned to allow more intensive development (e.g. changing from residential to commercial and thus from residential to non-residential streets). 
(7)  Development occurring within the M-DT district shall meet the M-DT urban space standards section below, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(8)  A request for an exception to the design standards may be submitted at the time of preliminary plat review and shall be processed as a variance as provided by the subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Local residential street design standards. 
(1)  Residential streets provide direct access to residential dwellings and other allowed uses. They should be designed for this intended function and exhibit characteristics which contribute to a safe and attractive living environment. This can be achieved by providing a diversity of street types, each serving a specific role. Right-of-way and pavement widths less than the general standard should provide acceptable levels of access, safety and convenience for all users, including emergency service providers, while enabling enhanced site design and creation of attractive streetscapes. Subdivision layouts should avoid the creation of pass through routes for external traffic while allowing local drivers to move easily to and from higher order streets. 
(i)  The design standard for a typical residential street shall be as follows: 
(A)  Right-of-way: Fifty (50) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Twenty-eight (28) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
(C)  Turnarounds: Terminal streets shall have a turnaround at the closed end with an outside right-of-way diameter of ninety-four (94) feet and a roadway pavement diameter of seventy-six (76) feet; 
(D)  Drainage: Curb and gutter system; 
(E)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(F)  Parking: Permitted on both sides of the street; 
(G)  Buffer strip: Five (5) feet wide with trees permitted in the right-of-way subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(H)  Utility easements: Ten (10) feet on both sides adjacent to the right-of-way. The city and public utility providers will not be responsible for the restoration of any landscaping placed within utility easements that is removed or damaged as a result of constructing, repairing or maintaining public utilities. 
(ii)  In place of the typical residential street, a request may be submitted at the time of preliminary plat review for approval of one or more of the following alternative streets: 
(A)  A residential feeder will be considered or may be required when one or more of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and adjacent zoning allows duplex or multi-family dwellings; 2) the expected average daily traffic (ADT) exceeds five hundred (500); or 3) the street collects localized traffic within a subdivision and leads to a collector or arterial street. A residential feeder shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Fifty (50) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty-two (32) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
4)  Buffer strip: Three (3) feet wide with only ornamental trees permitted; and 
5)  Other features: Same as a residential street. 
(B)  An access street will be considered when all of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and adjacent zoning is single-family detached dwellings; 2) the street is no longer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet; and 3) the expected ADT is less than two hundred fifty (250) feet. An access street shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Forty-four (44) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Twenty-four (24) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Turnarounds: Terminal streets shall have a turnaround at the closed end with an outside right-of-way diameter of ninety-four (94) feet and a roadway diameter of seventy-six (76) feet; 
4)  Sidewalks: Same as a residential street, except sidewalks shall not be required on cul-de-sacs less than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length; 
5)  Parking: Permitted on one side only; and 
6)  Other features: Same as a residential street. 
(2)  The design standard for residential alleys shall be as follows: 
(i)  Right-of-way: Eighteen (18) feet wide; 
(ii)  Pavement: Sixteen (16) feet wide measured from edge of pavement (no curb and gutter); 
(iii)  Travel lanes: Two-way traffic allowed; 
(iv)  Maximum length: Five hundred (500) feet between connecting streets; 
(v)  Parking: Parking in alley prohibited; 
(vi)  Setbacks: Garages, carports and open parking spaces shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the right-of-way; and 
(vii)  Utility lines: Both overhead and underground utility lines may be installed in the right-of-way. 
(d)  Local non-residential street design standards. 
(1)  A non-residential street is a low volume, low speed street which provides access to commercial, industrial, institutional, and other intensive land uses. Generally, only two (2) travel lanes are needed. In some cases, these streets may carry considerable truck traffic, require wider driveways for access to loading docks, and have a need for on-street parking. Direct connections to collector and arterial streets are essential. 
(i)  The design standard for a non-residential street shall be as follows: 
(A)  Right-of-way: Sixty-six (66) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Thirty-six (36) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
(C)  Turnarounds: Terminal streets shall have a turnaround at the closed end with an outside right-of-way diameter of ninety-four (94) feet and a roadway diameter of seventy-six (76) feet; 
(D)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(E)  Parking: Permitted on both sides of the street; 
(F)  Buffer strip: Nine (9) feet wide with trees permitted in the right-of-way subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(G)  Utility easements: Same as a standard residential street. 
(ii)  In place of the typical non-residential street, a request may be submitted at the time of preliminary plat review for approval of one or more of the following alternatives: 
(A)  An Option A street will be considered when two (2) or more of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and adjacent zoning is commercial, light industrial, office, and/or multi-family residential; 2) the expected ADT is less than four thousand (4,000); 3) the street is primarily intended to provide access to property and secondarily to serve through traffic; and 4) there is a nearby collector or arterial street to accommodate future traffic from surrounding land. Option A streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty (60) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty (30) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
4)  Other features: Same as a typical non-residential street. 
(B)  An Option B street will be considered when all of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and adjacent zoning is office and/or multi-family residential; 2) the street is no longer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet; 3) the expected ADT is less than one thousand (1,000); 4) the street is intended to provide access to property and not serve through traffic; and 5) there is a nearby collector or arterial street to accommodate future traffic from the development of surrounding land. Option B streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty (60) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty (30) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Parking: Permitted on one side only; 
4)  Buffer strip: Nine (9) feet wide with trees permitted as a typical non-residential street; and 
5)  Other features: Same as a typical non-residential street. 
(C)  An Option C street will be considered or may be required when two (2) or more of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and adjacent zoning is intensive commercial and/or industrial; 2) the expected ADT exceeds four thousand (4,000); 3) the street will serve a significant amount of through traffic; 4) the street will connect to two (2) collector or arterial streets; 5) there will be a significant number of left turns to and from abutting driveways; and 6) there will be a significant amount of truck traffic. Option C streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty-six (66) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty-eight (38) feet wide measured from back of curb to provide for two (2) travel lanes thirteen (13) feet wide and a twelve (12) foot two-way center turn lane; 
3)  Turnarounds: Terminal streets are not permitted; 
4)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; and 
5)  Other features: Same as a typical non-residential street. 
(e)  Neighborhood collector street design standards. 
(1)  A neighborhood collector is intended to collect traffic from surrounding residential areas and connect to major streets; serve local, non-residential land uses such as schools, churches, and parks; and promote neighborhood livability. These streets provide two (2) traffic lanes for shared use by vehicles and bicycles at low to moderate driving speeds (thirty (30) mph), accommodate an ADT volume of one thousand five hundred (1,500) to three thousand five hundred (3,500) vehicles, and generally, connect to only one arterial or major collector street. They may also provide direct access to property and contain on-street parking. 
(i)  Two (2) types of neighborhood collector streets are allowed. Either type may be required or proposed provided a statement of justification is submitted for the subject location. 
(A)  Option A streets are intended to provide direct access to property and provide some periodic on-street parking for abutting uses. The design standard shall be as follows: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty (60) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty-four (34) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Travel lanes: Two (2) travel lanes each thirteen and a half (13.5) feet wide; 
4)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
5)  Parking: Permitted on one side of the street only. A bulb-out may be built near intersections to create recessed parking, calm traffic and assist pedestrians; 
6)  Driveways: Permitted on both sides of the street; 
7)  Buffer Strip: Seven (7) feet wide with trees permitted in the right-of-way subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
8)  Utility easements: Same as a standard residential street. 
(B)  Option B streets are intended to primarily collect neighborhood traffic and not provide direct access to property. The design standard shall be as follows: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty (60) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty (30) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Travel lanes: Two (2) shared travel lanes each fifteen (15) feet wide; 
4)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
5)  Parking/Driveways: Not permitted on either side; 
6)  Buffer strip: Nine (9) feet wide with trees allowed as for Option A streets; and 
7)  Other features: Same as Option A streets. 
(f)  Major collector street design standards. 
(1)  A major collector is a mid-volume, multi-modal street (ADT of three thousand five hundred (3,500) to eight thousand five hundred (8,500) vehicles) which collects traffic from several neighborhoods and moves the traffic to the arterial network. These streets provide access to retail centers, office complexes, institutional uses such as colleges and hospitals, and multi-family residential areas. Major collectors typically have two (2) undivided travel lanes with a left turn lane at key intersections. A two-way center turn lane or intermittent raised median may be provided to manage access at high traffic locations. Typically, direct access to one and two-family residences is prohibited with consolidated driveways allowed for other uses when controlled as to location. No on-street parking is permitted. 
(i)  The design standard for a typical major collector street shall be as follows: 
(A)  Right-of-way: Sixty-six (66) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Thirty-six (36) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
(C)  Travel lanes: Two (2) lanes each twelve (12) feet wide; 
(D)  Bike lanes: Striped bike lane on both sides six (6) feet from back of curb; 
(E)  Sidewalks: Five (5) feet wide on both sides constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(F)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
(G)  Driveways: Controlled as to location and width for access management purposes; 
(H)  Buffer strip: Nine (9) feet wide with trees permitted in the right-of-way located four (4) feet from edge of street and sidewalk subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(I)  Utility easements: Same as a standard residential street. 
(ii)  In place of the typical major collector, a request may be submitted at the time of preliminary plat review for approval of one or more of the following alternative streets: 
(A)  An Option A street will be considered or may be required when the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and zoning of nearby land is one- or two-family residential and/or large open land areas such as parks, churches, and schools; and 2) the street is intended to serve through traffic and not provide direct access to property. Option A streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Sixty-six (66) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Thirty-two (32) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Travel lanes: Two (2) shared use travel lanes each sixteen (16) feet wide; 
4)  Bike lanes: No striped bike lanes; 
5)  Sidewalk/Pedway: A five-foot wide sidewalk on one side and an eight-foot wide pedway on the other side constructed one-foot inside the right-of-way; 
6)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
7)  Driveways: Not permitted on either side; 
8)  Buffer strip: Nine (9) to ten (10) feet wide with trees permitted as for a typical major collector; and 
9)  Other features: Same as a typical major collector. 
(B)  An Option B street will be considered or may be required when one or more of the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use and/or zoning of adjacent land is retail commercial, office, institutional or multi-family residential; 2) the expected ADT exceeds six thousand (6,000); and 3) the street will or is likely to connect to two (2) arterial streets. Option B streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
1)  Right-of-way: Seventy-six (76) feet wide; 
2)  Pavement: Forty-four (44) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
3)  Travel lanes: Two (2) shared use travel lanes each sixteen (16) feet wide plus a center two-way left-turn lane twelve (12) feet wide; 
4)  Bike lanes: No striped bike lanes; 
5)  Pedway/Sidewalk: An eight-foot wide pedway on one side and a five-foot wide sidewalk on the other side constructed one-foot inside the right-of-way; 
6)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
7)  Driveways: Controlled as to location and width for access management purposes; 
8)  Buffer strip: Eight (8) to nine (9) feet wide with trees permitted as for a typical major collector; and 
9)  Other features: Same as a typical major collector. 
(g)  Minor arterial street design standards. 
(1)  A minor arterial is a mid-to-high volume multi-modal street (ADT of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) to twenty thousand (20,000) vehicles) which moves a large portion of internal city traffic. Minor arterials usually connect to major arterials or expressways and provide access to such traffic destinations as retail shopping areas, employment centers, and many residential neighborhoods. These streets have a minimum of two (2), undivided travel lanes but may have up to four (4) travel lanes with a raised median and left turn lane at intersections to manage traffic access. Typically, direct access to property is restricted and no on-street parking is permitted. Three types of minor arterial streets are permitted. Each type may be allowed or required depending upon the surrounding land use pattern, traffic conditions or other circumstances. 
(i)  An Option A street will be considered or may be required when the intended use or zoning of nearby land is predominantly residential or large open land areas such as parks, churches, and schools. Option A streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
(A)  Right-of-way: Eighty-four (84) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Total width is forty (40) feet measured from edge of shoulder; 
(C)  Travel lanes: Two (2) lanes, each twelve (12) feet wide; 
(D)  Paved shoulder: One foot on each side for bikes and emergency parking; 
(E)  Drainage: Open channel or swale system without curb and gutter; 
(F)  Sidewalk: Five (5) feet wide on one side constructed foot inside the right-of-way; 
(G)  Pedway: Eight (8) feet wide on one side constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(H)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
(I)  Driveways: Controlled as to location and width for access management purposes; 
(J)  Buffer strip: Fourteen (14) to fifteen (15) feet wide on each side. Trees permitted in the right-of-way when located outside of the drainage channel and four (4) feet from edge of sidewalk or pedway subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(K)  Utility easements: Same as a standard residential street. 
(ii)  An Option B street will be considered or may be required when the following conditions exist: 1) the intended use or zoning of nearby land is residential or large open land areas such as parks, churches, and schools; and 2) the ADT volume of the street is projected to exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) vehicles in twenty (20) years. Option B streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
(A)  Right-of-way: One hundred (100) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Total width is forty (40) feet measured from edge of shoulder; 
(C)  Travel lanes: One lane twelve (12) feet wide located on each side of a twelve-foot center median; and 
(D)  Other features: Same as Option A. 
(iii)  An Option C street will be considered or may be required when the intended use or zoning of adjacent land is predominantly commercial, industrial, office, or institutional. Option C streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
(A)  Right-of-way: Eighty-four (84) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Forty-eight (48) feet wide measured from back of curb; 
(C)  Travel lanes: Two (2) travel lanes twelve (12) feet wide plus a twelve-foot wide center two-way left turn lane; 
(D)  Bike lanes: Striped six (6) feet wide bike lane on each side measured from back of curb; 
(E)  Drainage: A curb and gutter system is most common; 
(F)  Buffer strip: Ten (10) feet wide on each side. Trees permitted in the right-of-way when located six (6) feet from edge of street and four (4) feet from edge of sidewalk or pedway subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(G)  Other features: Same as Option A. 
(h)  Major arterial street design standards. 
(1)  A major arterial is a high volume multi-modal street (ADT of fifteen thousand (15,000) or more vehicles) which handles the bulk of through traffic within the city. Major arterials connect to expressways and freeways as well as provide access to major traffic destinations such as regional shopping centers and major universities. These streets usually have at grade intersections which are spaced well apart. It is very common for major arterials to have four (4) lanes with a continuous raised median except for a left turn lane at major intersections. Direct access to property is usually prohibited or limited to right-in, right-out and no on-street parking is permitted. Two (2) types of major arterial streets are permitted. Each type may be allowed or required depending upon the surrounding land use, traffic conditions or other circumstances. 
(i)  An Option A street will be considered or may be required when vehicle speeds are moderate, right-of-way is limited, and access is restricted thereby mitigating the need for a median. Option A streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
(A)  Right-of-way: One hundred six (106) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Total width of sixty (60) feet measured from back of curb or edge of pavement; 
(C)  Travel lanes: Four (4) lanes each twelve (12) feet wide; 
(D)  Bike lanes: Striped six (6) feet wide bike lane on each side measured from back of curb; 
(E)  Drainage: May be built with curb and gutter or an open swale; 
(F)  Sidewalk: Five (5) feet wide on one side constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(G)  Pedway: Eight (8) feet wide on one side constructed one foot inside the right-of-way; 
(H)  Parking: Not permitted on either side; 
(I)  Driveways: Controlled as to location and width for access management purposes; 
(J)  Buffer strip: Fourteen (14) to seventeen (17) feet wide on each side. Trees permitted in the right-of-way located ten (10) feet from edge of street and four (4) feet from edge of sidewalk or pedway subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(K)  Utility easements: Same as a standard residential street. 
(ii)  An Option B street will be considered or may be required when the projected ADT volume of the street could reasonably exceed twenty thousand (20,000) vehicles in twenty (20) years and/or the street connects to a freeway or expressway. Option B streets shall conform to the following design standards: 
(A)  Right-of-way: One hundred ten (110) feet wide; 
(B)  Pavement: Total width of fifty-two (52) feet measured from back of curb or edge of pavement; 
(C)  Travel lanes: One inner lane twelve (12) feet wide and one outer lane fourteen (14) feet wide on each side of a sixteen-foot wide center median which may include a twelve-foot wide left-turn lane at intersections; 
(D)  Bike lanes: No bike lane on either side; 
(E)  Sidewalk: Five (5) feet wide on one side constructed one foot inside right-of-way; 
(F)  Pedway: Ten (10) feet wide on one side constructed one foot inside right-of-way; 
(G)  Buffer strip: Twelve (12) to thirteen (13) feet wide on each side. Trees permitted in the right-of-way located eight (8) feet from edge of street and four (4) feet from edge of sidewalk or pedway subject to compliance with city policies and regulations; and 
(H)  Other features: Same as Option A.  
Sec. A.2. - Street names and numbers. 
(a)  Names. The council shall approve all public and private street names and suffixes within the city. A subdivider shall propose a name, pre-directional (if necessary) and suffix for each new or renamed street within a proposed subdivision in accordance with the street name standards set forth in the UDC Administrative Manual. 
Names of new streets shall not duplicate or sound like existing or platted street names in Boone County unless the new street is a continuation of an existing or platted street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or sound like any established business or development in Boone County. Names shall be easily spelled and pronounced. 
(b)  Suffixes. All streets should conform to standard street suffixes as follows: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares designated as such in the transportation plan should be designated as boulevards or avenues, or other suffixes appropriate to the context. 
(2)  Thoroughfares of more than one thousand (1,000) feet should be designated as streets, avenues, drives or roads, or other suffixes appropriate to the context. 
(3)  Streets of less than one thousand (1,000) feet should be designated as courts, places, ways, circles, lanes or terraces, or other suffixes appropriate to the context. 
(c)  Signs. Street signs shall be installed and readable from each direction of travel. 
(d)  Addresses. Addresses shall be assigned by the director to comply with the addressing system of the city. Broadway shall be the north-south base line and the designation of north and south shall be indicated on either side of Broadway. Garth Avenue shall be the east-west base line and the designation of east and west shall be shown on either side of Garth Avenue.  
Sec. A.3. - Street widths. 
(a)  The right-of-way width required to be dedicated and the pavement width required to be constructed for streets, according to street classification, shall be: 
	Right-of Way 	Pavement Width Face to Face of Curb 
Type of Street 	(Minimum Feet) 	(Maximum Feet) 	(Minimum Feet) 
Freeway 	Variable 	96* 	48* 
Expressway 	Variable 	72 	48* 
Arterial, major** 	106—110 	68 	60 
Arterial, minor** 	84—100 	52 	40 
Collectors, major** 	66—76 	44 	32 
Collectors, neighborhood** 	60 	34 	30 
Local, nonresidential, central traffic zone 	66 		44 
Local, nonresidential, all other** 	60—66 	38 	30 
Local, residential** 	40—50 	32 	20—32 
Cul-de-sacs, residential (stem portion)** 	44—50 	32 	24—28 
Alleys 	18 		16 
Estate lanes 	50 		28 
Frontage roads 	30 		20 
*In addition to road pavement, two (2) paved, ten (10) foot shoulders are required. 
 
(b)  In low density, single-family residential subdivisions, the width of local residential streets may be reduced from thirty-two (32) feet to twenty-eight (28) feet (estate lanes) if the subdivision complies with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Lots abutting the proposed estate lane may not exceed an overall density of one dwelling unit per acre. 
(2)  No lot abutting the proposed estate lane may be less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet wide at the building line. 
(3)  The street may not be designed to accommodate through traffic. Cul-de-sac, loop and horseshoe streets beginning and ending within a main block will ordinarily satisfy this requirement. 
(4)  In all other respects, street paving and related public improvements design for estate lanes shall be according to the design standards for local residential streets contained or referenced herein.  
Sec. A.4. - Street grades. 
The grades of streets shall comply with the following ranges. Where it is impracticable to comply with these standards, a written approval to deviate therefrom must be obtained from the director of public works. 
Type of Street 	Maximum (percent) 	Minimum (percent) 
Freeway 	4 	0.3 
Expressway 	4 	0.3 
Arterial, urban 	6 	0.5 
Arterial, rural 	7 	0.5 
Collector 	8 	0.5 
Local, nonresidential 	8 	0.75 
Local, residential 	10 	0.75 
  
Sec. A.5. - Curves. 
Curves shall comply with the following design criteria unless the director of public works determines that a more restrictive requirement is necessary to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare from potentially hazardous street design. 
(a)  When street pavement lines or street right-of-way lines deflect, the lines shall be connected by a horizontal curve having a maximum degree of center line curvature of 57°29' for local residential streets, 25°00' for local nonresidential streets, 12°30' for collector streets, 7°30' for arterial streets, and 5°00' for freeways, except that street right-of-way lines may deflect, provided the deflection angle is less than or equal to 10°00'. 
(b)  A tangent segment at least two hundred (200) feet in length shall be maintained between curves on all streets, except for local residential streets. 
(c)  All vertical grade changes shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance. Vertical grade changes of two (2) percent or less algebraically may be connected by chords if the design engineer encounters unusual circumstances such as facilitating drainage; however, sight distances must be maintained.  
Sec. A.6. - Intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall intersect one another at as near a ninety (90) degree angle as possible. No intersection of streets at angles less than sixty (60) degrees shall be approved. 
(b)  When streets intersect at a ninety (90) degree angle or when a street intersects with a cul-de-sac terminal bulb, the intersection right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a curve with a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet for residential streets and not less than thirty (30) feet for nonresidential streets. 
(c)  When streets intersect at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees, the director of public works may require the intersecting right-of-way lines to be rounded by a curve with a radius greater than, required for streets intersecting, at a ninety (90) degree angle. 
(d)  The intersection of more than two (2) streets at any one point shall be avoided except where necessary to secure a proper street system. 
(e)  Intersecting streets shall have center lines as nearly straight as possible. Streets with center line offsets at intersections shall be offset by less than five (5) feet or more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.  
Sec. A.7. - Terminal streets. 
Terminal streets shall also have a turnaround at the closed end with an outside roadway diameter of at least seventy-six (76) feet and right-of-way diameter of at least ninety-four (94) feet.  
Sec. A.8. - Alleys. 
(a)  Residential alleys shall be permitted in all residential areas. 
(b)  Nonresidential alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts when off-street loading and parking are not otherwise provided. 
(1)  The right-of-way width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet and the pavement width shall be sixteen (16) feet. 
(2)  When alleys intersect, the intersection right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a curve with a radius of not less than five (5) feet in length.  
Sec. A.9. - Driveway access restrictions. 
Any subdivision of land intended for single-family or two-family residential development shall be prohibited from taking driveway access onto arterial and collector roadways unless otherwise approved by the director. The access prohibition shall be indicated on the subdivision plat by a notation on each lot subject to this regulation. This subsection shall not apply to any subdivision with a preliminary plat approved before June 17, 1996.  
Sec. A.10. - M-DT district urban space standards. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The urban space standards apply to new development as well as the reconstruction of existing streets and other public (and publicly accessible) spaces. 
(2)  The urban space standards establish the rules and standards for the street space and squares and greens within the M-DT district. 
(b)  Intent. 
(1)  M-DT district properties are coded to be "perimeter blocks" with buildings placed along the outer edges of their block. The urban space standards ensure the coherence and appropriateness of the street-space. 
(2)  Although commonly thought of as just squares, greens or parks, the public realm is much more; it includes the complete street-space—the public domain between the building facades: the travel lanes between the curbs as well as the sidewalks; the squares and greens within the M-DT district. 
(3)  The urban space standards: 
(i)  Establish an environment that encourages and facilitates pedestrian activity and "walkable" streets that are comfortable, efficient, safe, and interesting; 
(ii)  Ensure the coherence of the street-space, serving to assist residents, building owners, and managers with understanding the relationship between the street-space and their own property; and 
(iii)  Contribute to ultimate sustainability. Native trees and plants contribute to privacy, the reduction of noise and air pollution, shade, maintenance of the natural habitat, conservation of water, and rainwater management. 
(4)  Property frontages and facades are part of the public realm, literally forming the walls of the street-space and are therefore subject to more regulation than the other portions of the private property. 
(5)  The private, interior portions of the lots (toward the alley, rear lot or lot lines) are less controlled to allow residents and operators to utilize these spaces as environments unseen by the public and allow residents to have private open space (semi-private for apartment and condominium dwellers), gardens and courtyards. 
(c)  Street-Space standards. 
(1)  General provisions. 
(i)  All plant material (including trees) shall be in accordance with the requirements of article 4 of this Code. 
(ii)  Mechanical and electrical equipment including, but not limited to the following, may not be stored or located within any street space: 
• Air compressors, 
• Pumps, 
• Exterior water heaters, 
• Water softeners, 
• Private garbage cans (not including public sidewalk waste bins), and 
• Storage tanks. 
Water pumps for public fountains or irrigation not visible are not included in the prohibition of location of equipment within any street space and temporary placement of private garbage cans within the street-space may be allowed to accommodate scheduled pick-up. 
(2)  Street trees. 
(i)  Each street-space must have street trees planted along the street tree alignment line generally in the centerline of the tree lawn or not less than three (3) feet from the back of the curb, unless otherwise specified in the regulating plan, and at an average spacing not greater than thirty (30) feet on center (average calculated per block face). Where necessary, spacing allowances may be made to accommodate curb cuts and infrastructure elements; however, at no location may street tree spacing exceed forty-five (45) feet on center except where necessary for transit stops or stations. Required street tree planting area configurations are specified in the street type specifications and below. 
(ii)  Required tree planting area minimum specifications are as follows: 
(A)  Street tree planting areas shall be at grade or not greater than six (6) inches in height above the sidewalk; 
(B)  Soil surface area shall not be less than one hundred ten (110) square feet per isolated tree or ninety (90) square feet per tree for connected (tree lawn) situations, as illustrated in the following figures; 
 
Figure A-1: Continuous Soil Area Configuration Options: low pedestrian traffic areas (left), high pedestrian traffic areas (right)
 
Figure A-2: Individual Tree Planting
(C)  No dimension of the soil surface area may be less than six (6) feet unless otherwise specified in this chapter; 
(D)  A pervious paving strip, maximum twelve (12) inches wide, may be placed at the back of the curb for access to on-street parking. This pervious strip is not measured against the required soil surface area; and 
(E)  The street-space types are configured for street tree trenches (connected soil areas). The above requirements may be met through the use of bridged slab, structural soil, or other techniques that clearly exceed these standards in the fostering of vital and long-lived street trees (See Figure A-1). 
(iii)  At planting, street trees shall be at least three and a half (3.5) inches caliper, measured four (4) feet above grade and at least ten (10) feet in overall height. Species shall be selected from the street tree list set forth herein. Consult with the director for the designated tree species for a particular street-space. 
(iv)  Any unpaved ground area shall be planted with ground cover, flowering vegetation, or climbing vines, not to exceed twelve (12) inches in maturity so as to not interfere with pedestrian or truck travel (minimum seven (7) feet clear over the sidewalk and fourteen (14) feet over any travel lanes) and to maintain visibility. 
(3)  Street tree specifications. 
(i)  Species in the street tree list are for placement as shown in street type specifications, or as specified in the regulating plan for placement along a street tree alignment line. The use of alternate species may be permitted, but only if approved by the director. 
(ii)  Street trees are part of an overall street-space plan designed to provide both canopy and shade and to give special character and coherence to each street. The desired aesthetic shall be achieved through the use of native and/or proven hardy adapted species. The list of appropriate street tree species may change over time and will be periodically amended by the director. Inclusion in this list shall be based on the following criteria: 
(A)  Structural. Street trees shape and subdivide the street-space, increasing pedestrian comfort and adding (literal) value to the street/community. "canopy shade tree" species grow to heights in excess of sixty (60) feet and have a broad canopy—enabling the trees to clear auto and pedestrian traffic, form a ceiling-like enclosure, and open a clear view of the street-space at eye-level. 
(B)  Tree survivability. Proper planting techniques and configurations provide a healthy environment in which the street tree can thrive—this will ensure that the trees increase their value to the community as they grow. 
(C)  Form. Species are planted consistently along a given street-space to provide a special form and character. This provides species diversity among streets at the same time it provides a specific street character by planting different street-spaces with different tree. 
(4)  Street tree list. 
(i)  Invasive species, as identified by the Missouri Department of Conservation's invasive species list, are prohibited. 
(ii)  The following list contains all approved tree species (large canopy trees with a mature height of sixty (60) feet and above) for use in the M-DT district. The list may include native and acceptable adapted species. Species marked with an asterisk may be placed within larger soil area locations such as parks, dooryards, squares, or in the wider tree lawns of the major streets. 
Acer saccharum 	Sugar Maple 
Betula nigra 	River Birch 
Celtis occidentalis* 	Common Hackberry* 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum 	Katsura Tree 
Ginkgo biloba 	Ginkgo (male only) 
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 	Thornless Honey Locust 
Liquidambar styraciflua "Rotundiloba" 	Seedless Sweetgum 
Nyssa Sylvatica 	Black Tupelo 
Platanus occidentalis 'Bloodgood' 	London Plane tree 
Quercus bicolor 	Swamp White Oak 
Quercus coccinea 	Scarlet Oak 
Quercus falcata 	Southern Red Oak 
Quercus palustris 	Pin Oak 
Quercus rubra 	Red Oak 
Quercus shumardii 	Shumard Oak 
Quercus velutina 	Black Oak 
Tilia Americana* 	American Linden* 
Tilia cordata 'Greenspire' Greenspire 	Littleleaf Linden 
Tilia euchlora 	Crimean Linden 
Tilia tomentosa 	Silver Linden 
Ulmus americana "libertas" 	Liberty Elm 
Ulmus hollandica "Groenveldt" 	Groenveldt Elm 
 
(5)  Street-Space elements. 
(i)  Streetlights shall: 
(A)  Be installed on both sides of the street-space, aligned with the street trees, except where otherwise designated on the regulating plan; 
(B)  Use the double-globed luminaires on sixteen-foot poles, for major streets; and 
(C)  Use the single-globed luminaires on fourteen-foot poles, for district streets. 
(ii)  At the time of development, the developer is required to install streetlights and sidewalks, as illustrated in the street type specifications, on the street-space frontage being developed. 
(iii)  Sidewalks not otherwise designated in the regulating plan or street type specifications shall provide a minimum six-foot clear walkway and be constructed to meet all city (and ADA) standards and specifications. 
(iv)  Street furniture is an element of the overall street-space design—not an afterthought. Street furnishings should be simple, functional, and durable. 
(6)  Pedestrian pathway. The area within a pedestrian pathway shall be a public access easement or public right of way. The easement width for these pathways must not be less than twenty (20) feet with a paved walkway not less than ten (10) feet wide providing an unobstructed view straight through its entire length, except where otherwise specified on the regulating plan. 
(d)  Street-Space recommendations. 
(1)  Intent. 
(i)  The street-space is a community's first and foremost public space and should be just as carefully designed and planned as any park or public building. The character of the street-space—both its scale and its details—plays a critical role in determining the pedestrian quality of a given location. 
(ii)  Street-spaces must balance the needs of all forms of traffic—auto, transit, bicycle and pedestrian—to maximize mobility and convenience for all residents and users. Their character will vary depending on their location: some streets will carry a large volume of traffic and provide a more active and intense urban pedestrian experience while others will provide a less active and more intimately scaled street-space. 
(iii)  These are city streets—not "roads, highways, arterials, or collectors"—and must be developed as such to create people-oriented places balancing all transportation modes. The neighborhood street-spaces are designed primarily for walkability and pedestrian comfort, with automobile movement as a secondary focus. The specifications for major streets grant more to the free movement of vehicles, while maintaining good walkability. 
(2)  Street design principles. 
(i)  The appropriate design of streets is one of the most important design elements for a downtown area. 
(ii)  To design for continuous free-flowing traffic creates situations where vehicles will travel at speeds greater than desirable for pedestrians. 
(iii)  With appropriate design techniques, drivers shall choose slower speeds and less aggressive behavior, a feat typically not achieved through basic speed limit signage/postings. 
(iv)  Scale is a threshold design consideration for street design elements (from signage to crossing distances)—in a downtown area it should be that of the pedestrian. 
(v)  An interconnected street network allows traffic capacity to be diffused and maintained across numerous streets. 
(vi)  Emergency vehicle access shall be maintained, but with an interconnected street network, there shall always be at least two (2) routes of access to any lot or parcel. 
(vii)  Differences between "requirements" and "preferences" can be significant—increased lane width and the accompanying increased vehicle speeds more often than not decrease overall safety for pedestrians. 
(viii)  On-street parking slows passing vehicular traffic and acts as a buffer between moving vehicles and pedestrians. 
(ix)  Overall function, comfort, safety and aesthetics of a street are more important than efficiency alone. 
(x)  In a downtown area, non-vehicular traffic should be provided with every practical advantage so long as safety is not adversely affected. 
(xi)  Street design should take into consideration what is reasonably foreseeable, not every situation that is conceivably possible. 
(xii)  Designing a street to facilitate (rather than accommodate) infrequent users may actually be the wrong design for the frequent users of the space. 
(xiii)  When the street design creates a conflict between the vehicular and non-vehicular user, it should be resolved in favor of the non-vehicular user. 
(3)  Street types. The street type recommendations illustrate model configurations for the street-spaces within the M-DT district. The plans and sections specify vehicular travel lane widths, curb radii, sidewalks, tree planting areas, and on-street parking configurations. 
(i)  District street types. 
(A)  The preferred and recommended models for most streets within the M-DT District are listed below. The numbers refer to dimensions of the street-space, the literal distance between building façades—including travel lanes, any on-street parking, and curb and gutter. The range they represent allows for variations in the street-space per the Regulating Plan. Detailed cross sections are provided in Figures A-3 through A-5 below. 
1)  DS 66-74 (most district streets); 
2)  DS 53-60 (ROW constrained district streets); and 
3)  DS alley. 
(B)  The M-DT district is designed to be the ideal complement to good transit service. 
(C)  The district street-spaces are configured such that in-lane bicycle travel is appropriate. 
(D)  Dooryards and alleys are generally reserved for utility easements. 
(ii)  Major street type. The preferred and recommended models for the major thoroughfares in the downtown-DT district are listed below. A detailed cross-section is provided in Figure A-6 below. 
(A)  DS Broadway. 
 
Figure A-3: DTS 66-74 (Most M-DT District Streets)
 
Figure A-4: DTS 53-60 (ROW Constrained M-DT District Streets)
 
Figure A-5: DTS Alley
 
Figure A-6: DS Broadway
