CODE OF THE CITY OF FULTON, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 26, 1993 
Effective: October 26, 1993 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FULTON, MISSOURI 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert Fisher 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dale Brady 
Don Woodson 
Dorothy Reifstack 
James "Dru" Maupin 
Steve Moore 
Mike West 
Mike Luebbert 
Warren Hollrah 
City Council 
____________ 
Mike Miller 
Director of Administration 
____________ 
Granville Collins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Carolyn Laswell 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FULTON, MISSOURI 
____________ 
LeRoy D. Benton 
Mayor 
____________ 
Wayne Chailland, Ward One 
Ballard Simmons, Ward One 
Jeffrey Stone, Ward Two 
Mary Rehklau, Ward Two 
Richard Vaughn, Ward Three 
John Braun, Ward Three 
Rick Shiverdecker, Ward Four 
Steven Moore, Ward Four 
City Council 
____________ 
William R. Johnson 
Director of Administration 
____________ 
Kathleen Holschlag 
Chief Financial Officer 
____________ 
Kyle Bruemmer 
Interim City Engineer 
____________ 
Darrell Dunlap 
Superintendent of Utilities 
____________ 
Courtney L. Crowson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Fulton, Missouri. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through April 14, 1992, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Ann Daniels, former City Administrator, and Mr. Jerry Ponder, Chief Financial Officer, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordi-nances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
BILL NUMBER 726 ORDINANCE NUMBER 656-93 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Fulton, Missouri; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Council of the City of Fulton: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 118, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 27, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 27, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage by the council and approval by the mayor. 
Read Three Times and Passed this 26th Day of October, 1993. 
/s/ Robert E. Fisher, Jr. 
       President of Council   Approved this 26th Day of October, 1993. 
/s/ Robert E. Fisher, Jr. 
       Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Carolyn L. Laswell 
       City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1276-10  4-27-10 Included 19 1282-10  8-24-10 Included 19 1284-10 10-12-10 Included 19 1288-10 11- 2-10 Included 19 1292-11  5-10-11 Included 20 1293-11  5-24-11 Included 20 1300-11  8-23-11 Included 20 1303-11 10-11-11 Included 20 1304-11 10-11-11 Included 20 1305-11 10-25-11 Included 20 1306-11 11- 8-11 Included 20 1308-11 12-20-11 Included 20 1309-11 12-20-11 Included 21 1312-12  1-24-12 Included 21 1313-12 1-24-12 Included 21 1314-12  1-24-12 Included 21 1316-12  2-14-12 Included 21 1318-12  4-24-12 Included 21 1320-12  4-24-12 Included 21 1321-12  6-26-12 Included 21 1322-12  6-26-12 Included 21 1323-12  6-26-12 Included 21 1324-12  6-26-12 Included 21 1328-12  9-11-12 Included 21 1331-12 11-13-12 Included 21 1333-12 11-13-12 Included 21 1336-12 11-27-12 Included 21 1337-13  1- 8-13 Included 22 1338-13  1- 8-13 Included 22 1339-13  1- 8-13 Included 22 1345-13  4-23-13 Included 22 1349-13  7- 9-13 Included 22 1350-13  8-13-13 Included 22 1354-13  9-10-13 Included 22 1356-13  9-24-13 Included 22 1381-15  2-10-15 Included 23 1384-15  3-10-15 Included 23 1388-15  6- 9-15 Included 23 1389-15  6- 9-15 Included 23 1391-15  7-14-15 Included 23 1403-15 11-24-15 Included 23 1406-15 12-15-15 Included 23 1417-16  6-28-16 Included 24 1420-16  8- 9-16 Included 24 1421-16  8- 9-16 Included 24 1423-16  9-27-16 Included 24 1427-16 11-22-16 Included 24 1429-17  1-24-17 Included 24 1436-17  6-13-17 Included 25 1438-17  7-11-17 Included 25 1439-17  8- 8-17 Included 25 1445-17 11-14-17 Included 25 1448-17 11-14-17 Included 25 1451-17 11-28-17 Included 25 1454-18  1- 9-18 Included 25 1458-18  3-27-18 Included 25 1460-18  5-22-18 Included 26 1461-18  6-12-18 Included 26 1468-18  7-24-18 Included 26 1469-18  8-14-18 Included 26 1473-18 10-23-18 Included 26 1477-18 11-27-18 Included 26 1488-19  3-26-19 Included 27 1496-19  5-28-19 Included 27 1498-19  5-28-19 Included 27  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    In order to provide for the government of the City of Fulton, and secure the benefits and advantages of constitutional home rule under the Constitution of the State of Missouri, the people of the City of Fulton, Missouri, adopt the following charter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Fulton City Charter, as adopted by the voters on April 1, 1986. Amendments to the charter will be indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note will indicate that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation, Name and Boundaries. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Fulton, within the corporate limits as now established on file in the office of the city clerk or as hereafter established in the manner then provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the City of Fulton. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 

Section 2.1. - Powers. 
    The city shall have all powers which the General Assembly of the State of Missouri has authority to confer upon any city, provided such powers are consistent with the Constitution of this State and are not limited or denied either by this charter or by statute. The city shall, in addition to its home rule powers, have all powers conferred by law. 
Section 2.2. - Construction. 
    The powers of the city shall be liberally construed. The specific mention of a particular power in this charter shall not be construed as limiting the powers of the city. 
Section 2.3. - Gender. 
    Wording in this Charter shall be so construed that the masculine shall import the feminine, the singular shall import the plural, and the word person shall include natural persons, firms, and corporations; provided that these roles of construction shall not apply to any part of the Charter containing express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content is contrary thereto. 
(Ord. No. 766-98, § 1, 2-10-98) 
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL 

Section 3.1. - Where Powers Vested. 
    Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. The council shall provide for the exercise of these powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
Section 3.2. - Composition, Eligibility, Election and Terms. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a City Council of eight (8) members, two (2) from each ward, nominated and elected by the qualified voters of their respective wards, as provided in Article IX. 
(b)  Eligibility. A councilman shall be a qualified voter of the city and shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding his nomination, and a resident of his ward immediately preceding his nomination. 
(c)  Election and Terms. Councilmen shall be elected to serve staggered two (2) year terms. At the first election under this charter, eight (8) councilmen shall be elected. Four (4) of the Councilmen, one (1) from each ward, elected at the first such election shall serve only one (1) year terms, they being determined by lot at the first meeting of the council. At each regular municipal election thereafter, councilmen shall be elected to fill the positions of those whose terms expire and shall serve full two (2) year terms. 
Section 3.3. - Compensation, Expenses. 
    The council may determine the annual compensation of councilmen by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing or decreasing such compensation shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of councilmen elected at the next regular election, provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least four (4) months. The salary of an officer shall not be changed during the time for which he was elected or appointed. Councilmen shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Section 3.4. - Deputy Mayor. 
    The council shall elect from among its members a deputy mayor. The deputy mayor shall act as the mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
Section 3.5. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding Other Office. Except where authorized by law, or pursuant to an agreement between the city and another entity of government, no councilman shall hold any other city office, employment or related volunteer position during the term for which he was elected to the council, and no former councilman shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the council. 
(b)  Appointments and Removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the director of administration or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express in regular or special session of the council as provided by law its views and fully and freely discuss with the director of administration anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c)  Interference with Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 3.8, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the director of administration solely through the director of administration, and neither the council nor its members shall give any orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 3.6. - Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a councilman shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, failure to reside in the ward from which he was elected, or forfeiture of his office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. A councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this charter or by law; 
(2)  Violates any prohibition of this charter; 
(3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(4)  Is in default to the city; or 
(5)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council without being formally excused by the council. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and approval by the council by a majority of all its remaining members for a period running to the next regular election. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with the election laws of the State of Missouri. 
Section 3.7. - Judge of Qualifications. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand. Decisions made by the council under this section shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Section 3.8. - Investigations. 
    The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
Section 3.9. - Independent Audit. 
    The council shall provide for an independent audit of all city accounts at least annually. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no substantial personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. A copy of the report prepared by the certified public accountant or firm of such accountants shall be kept in the city clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 3.10. - Legislative Proceedings. 
(a)  Meetings. The council shall meet regularly at least once each month at such time and place as the council may prescribe by ordinance. The mayor upon his own motion may, or at the request of three (3) members of the council shall, call a special meeting of the council for a time not earlier than three (3) hours after reasonable effort is made to serve notice on all members of the council who may be in the city. Special meetings of the council may also be held at any time by the consent of all the members of the council, and such consent may be given either prior to or during the special meeting. 
(b)  Rules and Journals. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept and this journal shall be open to public inspection. A separate journal shall be kept of executive sessions, which journal shall remain closed to public inspection or to legal process. 
(c)  Voting. Voting shall be by roll call except on procedural motions and resolutions, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. In all roll call votes the names of the members of the council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. A majority of members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the council. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council shall be necessary to adopt any proposed ordinance. 
(d)  Form of Ordinances. Proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the council only in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: 
Be It Ordained By the Council of the City of Fulton. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances submitted by initiative shall be: 
Be It Ordained By the People of the City of Fulton. 
(e)  Procedure. Except in the case of emergency ordinances, every proposed ordinance shall be read by title in open council meeting two (2) times before final passage, and at least one (1) week shall elapse between introduction and third reading with final passage. A copy of each proposed ordinance shall be provided for each councilmember at the time of its introduction, and at least three (3) copies shall be provided for public inspection in the office of the city clerk until it is finally adopted or fails of adoption. Persons interested in a proposed ordinance shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the council in accordance with such rules and regulations as the council may adopt. If the council adopts an amendment to a proposed ordinance any councilmember may require that the proposed ordinance as amended shall be placed on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk for one (1) additional week before final passage. 
(f)  Emergency Ordinances. A proposed ordinance may be adopted by the council and approved by the mayor as an emergency measure on the day of its introduction if it contains a declaration describing in clear and specific terms the facts and reasons constituting the emergency and receives the vote of six (6) members of the council. A proposed ordinance granting, reviewing, or extending a franchise shall not be adopted by the council and approved by the mayor as an emergency ordinance. 
(g)  Effective Date. Every adopted and duly approved ordinance shall become effective after adoption and upon approval by the mayor, or at any later date specified therein. Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption by the council and approval by the mayor or at any later date specified therein. 
(h)  Authentication and Recording. All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city clerk. The city clerk shall record in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council. 
Section 3.11. - Revision of Ordinances. 
    Within three (3) years after adoption of this charter, all ordinances of the city of a general and permanent nature shall be revised, codified, and promulgated according to a system of continuous numbering and revision as specified by ordinance. Such recodification shall be periodically supplemented and updated, not less frequently than biannually. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAYOR 

Section 4.1. - The Mayor. 
    The executive power of the city shall be vested in a mayor who shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all legal and ceremonial purposes, and by the Governor of Missouri for all purposes of military law. 
Section 4.2. - Mayor; Election, Term, and Qualifications. 
    The mayor shall be elected by the qualified registered voters of the city at-large at the regular municipal election. He shall hold his office for a term of four (4) years. The mayor shall be a qualified registered voter of the city, shall have been a resident of the city for the two (2) years immediately preceding his election, and shall be at least thirty (30) years of age at the time that he assumes his office. 
Section 4.3. - Mayor; Powers and Duties. 
    The mayor shall have the following powers and duties and shall perform the following functions in addition to those conferred upon him by other provisions of this charter and by all of the General Statutes of the State of Missouri: 
(a)  Presiding Officer During Council Meetings. He shall preside at the meetings of the council but shall have the right to vote only in the case of ties. He may call special meetings of the council as provided in section 3.10(a). 
(b)  The Power of Veto. He shall have the power to veto with respect to bills, resolutions and appropriation bills adopted by the council. When invoked this power shall be exercised pursuant to the provisions of this charter. Every bill or resolution adopted by the council shall be presented to the mayor for his approval and if the mayor shall sign the same, it shall be deemed approved and adopted. The mayor may return a bill or resolution with objections to the council unsigned within thirty (30) days and such bill or resolution shall stand vetoed and shall not take effect without approval of the mayor unless adopted over his veto in the following manner: No later than the regular meeting next following the receipt of a disapproved bill or resolution, the city council shall cause the objection of the mayor to be entered upon the journal of the council and the mayor shall put to the council the question, "Shall the bill or resolution take effect, the objections of the mayor notwithstanding." After discussion, the question may not be tabled and the clerk shall proceed to call the roll. Should six (6) members of the entire council cast their votes in favor of overriding the mayor's veto, the bill or resolution shall take effect, otherwise it shall not take effect. Should the mayor neither sign nor return with objections any bill or resolution within (30) days of its adoption by the council it shall be deemed approved and adopted. 
    The mayor shall have the power to approve all or any part of any appropriation bill or the general appropriation of the city budget or veto any item or all of the same. The council may override such veto in the same manner as a bill or resolution provided six (6) members cast their votes in favor of overriding the mayor's veto before the veto override shall take effect. 
(c)  Execution of Laws, Ordinances, Resolutions, Rules and Regulations. He shall take care that the laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city be faithfully executed. He may require oral or written reports and opinions from boards and commissions of the city except the judge of the municipal court. 
    In coordination with and through the director of administration or in the absence of the director of administration the mayor may require oral or written reports and opinions from the heads of all executive departments or from the heads of other departments. 
(d)  Appointment of Boards and Commissions. He shall have the power to appoint members of all boards and commissions provided for in the administrative code with the approval of the majority of the entire city council unless otherwise required by law. 
(e)  Administration of Oath. He shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations and shall sign the commissions of all officers of the city except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(f)  Execution of Documents. He shall sign all proclamations and executive orders and shall sign in behalf of the city all instruments, contracts, agreements, leases, deeds, mortgages and other instruments binding the city or conveying an interest in property or other right of the city to any other corporation, association, legal entity or natural person, when authorized by the council to do so. 
(g)  Messages to the Council. He shall from time to time deliver to the council orally or in writing messages suggesting to the council possible legislation and advising on matters which he deems should be called to the attention of the council. 
(h)  Budget and Capital Program. Each year he shall submit a budget and a three (3) year capital program for the ensuing fiscal year for consideration of the council as required by this charter. 
(i)  Administrative Policy Matters. He shall have the responsibility of discussing with the director of administration any and all policy matters; however, he shall not interfere with the day to day operation of city affairs. 
(j)  Remit Fines and Forfeitures and Grant Reprieves and Pardons; Exception. The mayor shall have power to remit fines and forfeitures and to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses arising under the ordinances of the city; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed as to authorize the mayor to remit any cost which may have accrued to any officer of the city by reason of any prosecution under the laws and ordinances of the city. Notice of such action shall be made public at the next regular council meeting. 
Section 4.4. - Compensation of the Mayor. 
    Compensation of the mayor shall be established by ordinance. The council shall not change the compensation of any mayor, except prior to the election of the mayor to take effect at the beginning of the next term of office for the mayor; provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least four (4) months. 
Section 4.5. - Mayor-Vacancy, Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
    The office of the mayor shall be deemed vacant or forfeit for the same reason as a councilman's office shall be deemed vacant or forfeit under this charter. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the deputy mayor shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the office until the next regular municipal election is held in accordance with the election laws as provided by the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri. As acting mayor, the deputy mayor shall continue to have a vote in the council, but he shall not have the veto power nor vote to break a tie. 
Section 4.6. - Prohibition; Holding Other Public Office. 
    Except where authorized by law, or pursuant to an agreement between the city and another entity of government, the mayor shall not hold any other city office, city employment, related volunteer position, or other elected public office during the term for which he was elected mayor, and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment until one (1) year after the expiration of his term for which he was elected as mayor. 
ARTICLE V. - DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION 

Section 5.1. - Director of Administration-Appointment, Qualifications. 
    There shall be a city director of administration who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the majority vote of the entire council. Director of Administration shall serve for an indefinite term and the council shall fix his compensation and conditions for employment. The director of administration shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his experience in or his knowledge of public administration, and such further qualifications as may be required by ordinances, or by this charter. He shall be a resident of the city within six (6) months after his appointment unless he is granted an extension by the majority vote of the city council. He must remain a resident of the city as long as he is acting in the capacity of director of administration. He must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and must devote his entire time to the duties of his office. 
Section 5.2. - Removal of Director of Administration. 
    The director of administration may be removed by executive order of the mayor with the approval of the majority vote of the entire city council. 
Section 5.3. - Powers and Duties of the Director of Administration. 
    The director of administration shall be the chief operating officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the mayor for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Appointment and Removal of Department Heads. With the advice and consent of the mayor the director of administration shall appoint all department heads except the city attorney and city counselor, consistent with hiring procedures established in the City Personnel Code to be adopted pursuant to this charter and except as otherwise provided by law or this charter. He may suspend or remove any city employee both classified and unclassified as provided in Section 6.3, consistent with termination procedures established in the City Personnel Code to be adopted pursuant to this charter, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer that is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates of that officer's department, office or agency. 
(b)  Administration of Departments. He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(c)  Attend Council Meetings. He shall attend council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion. He shall receive notice of all special meetings, and commission and board meetings. 
(d)  Enforcement of City Laws. He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by him or officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(e)  Budget and Capital Program. He shall prepare and submit a budget recommendation and a three (3) year capital program to the mayor, annually. 
(f)  Finance and Administrative Report. He shall submit to the mayor and the council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  Reports. He shall make such other reports as the mayor and the council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(h)  Report of Financial Condition of City. He shall keep the mayor and the council fully apprised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the mayor and the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(i)  Other Duties. He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the mayor. 
Section 5.4. - Acting Director of Administration. 
    The personnel code shall provide for the appointment of an acting city director of administration in the event of a vacancy in the office of the city director of administration for a period no longer than shall be required to conduct a search for a person to occupy the office of director of administration. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL SYSTEM 

Section 6.1. - Administrative Organization. 
    Within twelve (12) months after the adoption of this Charter, the council shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing a complete plan of organization and structure for the city government. The administrative code may authorize the Director of Administration to promulgate regulations supplementing its provisions and assigning the responsibilities of the various departments. The administrative code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this charter. Unless otherwise required by law all boards and commissions provided for in the administrative code shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority vote of the entire city council, and shall be nonpartisan. 
    There are hereby created the following departments, boards, and commissions: 
(a)  A Police Department to be organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance and in accordance with the Personnel Code. 
(b)  A Fire Department to be organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance. 
(c)  A Utility Department which shall operate all public utilities now owned or which may in the future be acquired by the City, organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance. 
(d)  A Finance Department to be organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance. 
(e)  A Public Works Department to be organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance. 
(f)  A Parks and Recreation Department to be organized and maintained as provided by the City Council by ordinance. 
(g)  A Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with RSMo 89.310. 
(h)  A Commission on Human Rights and Community Relations. 
(i)  A Board of Public Utilities. Such Board shall have the authority as provided in RSMo 91.540, with regard to rate setting, and said Board shall sit in advisement with the Mayor and Director of Administration in selection of a Superintendent of the Utility Department. The Board shall act to set all technical policy and review all technical operational activity not inconsistent with this charter or the ordinances of the City. It shall also have such other duties and responsibilities as assigned from time to time by the City Council, Mayor, or Director of Administration. 
(j)  A Personnel Board shall be organized and maintained as prescribed by ordinance. 
    By ordinance, the council shall establish and prescribe the functions of such departments, boards, and commissions as it deems necessary, not inconsistent with this charter or state statutes. The council may further create, reorganize, alter, abolish, or discontinue any department, board, or commission so created not inconsistent with this charter. 
    The mayor and director of administration shall be ex officio members of all boards and commissions, but shall have no vote. 
Section 6.2. - City Clerk. 
    The director of administration shall appoint a city clerk with the advice and consent of the mayor and council. The city clerk shall keep the journal of council proceedings, authenticate by his signature all ordinances and resolutions, and record them in full in a book kept for that purpose. The city clerk shall perform such other duties as may be required by law, by this charter, by ordinance, or by the director of administration. 
Section 6.3. - Personnel System. 
    Within twelve (12) months after the adoption of this charter, the council shall adopt by ordinance a personnel code providing a comprehensive personnel system for city officers and employees. The personnel code shall provide for the definition of classified and unclassified employees as follows: classified are positions other than department heads, city clerk, and director of administration. Unclassified shall include department heads, city clerk, and director of administration. The personnel code shall provide that all appointments and promotions of classified employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. The personnel code shall further provide that appointment to unclassified positions shall be made on the recommendation of the director of administration with the advice and consent of the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the director of administration unless otherwise provided by law or this charter. 
    The personnel code shall authorize the director of administration with the advice of the personnel board, to promulgate regulations dealing with personnel matters. The personnel code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - LEGAL DEPARTMENT 

Section 7.1. - City Attorney-Election, Term, and Qualifications. 
    At the first election following the adoption of this charter and biennially thereafter, the qualified voters of the city shall elect a city attorney, who shall hold office for two (2) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. The city attorney shall be a qualified voter of the city, licensed to practice law in this state, and a resident of the city at least six (6) months and of the state one (1) year next prior to his election. Should there be no qualified person filing for such office, the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, is authorized to employ a city attorney who may or may not be required to be a resident of the City of Fulton on such terms as shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 7.2. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prosecute all persons charged with violations of the ordinances of the city, and to perform such other duties as may be required from time to time by ordinance. 
Section 7.3. - Compensation of City Attorney. 
    Compensation of the city attorney shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 7.4. - Cases Where Filed. 
    All cases filed shall be filed in the division of the Associate Judge of the 13th Judicial Circuit, as may be assigned by the Presiding Judge of the Circuit, or as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 7.5. - City Counselor. 
    The mayor with the advice and consent of the council may appoint a city counselor, whose tenure, qualifications, duties, and compensation shall be established by ordinance. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 8.2. - Submission of Budget and Budget Message. 
    On or before sixty (60) days prior to the end of the fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
Section 8.3. - Budget. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the mayor deems desirable or the council may require. The budget shall indicate in separate sections: 
(1)  Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing such expenditures. 
(2)  Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and 
(3)  Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the city and the proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget. 
    The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated revenue, and unencumbered balances from previous years. 
Section 8.4. - Capital Program. 
(a)  Submission to Council. The mayor shall prepare and submit to the council a three (3) year capital program at least six (6) months prior to the final date for submission of the budget. 
(b)  Contents. The capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the three (3) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
    The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
Section 8.5. - Council Action on Budget. 
(a)  Notice and Hearing. The council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city a general summary of the budget and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public, and 
(2)  The time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
(b)  Amendment Before Adoption. After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated revenue and unencumbered balances from previous years. 
(c)  Adoption. The council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on or before the last day of the fiscal year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 
Section 8.6. - Council Action on Capital Program. 
(a)  Notice and Hearing. The council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city a general summary of the capital program and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the public, and 
(2)  The time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program. 
(b)  Adoption. The council by resolution shall adopt the capital program with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the last day of the fiscal year currently ending. 
Section 8.7. - Public Records. 
    Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted and operating information which shall conform to generally accepted accounting principles or as prescribed by ordinance shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at suitable places in the city. 
Section 8.8. - Amendments after Adoption. 
(a)  Supplemental Appropriations. If during the fiscal year the mayor certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  Reduction of Appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the mayor that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
(c)  Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the mayor may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon written request by the mayor, the council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 
(d)  Emergency Appropriations; Effective Date. The supplemental appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption and may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.10(f). 
Section 8.9. - Administration of Budget. 
(a)  Work Programs and Allotments. At such time as the director of administration shall specify, each department, office or agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The mayor or his designee shall review and authorize such allotments with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. The director of administration may revise such allotments during the year if he deems it desirable and shall revise them to accord with any supplemental, reduced or transferred appropriations made pursuant to Section 8.8. 
(b)  Payments and Obligations Prohibited. No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the mayor or his designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be void and payment so made illegal; such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation, and he shall also be liable to the city for any amount so paid. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. 
Section 8.10. - Tax Rates and Tax Rolls. 
    Immediately after the budget is finally adopted, the council shall by ordinance set the tax rates and levy on the various classes of property, and the levy so established shall be certified by the city clerk to the appropriate official, who shall compute the taxes and extend them upon the tax rolls. 
Section 8.11. - Sale of Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise required by law or this charter, all bonds issued by the city shall be sold as prescribed by city ordinance. 
Section 8.12. - Sale of Public Utilities. 
    The public utilities, now owned or hereafter acquired, shall not be sold, disposed of in any way, abandoned, or cease to operate except by a majority of the votes cast at any city election, or a special election held for that purpose pursuant to ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 9.1. - City Elections. 
(a)  Regular Elections. The regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April each year. 
(b)  Special Elections. The council may by resolution order special elections, fix the time for such elections, and provide for holding such elections. 
(c)  Conduct of Elections. All city elections shall be governed by the provisions of this charter and of applicable state law. The council by ordinance may further regulate elections, subject to the provisions of this charter and applicable state law. 
Section 9.2. - Nominations By Petition. 
(a)  Nominations. Nominations of candidates for all elective offices shall be by petition. Petitions for ward councilmen shall be signed by not less than twenty-five (25) qualified voters who are entitled to vote for the candidate so nominated. Petitions for officials elected by the entire city shall be signed by not less than one hundred (100) qualified voters of the city. No voter shall sign more than one (1) nominating petition for the same office, and should a voter do so, his signature shall be void except as to the first filed of the petitions signed by him for the office concerned. The signatures shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil. Each signer shall indicate next to his signature the date of his signing and the place of his residence, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify his place of residence. The council by ordinance shall designate the appropriate form for nominating petitions and for acceptance of nominations. 
(b)  Filing and Acceptance. All separate papers comprising a nominating petition shall be assembled and filed with the election authorities as one instrument in compliance with Chapter 115.127 Paragraph 5 of the Missouri State Statutes. The election authorities shall make a record of the exact time when each petition is filed. No nominating petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by signed acceptance of the nomination. 
(c)  Procedure After Filing. Within ten (10) working days after the filing of a nominating petition, the election authorities shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it is sufficient. If a petition is found insufficient, the election authorities shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying wherein it is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions, such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a different petition may be filed for the same candidate. The election authorities shall keep on file all petitions found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the candidates are nominated in those petitions. 
(Ord. No. 766-98, § 1, 2-10-98) 
Section 9.3. - Preparation of Ballots. 
    The names of candidates for elective offices shall be printed on the ballot without party designation in the order in which they were received. The names of candidates in election notices shall be printed in the order in which they were received. 
Section 9.4. - Voting Machines. 
    The council shall have the power to provide for the use of mechanical, electronic, or other devices for voting or counting the votes not inconsistent with state law. 
Section 9.5. - Determination of Election Results. 
(a)  Number of Votes. Every voter shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for each available seat for councilman to represent the ward in which the voter resides. 
(b)  Returns; Canvass. The council shall canvass the election returns and declare the results of any municipal election, regular or special, at a meeting to be held not later than one (1) week following such election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for each office shall be declared elected and inducted into office at that time. 
(c)  Tie Vote. If at any municipal election there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more having received an equal number of votes, the council shall proceed to determine the election by lot in a meeting open to the public and to which all candidates have been invited. 
Editor's note- Per state statutes the provisions of subsection (c) above are incorrect and Ordinance No. 338-86 passed by the city council on November 11, 1986, is correct according to state statutes. The wording is as follows: "Tie Vote. If at any municipal election there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more having an equal number of votes, the city council shall call a special election at which the candidates receiving the equal number of votes shall be the only candidates, and the special election shall be conducted and the votes counted as in other elections. The incumbent shall remain in office until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified." 
Section 9.6. - City Council Wards. 
    There shall be four (4) city council wards, bounded and numbered the same as the wards which exist at the time of adoption of this charter. Ward boundaries shall be established by ordinance following each decennial census. Wards shall comprise compact and contiguous territory and shall contain, as nearly as possible, an equal number of inhabitants. 
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, adopted Jan. 23, 1996, repealed the former Art. X and enacted a new Art. X. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter. 

Section 10.1. - General Authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the council and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, zoning, or salaries of city officers or employees. No proposed initiative ordinance shall contain more than one (1) subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program, any emergency ordinance, any ordinance levying a special assessment or providing for the issuance of special tax bills, or any ordinance relating to zoning, appropriation of money, or levy of taxes. 
(c)  Recall. Any official elected by popular vote may be removed by the voters qualified to vote for his successor in accordance with the procedures set out in this charter, such power to be known as the recall, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The official may not be subject to recall within six (6) months of his induction into office or during the last six (6) months of his term; 
(2)  Only one (1) petition may be filed to recall an elected official during a term; 
(3)  A recalled official may not be a candidate to succeed himself at a special election held to fill the vacancy created by his recall, nor may he be appointed by the appointing authority to fill such vacancy; 
(4)  An official may be recalled only for reasons of (a) misconduct in office, (b) incompetence or (c) failure to perform duties prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.2. - Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit. 
    Any five (5) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
    Recall proceedings may be commenced by any five (5) qualified voters of the City registered to vote for the elected official who is the subject of such recall by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the recall petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses, and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent. Such affidavit shall further specify the name of the elected official to be recalled and set forth the reasons for which recall is sought which shall not be more than two hundred (200) words in length. An affidavit to form a petitioner's committee for purposes of recalling an elected official may not be filed within six (6) months of such official's induction into office, within the last six (6) months of his term, or following an election held to recall such official during a term. 
    Not less than three (3) business days after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. For purposes of this article, a business day shall be a day when city hall is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.3. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. Recall petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city registered to vote for such office equal in number to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote for such office at the last regular city election. 
(b)  Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one (1) instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing and the date signed. Petitions shall be filed with the city clerk within sixty (60) days after the date of the earliest signature on the petition. Initiative and referendum petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. Recall petitions shall state the name and office of the elected official sought to be recalled and shall contain a statement of the reasons for which recall is sought which shall not be more than two hundred (200) words in length. The reasons for recall are misconduct in office, incompetence or failure to perform duties prescribed by law. 
(c)  Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered, or the recall statement. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.4. - Procedure After Filing. 
(a)  Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within twenty (20) business days after the petition is filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two (2) business days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section 10.3, and within five (5) business days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. Should the council find a petition insufficient in form as a result of clerical error or omission, a majority of the circulating committee may correct such insufficiency by amending such petition, and the council may consider such petition so amended without the requirement of additional signatures on the amended petition. 
(b)  Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.5. - Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended; provided however, any ordinance having been in effect for thirty (30) calendar days or more shall not be suspended pending determination of the referendum. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
(3)  The council repeals the ordinance; or 
(4)  Thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.6. - Action on Petitions. 
(a)  Action by Council on Initiative and Referendum Petitions. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article III or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) calendar days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) calendar days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the city. 
(b)  Submission to Voters of Proposed or Referred Ordinances. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held on an available election date under state law which is not later than one (1) year from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Action by Council on Recall Petitions. When a recall petition has been certified to the city council as sufficient by the city clerk, the city council within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date of receipt of such certificate shall adopt an ordinance calling an election to submit the question to the voters of the city entitled to vote thereon. Such election shall be called for the next available election date under state law, provided that if such date is within the last six (6) months of the term of the official sought to be recalled, the council shall not be required to submit the question to the voters of the city. If such office becomes vacant prior to the election, such election shall be canceled, and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in this charter. 
(d)  Form of Recall Ballot. The ballot shall be in the following form: 
SHALL    (Name/Title)   BE REMOVED FROM OFFICE? 
[ ] YES 
[ ] NO 
    Voters in favor of the removal place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "Yes". 
    Voters opposed to the removal place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "No". 
    If voting machines or devices other than printed ballots are used, the ballot shall be prepared in a form so as to give the elector an opportunity to vote substantially as set forth above. 
(e)  Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15th) business day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Section 10.7. - Results of Election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(c)  Recall. If a majority of the qualified registered voters voting in such recall election shall vote in favor of the recall, then a vacancy shall exist, regardless of a defect in the recall petition. Such vacancy shall be filled as provided in this charter. If a majority of the qualified registered voters voting in such election shall vote against the recall, the elected official shall continue in office. Any such person who has been recalled shall be ineligible to serve in the city in any capacity at any time during the remainder of the term for which he was originally elected. 
(Ord. No. 711-96, § 2, 1-23-96) 
ARTICLE XI. - FRANCHISES 

Section 11.1. - Granting of Franchises. 
    All public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions, and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted within less than thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the council, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon. No exclusive franchises shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than twenty (20) years. No such franchise shall be transferable directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance after a full public hearing. 
Section 11.2. - Right of Regulation. 
    All public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council to: 
(a)  Repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply therewith. 
(b)  Require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standards of efficiency. 
(c)  Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(d)  Make an independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and require reports annually. 
(e)  Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof. 
(f)  Control and regulate the use of the city streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them. 
(g)  Regulate rates, fares, and charges and make readjustments thereof from time to time if the same are not regulated by the state. 
(h)  Impose such other regulations from time to time as it may determine to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
Section 11.3. - Revocable Permits. 
    Temporary permits for the operation of public utilities, or like permits for a period not to exceed two (2) years but subject to being renewed for a period not to exceed one (1) year and subject to amendment, alteration, or revocation at any time at the will of the council may be granted only by ordinance on such terms and conditions as the council shall determine. Such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises, or extensions or amendments of franchises. 
Section 11.4. - Operation Beyond Franchise Period. 
    Any operation of a public utility by a franchise holder, with the tacit permission of the city, beyond the period for which the franchise was granted, shall under no circumstances be construed as a renewal or extension of such franchise. Any such operation shall at most be regarded as a mere temporary permit, subject, like other permits, to amendment, alteration, or revocation at any time at the will of the council. 
ARTICLE XII. - LICENSING, TAXATION, AND REGULATION OF BUSINESSES, OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS, VOCATIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES OR THINGS 

Section 12.1. - Objects of Licensing, Taxation, and Regulation. 
    The council shall have power by ordinance to license, tax, and regulate all businesses, occupations, professions, vocations, activities, or things whatsoever set forth and enumerated by the statutes of this state now or hereafter applicable to constitutional charter cities, or cities of the first, second, third, or fourth class, or of any population group, and which any such cities are now or may hereafter be permitted by law to license, tax, and regulate. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 13.1. - Personal Financial Interest. 
    Any city officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city, or in the sale of any land, material, supplies, or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the mayor or the city council. 
Section 13.2. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Activities Prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against in any manner proscribed by law with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office. 
(2)  No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this charter or the rules and regulations made thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules, and regulations. 
(3)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who by himself or with others willfully violates any of the provisions of paragraphs one (1) through three (3) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 13.3. - Notice of Suits. 
    No action shall be maintained against the city for or on account of any injury growing out of alleged negligence of the city unless notice shall first have been given in writing to the mayor within ninety (90) days of the occurrence for which said damage is claimed, stating the place, time, character, and circumstances of the injury, and that the person so injured will claim damages therefor from the city. 
Section 13.4. - Official Bonds. 
    All officers and employees of the city who receive, disburse, or are responsible for city funds, and such other officers and employees as the council by ordinance may designate, shall, within such time after election or appointment as may be fixed by ordinance, and before entering upon the discharge of their duties, give bond to the city in such sums and with such sureties as shall be prescribed by ordinance, and subject to approval by the council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of their duties and for the prompt accounting for and paying over to the city of all moneys belonging to the city that may come into their hands. The city shall pay the premiums on all such bonds. 
Section 13.5. - Charter Amendment. 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the electors by a commission in the manner provided by law and the Constitution for framing and submitting a complete charter. Amendments may also be proposed by the council or by petition of not less than ten percent (10%) of the registered qualified electors of the city, filed with the city clerk, setting forth the proposed amendment. The council shall at once provide by ordinance that any amendment so proposed shall be submitted to the electors at the next election held in the city not less than sixty (60) days after its passage, or at a special election held as provided by law and the Constitution for a charter. Any amendment approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon shall become a part of the charter at the time and under the conditions fixed in the amendment; sections or articles may be submitted separately or in the alternative and determined as provided by law and the Constitution for a complete charter. 
Section 13.6. - Public Improvements and Special Assessments. 
(a)  Improvements. The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law. 
(b)  Special Assessments. The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or special tax bills evidencing such assessments shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law. 
Section 13.7. - Proof of Ordinance. 
    Any ordinance may be proved by a copy thereof certified by the city clerk under the seal of the city; or, when printed and published by authority of the city, it shall be received in evidence in all courts, or other places, without further proof of authenticity. 
Section 13.8. - Separability. 
    If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Section 14.1. - Personnel System. 
    All employees holding a city position at the time this charter takes full effect, shall not be terminated solely as a result of the adoption of this charter, nor be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position, but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system established pursuant to Section 6.3. This section does not apply to the position of director of administrative services. 
Section 14.2. - Ordinances to Remain in Force. 
    All ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at the time this charter takes effect, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, shall remain and be in force until altered, modified, or repealed by or under authority of this charter or ordinance. 
Section 14.3. - Pending Actions and Proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this charter shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this charter or by anything herein contained. 
Section 14.4. - Continuance of Contracts, Public Improvements and Taxes. 
    All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at the time this charter takes effect may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws. All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all fines and penalties imposed, and all other obligations owing to the city which are uncollected at the time this charter becomes effective, shall continue in full force and effect and shall be collected as if no change had been made. 
ARTICLE XV. - SCHEDULE 

Section 15.1. - Election to Adopt Charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the City of Fulton at a general election to be held on the First (1st) day of April, 1986. The election shall be administered by the officials now charged with the responsibility for the conduct of city elections. 
Section 15.2. - First Election. 
    At the time of its adoption, this charter shall be in effect to the extent necessary in order that the first election of members of the city council and the mayor may be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this charter. The first election shall be held on the Seventh (7th) of April, 1987. 
Section 15.3. - Time of Taking Full Effect. 
    This charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the date and time of the first meeting of the newly elected council. 
Section 15.4. - Incumbent Councilmen; First Meeting of Newly Elected Council. 
    The mayor and councilmen in office at the date this charter is adopted shall continue in office until after the election of April, 1987, and within one (1) week thereafter, shall canvass the returns of said election, declare the results thereof, and induct into office the mayor and councilmen declared elected. Thereupon the newly elected mayor and councilmen shall forthwith become the official governing body of the city and shall conduct the first meeting of the newly elected council. 
Section 15.5. - Temporary Ordinances. 
    At its first meeting or at any meeting held within sixty (60) days thereafter, the council may adopt temporary ordinances to deal with cases in which there is an urgent need for prompt action in connection with the transition of government and in which the delay incident to the appropriate ordinance procedure would probably cause serious hardship or impairment of effective city government. Every temporary ordinance shall be plainly labeled as such but shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally. A temporary ordinance may be considered and may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. A temporary ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time preceding automatic repeal under this subsection as it may specify, and the referendum power shall not extend to any such ordinance. Every temporary ordinance, including any amendments made thereto after adoption, shall automatically stand repealed as of the ninety-first (91st) day following the date on which it was adopted, and it shall not be readopted, renewed or otherwise continued except by adoption in the manner prescribed for ordinances of the kind concerned. 
Section 15.6. - Purpose of Schedule. 
    The purpose of the foregoing provisions is to provide a transition from the present government of the City of Fulton, Missouri, to the new government provided for in this charter and to inaugurate the new government under the provisions of this charter. They shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that aim. 
PART II - CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Fulton City Code." 
(Code 1980, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Fulton, Missouri. 
    City council. The term "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Fulton, Missouri. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.040. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the term "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" is used, it shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Fulton. 
    County. The term "the county" shall mean the County of Callaway. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the masculine, females, as well as males, and associations and bodies corporate, as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.030(2). 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any section of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. Words importing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.050. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.020(10). 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the term "of the City of Fulton" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the term "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the term shall include the partners or members thereof and as to corporations shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.020(11). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.020(12). 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real, tangible and intangible personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.020(15). 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and all other property open to the public. 
    Public way. The term "public way" shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property, premises, real estate or lands. The terms "real property," "premises," "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the term "seal" is used, it shall mean the city or corporate seal. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean the portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Missouri. 
    Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include all of them. 
    Tangible personal property. The term "tangible personal property" shall include goods, chattels and all personal property, except intangible personal property. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Writing. The terms "writing" and "written" shall include printing, lithographing or any other mode of representing words and letters, but in all cases where the signature of a person is required, the proper handwriting of the person or his mark is intended. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the term "year" shall be equivalent to the term "year of our Lord." 
(b)  All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. 
(Code 1980, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions, rules of construction, RSMo 1.020 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section or as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The sections appearing in this and the following chapters, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1980, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1980, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc. 
    Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying such ordinance shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance prior to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if such ordinance or provisions had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1980, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
    When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and such former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. 
(Code 1980, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Seal-Device; form and size. 
    The device of the seal of the city shall be a bare arm and hand holding a hammer, and the seal shall be so engraved as to represent by its impression on such device surrounded by a double circle in which shall be the words "City of Fulton," "seal." The seal shall be circular and two inches in diameter, and all as designed and in use by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Same-Clerk's duties. 
    The city clerk shall keep the seal of the city in his office and shall affix the seal to all instruments of writing of whatsoever nature, whenever required by ordinance, resolution or order of the city council or at the request of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Same-Affixing when required by person. 
    The city clerk is authorized to affix the seal of the city to copies of all records and documents whenever required by any person. 
(Code 1980, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances passed and adopted by the city council shall be recorded by the clerk of the city council in the ordinance book and signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk of the city council, and all ordinances when so recorded, signed and countersigned shall be considered and taken to be the original roll of the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Beginning with the ordinance following the last ordinance included in this Code, each proposed ordinance shall be assigned a bill number, beginning with number 1 and continuing in numerical order, and each ordinance finally adopted, beginning with the ordinance following the last ordinance included in this Code, shall be assigned an ordinance number, beginning with number 1 and continuing in numerical order. A separate file shall be kept of all bills not finally adopted. 
(c)  Any ordinance passed and adopted by the city council shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, except as may be otherwise provided in such ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Copies of Code. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep two copies of this Code. These copies shall be so preserved by the city clerk that any and all amendments to or general ordinances affecting such codification shall be shown by appropriate notes. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure the maintenance in the office of the city clerk of two master copies of the codification in which shall be shown any and all changes which have taken place since the publication of this Code. 
(b)  In determining whether or not any ordinance passed or any part thereof shall be noted in the copies of the codification so preserved by the city clerk and in determining the form of any such note and its location, if any doubt arises, the city clerk shall be guided by the advice of the city counselor or his assistants. 
(Code 1980, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Code as evidence. 
    Any printed copy of this Code containing a printed certificate of the mayor and the city clerk as to the correctness of such codification shall be received in evidence in any court for the purpose of proving the ordinances therein contained and for the same purpose as the original ordinances, minutes or journals would be received. 
(Code 1980, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Amendments to Code-Effect. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1980, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Same-Procedures. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Same-Language. 
    Amendments to any of the chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code should be made by amending such chapters, articles, divisions or sections by specific reference to the chapter, article, division or section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That chapter (or article, division or section) _____ of the Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______ (set out new provisions in full) _______." 
(Code 1980, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-16. - Same-New material. 
(a)  If a new section not existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri, is hereby amended by adding a chapter (or article, division, section or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered _____, which reads as follows: _______(set out new provisions in full)_____." 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the city council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of the City of Fulton, Missouri, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1980, § 1-16) 
Sec. 1-17. - Same-Repeal. 
    All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, division number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, § 1-17) 
Sec. 1-18. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-18) 
Sec. 1-19. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 1-19) 
Sec. 1-20. - General penalty for Code violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city any act or failure to act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 1-20) 
Cross reference- Planning and code enforcement officer, § 2-251 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 110-31 et seq. 
Sec. 1-21. - Ordinances saved from repeal generally. 
    Nothing contained in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries or other compensation of officers, employees or special counsel of the city not inconsistent with such Code; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, or in any way affecting any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing traffic regulations for specific streets or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance of the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance levying taxes, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance fixing utility rates and charges. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which is repealed by this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animal control commission, § 14-41 et seq.; local organization for civil emergencies, § 34-26 et seq.; elections, ch. 42; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; administration and enforcement of flood control regulations, § 54-31 et seq.; historic preservation commission, § 62-26 et seq.; human rights and community relations commission, § 66-31 et seq.; disability grievance procedure, § 66-61 et seq.; police department, § 70-26 et seq.; superintendent of parks and recreation, § 82-26 et seq.; parks and recreation board, § 82-51 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 86-26 et seq.; signs, ch. 92; solid waste department, § 94-26 et seq.; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 110-31 et seq.; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Provisions relative to all cities, RSMo 71.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Chapter's status. 
    This chapter shall constitute the administrative code required by section 6.1 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 32-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Contracts-Authorization. 
(a)  Whenever it is deemed necessary for the city to enter into any contract with any person, the city council may by ordinance or resolution instruct the mayor and city clerk to enter into any such contract on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Such ordinance shall state the names of parties to such contract to be made and entered into and the general terms and the consideration thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
State Law reference- Requirements for municipal contracts generally, RSMo 432.070; duplicate copies required, RSMo 432.080. 
Sec. 2-3. - Same-Form. 
    All contracts entered into pursuant to section 2-2 shall be in writing, shall be signed by the parties thereto and, on the part of the city, shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk with the seal of the city affixed thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-4. - Same-Bids. 
    The city council may solicit sealed bids for any contract through the city clerk, and the council shall have the right to reject any bids. 
(Code 1980, § 2-3; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-5. - Impersonation of city officers. 
    No person shall, in the city, falsely represent himself to be an officer of the city or shall, without being lawfully authorized, exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-6. - Hindering, obstructing or resisting officer in discharge of duty. 
    No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with an officer of the city in the discharge of his official duty or attempt to rescue any person from the custody of any such officer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-7. - Statements of city officers in claims against the city. 
    Officers, agents and employees of the city shall not give, make or sign statements presented to them by attorneys, adjusters or others having or prosecuting claims against the city, except with the advice and consent of the city counselor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-6; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-8. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of January and terminate on the thirty-first day of December of each year, and the books, accounts and reports of all officers shall be made to conform thereto. 
(Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 718-96, § 1, 6-25-96) 
Sec. 2-9. - Fiscal or interest disclosure-Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-8; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 672-94, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 883-01, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 938-03, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1105-05, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 1189-07, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1350-13, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1391-15, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 2-10. - Same-Conflicts of interest. 
    The mayor or any member of the city council who has a substantial personal or private interest, as defined by state law, in any bill shall disclose on the records of the city council the nature of his interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on any matters relating to this interest. 
(Code 1980, § 2-9; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 672-94, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 883-01, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 938-03, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1105-05, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 1189-07, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1350-13, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1391-15, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 2-11. - Same-Disclosure reports. 
    Each elected official, the director of administration, and chief financial officer shall disclose the following information by May 1 if any such transaction were engaged in during the previous calendar year. 
(a)  For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of $500.00, if any, that such person had with the political subdivision, other than compensation received as an employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision; and 
(b)  The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of $500.00, if any, that any business entity in which such person had a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision. 
(c)  The director of administration and the chief financial officer also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each of the employers of such person or firm from whom income of $1,000.00 or more was received during the year covered by the statement; 
(2)  The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and address of each partner or co participant for each partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the secretary of state; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten percent or more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two percent or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests; 
(3)  The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver. 
(Code 1980, § 2-10; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 672-94, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 883-01, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 938-03, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1105-05, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 1189-07, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1350-13, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1391-15, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 2-12. - Same-Filing of reports. 
    The reports, in the prescribed format, shall be filed with the city clerk and with the secretary of state prior to January 1, 1993, and thereafter with the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 2-11; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 672-94, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 883-01, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 938-03, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1105-05, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 1189-07, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1350-13, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1391-15, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 2-13. - Same-When filed. 
    The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one financial interest statement in any calendar year: 
(a)  Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within 30 days of such appointment or employment; 
(b)  Every other person required to file a financial interest statement shall file the statement annually not later than May 1 and the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31; providing that any member of the city council may supplement the financial interest statement to report additional interests acquired after December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement. 
(Code 1980, § 2-12; Ord. No. 648-93, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 672-94, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 883-01, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 938-03, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1105-05, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 1189-07, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1350-13, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1391-15, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Secs. 2-14-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Division of city into wards, RSMo 82.110; election of officers, date, RSMo 82.040. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Election. 
    An election for one councilmember shall be held in each ward on the first Tuesday in April of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 2-30(c)) 
Sec. 2-32. - Qualifications; term of office. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible to the office of councilmember who is not 21 years of age, a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter of the city. Such person shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding his nomination and a resident of his ward immediately preceding his nomination. No person shall be a councilmember who is in arrears for any tax lien, forfeiture or defalcation in office. 
(b)  Members of the council shall hold office for two years ensuing their election, and until their successors are elected, qualified and commissioned, unless they have resigned, moved from the ward from which they were elected or for other reasons vacated the office. 
(Code 1980, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-33. - Compensation of deputy mayor when acting as mayor. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor as set forth in section 4.5 of the city Charter, the deputy mayor who assumes all the duties and responsibilities of the mayor shall receive the same salary as the mayor until the next regular municipal election. 
(Code 1980, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-34. - Meeting times, places-Generally. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be held at such places and times as established by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-35. - Same-Regular. 
(a)  The first regular meeting of the city council after each annual election shall be held on the second Tuesday in April, and thereafter regular meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. or as may be provided by the council. 
(b)  Adjourned meetings shall be reconvened whenever the council shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 2-38) 
Charter reference- Council to set meeting time and place, § 3.10(a). 
Sec. 2-36. - Election of deputy mayor. 
(a)  At the first regular meeting after each annual city election, the council shall elect a deputy mayor from the council to serve for one year. The deputy mayor shall act as the mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(b)  If the election of a deputy mayor results in a tie vote of the council, the council shall proceed to determine the election by lot. 
(Code 1980, § 2-39) 
Charter reference- Deputy mayor, § 3.4. 
Sec. 2-37. - Special committees. 
    Special committees may be appointed by the mayor or by the council from time to time, and such committees shall consider and report on such matters as may be referred to them. 
(Code 1980, § 2-40) 
Secs. 2-38-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Council to determine its rules and order of business, § 3.10(a). 

Sec. 2-51. - Rules to govern deliberations of council. 
    Rules of order and council procedure shall be submitted by the mayor and approved by the council at the beginning of each new term of the council. Any procedural question not covered by the adopted rules or this division shall be determined by reference to Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1980, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-52. - Deputy mayor performing duties of mayor; election of substitute deputy mayor. 
    When the hour designated for a council meeting arrives, if the mayor is not present the deputy mayor shall perform all the duties of the mayor and as presiding officer of the council. If both the mayor and deputy mayor are absent, a quorum of members being present, the member with the most seniority on the council shall call the council to order and shall perform all the duties of the president of the council to order and shall perform all the duties of the president of the council for that meeting or until the mayor or deputy mayor shall arrive. Any member serving in such capacity shall retain a right to vote. 
(Code 1980, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-53. - Committee of the whole. 
    It shall be the standing order for the council to resolve themselves into committee of the whole council on the state of the city. On motion made and carried to go into committee of the whole, the mayor shall leave the chair and call the councilmember with the most seniority on the council present to preside. The rules of proceeding in the council shall be observed in the committee as far as they are applicable, except that no limit of speaking shall be observed. A motion for the rising of the committee shall always be in order, unless a member is speaking, and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-55) 
Sec. 2-54. - Voting. 
    Every member of the council who shall be present when the question is stated by the chair shall vote thereon, unless excused by the council or unless he is prohibited by section 13.1 of the Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-56) 
Sec. 2-55. - Reducing motions and resolutions to writing. 
    Every resolution of the council shall be reduced to writing, and every motion of the council, at the request of the president or of any member of the council, shall be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1980, § 2-57) 
Sec. 2-56. - Deciding priority of business; objection to reading paper. 
    All questions relating to the priority of business to be acted on by the council shall be decided without debate. When a reading of any paper is called for and the reading is objected to by any member, it shall be determined by a vote of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-58) 
Sec. 2-57. - Voting on nominations for office. 
    When a nomination for office shall be made by the mayor, the council shall proceed to vote thereon, but no nomination shall be ratified until it shall have been approved by a majority of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-59) 
Sec. 2-58. - Resignation of member. 
    Any member of the council may resign at any time by addressing the resignation in writing to the mayor, who shall lay the resignation before the council at the first meeting after he receives the resignation. The council shall accept the resignation by motion which shall be noted in the journal of the council proceedings. 
(Code 1980, § 2-60) 
Secs. 2-59-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

Sec. 2-71. - Council to require city counselor to sign. 
    The city council may require the signature of the city counselor on any ordinance or resolution certifying they are correct as to form. Such requirement shall be made any time prior to the passage of any ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 2-99(e); Ord. No. 1496-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 2-72. - Vote for passing resolution. 
    The vote required to pass a resolution shall be a majority of the members of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-73. - Title of bill. 
    The title of every bill shall indicate the purpose and object sought to be accomplished thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 2-102) 
Secs. 2-74-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-96. - Departmental organization. 
(a)  The administrative service of the city shall be divided under the director of administration. The city council may further create, reorganize, alter, abolish or discontinue any department so created not inconsistent with the Charter into the following departments and heads thereof: 
(1)  Legal department, city attorney, city counselor. 
(2)  Police department, police chief. 
(3)  Fire department, fire chief. 
(4)  Utility department, superintendent of utilities. 
(5)  Finance department, chief financial officer. 
(6)  Public works department, city engineer. 
(7)  Parks and recreation department, parks and recreation superintendent. 
(8)  Solid waste department, solid waste manager. 
(9)  Office of the city clerk, city clerk. 
(10)  Planning and code enforcement department, planning and code enforcement officer. 
(b)  The council shall annually, prior to the adoption of the city budget, review the organization chart and shall make any such revisions as may be required. 
(Code 1980, § 32-5) 
Sec. 2-97. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officials. Each official shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, this chapter and other ordinances of the city and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the director of administration. 
(b)  Department heads. Each department head shall: 
(1)  Be responsible to director of administration. Be immediately responsible to the director of administration for the effective administration of his department and all activities assigned thereto. 
(2)  Inaugurate sound practices. Keep informed as to the latest practices in his particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the director of administration, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(3)  Report to director of administration. Submit a monthly report of the activities of his department to the director of administration and such other reports as may be required by the director of administration. 
(4)  Maintain records. Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the director of administration. 
(5)  Have authority over employees. Have the power, when authorized by the director of administration, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel system regulations for personnel, all subordinates under him. 
(6)  Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his department. 
(c)  Departments. Each department shall furnish, upon direction of the director of administration, any other department such service, labor and material as may be requisitioned by the head of such department and as its own facilities permit, through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred. 
(d)  Operation of administrative service. The administrative service shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open at such hours and on such days as shall be required by the director of administration. 
(2)  Deposits. Make such deposits of any monies received as directed by the director of administration. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed by the director of administration, city council or city ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 32-7) 
Sec. 2-98. - Requisitions and estimates. 
    Each city department or agency shall file with the director of administration detailed requisitions or estimates of the requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times and for such future periods as the director of administration or designee shall prescribe. 
(Code 1980, § 2-240) 
Secs. 2-99-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Finance department created, § 6.1(d). 

Sec. 2-111. - Created. 
    As provided in the city Charter there is created a finance department. The finance department shall be responsible for the effective and efficient collection and disbursement of all city revenues. The department shall be supervised by a chief financial officer who shall be appointed by the director of administration with the consent of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-226) 
Sec. 2-112. - Duties of chief financial officer. 
    In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, it shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city. The chief financial officer shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Fiscal supervision. Exercise general supervision regarding the proper management of the fiscal concerns of the city. 
(2)  Report delinquent payments and financial reports. See that officers receiving money pay the money into the city treasury, when required, and that all necessary financial reports are made by officials and shall report all delinquents in such payments or reports to the director of administration and city council. 
(3)  Duty upon default of official. Report the default of any official of the city to the director of administration who shall direct the city counselor to take immediate legal measures for the recovery of the amount for which such official may be in default. 
(4)  Responsibility for proceeds of bonds. Deposit the proceeds of all sales of bonds in the city treasury immediately after he shall have received the proceeds, and, until such deposit, he shall be responsible for the amount thereof. 
(5)  Payments of money from special trust funds. Pay to the persons duly entitled thereto any money paid into the treasury pursuant to condemnation proceedings or for the redemption of property sold for taxes or arising from special assessments for public improvements, condemnation fund certificates and all special trust funds. 
(6)  Accounts of receipts and expenditures. Keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all the monies received and disbursed by him in behalf of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom received and to whom disbursed and on what account received and disbursed and how paid. 
(7)  Receive and disburse monies. Receive and have custody of all monies paid to the city. 
(8)  Pay city employees. Pay city employees upon presentation of the properly certified payroll. 
(9)  Collect monies and fees due city. Demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner and the means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectable by other methods, he shall report such to the city counselor for prosecution. 
(10)  Audit accounts. Examine and audit the accounts of all officials and departments. 
(11)  Budget duties. Prepare an estimate of revenue and give such other assistance in the preparation of the budget as may be required of him by the director of administration. 
(12)  Financial statements. Transmit to the director of administration, when so directed, audited statements of cash on hand and of unencumbered appropriation balances for the city as a whole and such other financial statements as the director of administration may from time to time require. He shall keep all departments, boards, commissions or institutions currently informed of its unencumbered appropriation balances. 
(13)  Keep accounts. Keep all accounts of the city government and of the respective departments, offices, boards, commissions and institutions. 
(Code 1980, § 32-9) 
Secs. 2-113-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-126. - Established; purpose. 
    There is established for the city, in accordance with the city Charter, a public works department, the purpose of which is to provide for the control, construction and maintenance of the public works of the city, except those public works of the city classified as municipal utilities. 
(Code 1980, § 31-1) 
Sec. 2-127. - Composition. 
(a)  The public works department will consist of but not be limited to the following divisions: 
(1)  Engineering service; 
(2)  Street; 
(3)  Airport; and 
(4)  Cemetery. 
(b)  The director of administration, with the consent of the council, may from time to time include additional responsibilities or functions. 
(Code 1980, § 31-2) 
Sec. 2-128. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the personnel of the public works department shall be determined by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 31-3) 
Sec. 2-129. - Suspension, demotion or discharge of personnel. 
(a)  The city engineer may suspend, demote or discharge any personnel of the public works department for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency. 
(b)  Any person so suspended, demoted or discharged for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency may appeal such suspension, demotion or discharge through the grievance procedures established in the personnel manual. 
(Code 1980, § 31-4) 
Sec. 2-130. - City engineer. 
(a)  Generally. The director of administration, with the consent of the mayor, shall appoint a city engineer, who shall have supervisory responsibility for the operations of the public works department. 
(b)  Property. The city engineer shall have the power of control over the responsibility for all real estate and personal property placed under the jurisdiction of the street division, including, but not restricted to, the real estate and personal property used for and by the storage building, sheds and areas used for such purposes and the offices and rooms in the city hall now devoted to such uses. The council may, by resolution from time to time, include additional property or functions within the control and responsibility of the city engineer or remove any property or functions from him. Property shall only be sold or leased with the written approval of the council by resolution. All legal descriptions of real estate which are the subject of any transaction involving the city in any way shall be checked and approved by the city engineer in writing, addressed to the proper department head or city official. 
(Code 1980, § 31-5(a)) 
Sec. 2-131. - City engineer may use title of street commissioner. 
    The city engineer shall have the powers of and may use the title of street commissioner whenever called for by city or state law. 
(Code 1980, § 31-6) 
Sec. 2-132. - Duties and responsibilities of city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall have supervisory responsibility for all personnel of the public works department. 
(b)  The city engineer shall make such rules and regulations as he deems necessary governing the relation of the various departments under his supervision with other departments and agencies of the city. 
(c)  Construction and maintenance work shall be conducted as necessary to the effective operation of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-7) 
Secs. 2-133-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-156. - Salaries. 
    The council shall fix by ordinance as far as practicable the compensation of all officers and regular employees of the city; provided, however, that the salary of an officer shall not be changed during the time for which he was elected, appointed or employed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-140) 
Sec. 2-157. - Qualifications. 
    All officers elected or appointed to offices under the city government shall be qualified voters under the law and constitution of the state and the ordinances of the city and, except the city sextons, must be residents of the city. No person shall be elected or appointed to any office and no person shall be employed or remain in the employment of the city who shall, at any time, be in arrears for any unpaid city taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office. 
(Code 1980, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-158. - Oath. 
    Every officer of the city and his assistants and every councilmember, before entering upon duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before some court of record in the county or justice of the peace in the city, county or state or the city clerk or municipal judge that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by law; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the state, the provisions of all laws of the state affecting constitutional charter cities and the ordinances of the city and that he will faithfully demean himself in office, which official oath or affirmation shall be filed with the city clerk. If any person elected or appointed to any office shall fail to take and subscribe such oath or affirmation, his office shall be deemed vacant. 
(Code 1980, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-159. - Certain officers authorized to administer oaths and affirmations. 
    The mayor or presiding officer, municipal judge and city clerk are authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations in the following cases: 
(1)  The mayor or presiding officer of the city council to witnesses or other persons touching any subject under consideration by the council in which the interest of the city may be involved or in the conduct of the trial of any proceedings in which the city may be an interested party or any other elective or appointive officer to his official oath. 
(2)  The municipal judge to witnesses, jurors or other persons relating to any trial or other proceedings within the jurisdiction of his court or to any elective or appointive officer to his official oath. 
(3)  The city clerk to any person certifying to any demand or claim against the city, bearing on the correctness of the demand or claim, or to any witness or juror in any case wherein the city is or may be an interested party. 
(Code 1980, § 2-143) 
Sec. 2-160. - Official bonds. 
    Every officer of the city, when required by law or ordinance, shall, within 15 days after his election or appointment and before entering upon the discharge of his duties, give bond to the city in such sum and with such sureties as shall be designated by this Code or by city ordinance, conditioned on the faithful performance of his duty and that he will pay over all moneys belonging to the city, as provided by law, that may come into his hands. If any person elected or appointed to any office shall fail to give bond as required in this section, his office shall be deemed vacant. For any breach of condition of any such bond, suit may be instituted thereon by the city or by any person in the name of the city for use of such person. Should any officer of the city required to give bond be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent or more, an individual bond shall not be required. 
(Code 1980, § 2-144) 
Sec. 2-161. - Commission authorizing person to discharge duties of office. 
    After receiving certificates of election and upon the filing of the oath and bond provided for in sections 2-158 and 2-160, the city clerk shall deliver to the person elected or appointed a commission in due form, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and under the seal of the city, authorizing and empowering such person to discharge the duties of the office therein named for the term for which he has been elected or appointed and until his successor shall have been duly elected or appointed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-145) 
Sec. 2-162. - Annual reports to council. 
    All officers of the city shall report annually to the council at the first regular monthly meeting thereof in August of each year. Such reports shall be made in writing and shall embrace a full and detailed statement of the receipts and shall embrace a full statement of the expenditures, if any, of their respective offices and all other matters and things necessary to a complete showing of all the public business done in their respective offices or under the supervision thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-147) 
Sec. 2-163. - Inspection of books, documents, vouchers by public. 
    All books, papers, records, documents and vouchers of a public character in the office of any city officer shall be open for the reasonable inspection of the public at all times during reasonable business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 2-148) 
Sec. 2-164. - Receipt for books, furniture and supplies; delivery of property to successor. 
    Upon taking his office, every city officer shall sign a receipt for all books, papers, records, furniture and fixtures and office supplies of all kinds coming to him with such office, such receipts being filed with the city clerk. Upon going out of office, the officer shall deliver the property, together with all of a similar character that shall accumulate during his term of office, to his successor or make good to the city any missing or damaged property. 
(Code 1980, § 2-149) 
Sec. 2-165. - Vacancy of office for certain changes in residence. 
    If any city officer shall leave the city with the intention of changing residence from the city, his office shall thereby be declared vacant. If any councilmember shall move from the ward from which he was elected, his office shall be declared vacant and his successor named according to the provisions made for the election of officers. 
(Code 1980, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-166. - Appointive offices-Vacancy in office. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any nonelective office as to which the mayor has the power of appointment with the consent of the council, the mayor shall appoint a suitable person to discharge the duties of the office until the first regular meeting of the council thereafter, at which time such vacancy shall be permanently filled in the manner provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-152) 
Sec. 2-167. - Same-Time of appointment; majority consent of council for certain appointments. 
    The several city offices not made elective by the state law shall be filled by proper appointment, according to law and ordinance, not later than 30 days after the organization of the council in April in each year. The consent of a majority of the members elected to the city council shall be necessary to a confirmation of any appointment wherein the approval of the council is required. 
(Code 1980, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-168. - Resignations. 
    Any officer or person desiring to resign his office or employment under the city government shall do so in writing. The written resignation shall be directed to the department head or to the mayor and receipt received for its delivery. Upon receipt of any resignation, the department head or the mayor shall immediately take action thereon, and no office or position shall be deemed vacant until such resignation has been duly accepted by the department head or the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-154) 
Sec. 2-169. - Workers' compensation-Start of benefits. 
    Workers' compensation benefits shall begin as provided by statute. 
(Code 1980, § 2-160) 
Sec. 2-170. - Same-Payment of sick leave prior to receiving benefits; pay while drawing compensation. 
(a)  Regular sick leave shall be paid until workers' compensation benefits shall begin, except that sick leave shall not be paid in excess of that to which the employee is entitled. 
(b)  While receiving workers' compensation the employee shall receive from the city an amount equal to the difference between the regular rate of pay being earned at the time of the accident and the amount of workers' compensation being paid to the employee. 
(Code 1980, § 2-161) 
Sec. 2-171. - Participation in retirement system. 
(a)  The city is a political subdivision as defined in RSMo 70.600-70.760 and elects to have covered by the state local government employees retirement system all of its eligible employees in the following classes: 
(1)  Present and future general employees. 
(2)  Present and future police officers. 
(3)  Present and future firefighters. 
(b)  The city elects that 100 percent of prior employment be considered for prior service credit in computing benefits and contributions to the system. 
(c)  The city clerk is authorized and directed to deduct from the wages and salaries of each employee member the member contributions required by RSMo 70.705 and to promptly remit the deductions to the retirement system together with the employer contributions required by RSMo 70.730. 
(Code 1980, § 2-162) 
Sec. 2-172. - Election of benefit program in state retirement system. 
    The city elects benefit program L-3 in accordance with RSMo 70.655. Such election shall be effective on July 1, 1978. 
(Code 1980, § 2-163) 
Sec. 2-173. - Matters not covered by article. 
    Matters relating to officers and employees not covered in this article or elsewhere in this Code shall be as provided in the personnel manual. 
(Code 1980, § 2-164) 
Sec. 2-174. - City engineer. 
(a)  Duties generally. The city engineer shall be responsible for all matters relating to community planning, zoning and development; and the construction, management, maintenance and operation of the city's physical properties. 
(b)  Duties for public works. The city engineer shall perform all engineering services for the department of public works and for such other departments of the city as may from time to time require such services. 
(c)  Duties for street division. For the street division the city engineer shall direct the repair, maintenance and uses of all city streets. 
(Code 1980, § 32-11) 
Sec. 2-175. - Conflicts in private business transactions. 
    No city officer or employee shall enter into any private business transaction with any person who or entity that has a matter pending upon which the officer or employee is or will be called upon to render a decision or pass judgment. If any officer or employee is already engaged in the business transaction, at the time that matter arises, he shall be disqualified from rendering any decision or passing any judgment upon the business. 
(Code 1980, § 2-241) 
Sec. 2-176. - Gifts and rebates. 
    Every city officer and employee is expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person from whom any purchase or contract is or might be awarded any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. Violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 2-242) 
Secs. 2-177-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor, §§ 4.1-4.6. 

Sec. 2-186. - Appointment of certain officers and employees. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the council, shall have the power to appoint all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for by the Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-179) 
Sec. 2-187. - Deputy mayor's duties in temporary absence or disability of mayor. 
    Should the mayor be absent or unable to perform the duties of his office for a period of 30 days or more, the deputy mayor shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the office until the mayor shall return and shall receive the same compensation as the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-180) 
Secs. 2-188-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-201. - Functions. 
    The director of administration shall be the chief operating officer of the city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and require the faithful performance of all administrative duties. He may serve as the head of any department other than the legal department. 
(Code 1980, § 32-3(A)) 
Sec. 2-202. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of administration shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Appointments, dismissals, suspensions and disciplinary actions. With the advice and consent of the mayor, appoint all department heads, except the city counselor and city attorney. He shall appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to the administrative service and shall have the power to dismiss, suspend and discipline, in accordance with the personnel code, all officers and employees in the administrative service under his control. He shall also have the power to authorize a department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under that department head or officer. 
(2)  Administration. Be responsible for the day-to-day administrative activities of the city. He shall also serve as the professional staff resource to the mayor and the city council in matters concerning the proposal and development of public policy and shall, as a matter of procedure, bring all such public policy proposals and suggestions first to the mayor for discussion and the mayor shall transmit to the city council. 
(3)  Appoint to acting capacity. Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or position in the administrative service under his control which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent. 
(4)  Annual report. Prepare and present to the mayor for review, amendment and transmittal to the city council an annual report and such other reports as the mayor and council shall require. 
(5)  Budget report. Assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources for the city each ensuing year, prepare a program of activities within the financial power of the city and prepare and submit to the mayor a recommended annual budget and three-year capital program for mayoral review, amendment and transmittal to the city council. 
(6)  Assign according to classification. Have the power to assign any employee of the city to any department or branch thereof requiring services appropriate to the personnel code classification of the employee so assigned. 
(7)  Prescribe rules. Have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority and have the power to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service so prescribed by himself or subordinates. 
(8)  Investigations. Have the power, either by himself or by an officer or person designated for the purpose by him, to investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department, division, bureau or office and, when so authorized by the city council, have the power to employ consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries. 
(9)  Overrule officials. Have the power to set aside any action taken by a department head, except the city attorney and city counselor, and may supersede the department head in the functions of his office. 
(10)  Delegate duties. Have the power to direct any department, division or bureau to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau. 
(11)  Attendance at council meetings. Attend council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion, but may not vote. He shall receive notice of all meetings. 
(12)  Other duties. Perform such other duties as are specified in the Charter or may be required by the mayor from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 32-3(B)) 
Secs. 2-203-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY AND CITY COUNSELOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 653-93, § A, adopted Oct. 12, 1993, repealed §§ 2-213-2-221 of the city's 1980 Code, codified herein as §§ 2-216-2-223, and § B of the ordinance added similar new provisions to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference- City attorney, §§ 7.1-7.4; city counselor, § 7.5. 

Sec. 2-216. - City attorney-Selection. 
    At the first election following the adoption of the City Charter and biannually thereafter, the qualified voters of the city shall elect a city attorney, who shall hold office for two years and until his/her successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-217. - Same-Qualifications. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be a qualified voter of the city, licensed to practice law in this state, and a resident of the city at least six months and of the state one year next prior to his election. 
(b)  Should there be no qualified person filing for such office, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, is authorized to employ a city attorney on such terms as shall be established by ordinance. In such case, the city attorney shall not be required to be a resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-218. - Same-Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prosecute all persons charged with violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  When any complaint has been filed, it shall be the duty of the city attorney to prepare and file with the associate judge of the 13th judicial circuit a statement of information in proper form. 
(c)  When an affidavit is required on behalf of the city in any cause pending in the municipal court, it shall be made by the city attorney or, in case of the city attorney's inability, by some other person with knowledge of the facts. 
(d)  All cases filed shall be filed in the division of the associate judge of the 13th judicial circuit, as may be assigned by the presiding judge of the circuit. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the city attorney to review, as to form, all ordinances passed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-219. - City counselor-Selection. 
    The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint a city counselor, whose tenure shall be determined on an as-needed basis. The city counselor may be an individual or law firm, licensed to practice in this state. Residency is not a requirement for the appointment of an individual or law firm as city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-220. - Same-Term of office. 
    The city counselor shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-221. - Same-Duties. 
    The city counselor shall give legal advice and handle all legal issues assigned by the mayor or, with the advice and consent of the mayor, by the director of administration. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Sec. 2-222. - Compensation. 
(a)  City attorney. The compensation of the elected city attorney shall be a sum per month as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  City counselor. The compensation of the appointed city counselor (if any) shall be established by agreement between the appointing authority and the attorney or law firm involved at a specific rate per hour, which agreement shall be reported from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 663-94, § 1, 1-26-94) 
Sec. 2-223. - Filling temporary vacancy in office of city attorney. 
    In case of sickness, absence from the city or other temporary disability or inability of the city attorney to perform the duties of his office, then the mayor shall appoint some competent attorney to act as city attorney pending such temporary disability. The person so appointed shall possess the same power and receive the same compensation as the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 653-93, § B, 10-12-93) 
Secs. 2-224-2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk, § 6.2. 

Sec. 2-236. - Office created. 
    The office of city clerk is created. 
(Code 1980, § 2-193) 
Sec. 2-237. - Duties. 
    The city clerk shall: 
(1)  Serve as clerk of the city council and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be specified by law. 
(2)  Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the city council. 
(3)  Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and authenticate the ordinances. 
(4)  Publish all adopted ordinances and resolutions of the city council, as required, and all legal notices required by law or ordinance. 
(5)  Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member of any board or commission, such notice to be given at least 30 days before such expiration. 
(6)  Be the custodian of the official seal of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-4) 
Sec. 2-238. - Assistant. 
    The director of administration shall appoint an assistant city clerk, upon the recommendation of the city clerk and with the advice and consent of the mayor and the council. The assistant clerk shall perform the duties of the city clerk in the city clerk's absence, and the service rendered shall be in the name of and for the clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-197) 
Sec. 2-239. - Temporary clerk. 
    Whenever for any reason the city clerk is unable in person or by an assistant to perform the duties of the office, the director of administration may appoint a temporary clerk, who shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the regular clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-198) 
Secs. 2-240-2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PLANNING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20. 

Sec. 2-251. - Position created, appointment, similar titles. 
(a)  The position of planning and code enforcement officer is created. 
(b)  The planning and code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the director of administration with the consent of the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the city engineer and the director of administration. 
(c)  Any reference to the titles of code official, building inspector or health officer or health authority within this Code or any other code adopted by the city shall be construed to mean the planning and code enforcement officer or his designee. 
(Code 1980, § 6-10) 
Sec. 2-252. - Duties. 
    The planning and code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and inspections involved in community planning, zoning and development and the construction of sewer and water services, sidewalks, curb cuts, street cuts and buildings. The planning and code enforcement officer shall review all building plans and construction thereof under the provisions of the electrical, plumbing and building codes of the city and inspect all premises, including structures and appurtenances thereon, for safety features. 
(Code 1980, § 32-12) 
Secs. 2-253-2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OFFENSES AND IMPEACHMENT 

Sec. 2-266. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Officer means any elected official or anyone appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-263) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-267. - Voting for illegal claim or demand. 
    Any member of the council or officer who shall knowingly or willfully or corruptly vote for or assent to or report in favor of or allow or certify for allowance any claim or demand against the city, which claim or demand shall be on account of a contract or agreement not authorized by law and the ordinances of the city, shall be subject and liable to removal from office for cause. 
(Code 1980, § 2-264) 
Sec. 2-268. - Interest in city contracts. 
    Any city officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, or because of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city, or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the mayor or the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-265) 
Sec. 2-269. - Receiving reward for improper services. 
    Every city officer who shall, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any fee, consideration, gratuity or reward or act on any promise to receive any such compensation in connection with any city activity under the control and influence of any officer in his official capacity, by either omission or neglect, or showing partiality or favor in any responsibility or act for which he has the obligation and ability to control, contrary to law or ordinance, shall be subject to removal for cause. 
(Code 1980, § 2-266) 
Sec. 2-270. - Receiving reward for procuring appointments. 
    Every city officer who shall, directly or indirectly, accept or receive of another any sum of money or other valuable consideration, gratuity or reward or any promise or security thereof: 
(1)  Upon any agreement to give or procure the officer's interest or influence or other means; any appointment, office or place of trust or any preferment or emolument; or to aid or assist in procuring such for any other person; or 
(2)  In consideration of any office or appointment, place or preferment or emolument of any act, interest or influence aid or assistance by any means in procuring or attempting to procure any such preferment or emolument, appointment, office or place of trust; 
shall be subject and liable to removal from office for cause. 
(Code 1980, § 2-267) 
Sec. 2-271. - Procuring office by improper means. 
    Every city officer who shall have taken, accepted, received or obtained, directly or indirectly, his office, appointment, place of trust, preferment or emolument by the act, influence, aid or assistance of another upon any agreement or consideration mentioned in sections 2-269 and 2-270 shall be subject and liable to removal from office for cause. 
(Code 1980, § 2-268) 
Sec. 2-272. - Willful misconduct, malicious conduct, abuse of authority. 
    Every city officer who shall be guilty of willful misconduct or abuse of authority or willful and malicious oppressive partiality in his official capacity or under color of his office shall be subject and liable to removal from office for cause. As used in this section, the term "willful misconduct" means either nonfeasance, misfeasance or malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1980, § 2-269) 
Sec. 2-273. - Removal of appointive officers. 
(a)  The mayor may, with the majority vote of all the members of the council, remove from office any appointive city officer at will, and any such appointive officer may be so removed by six votes of the council, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(b)  No formalities whatever shall be necessary for the removal of any appointive city officer further than the necessary vote therefor by the city council, with or without the mayor's approval, as the case may demand under the law and this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-270) 
Sec. 2-274. - Suspension of officer. 
    Whenever an impeachment proceeding shall be started or commenced against any city officer and as soon as the complaint has been filed with the city clerk or mayor, the mayor, with the consent of the majority of the council, may suspend such officer, if they think it to be for the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-271) 
Sec. 2-275. - Impeached officer filling vacancy. 
    Any city officer who shall be impeached and removed from office in accordance with this division shall not be eligible for election or appointment to fill the vacancy created by removal, but such vacancy shall be filled in other respects as other vacancies are filled. 
(Code 1980, § 2-272) 
Sec. 2-276. - Removal of officer by mayor. 
    The mayor may, with the majority vote of all the members of the city council, remove from office for cause shown any city officer. Such officer being first given opportunity, together with witnesses, shall be heard before the council sitting as a court of impeachment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-273) 
Sec. 2-277. - Removal of officer by council. 
    Any officer, including the mayor, may, in the manner prescribed in section 2-276, for cause shown, be removed from office by six votes of the city council, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(Code 1980, § 2-274) 
Sec. 2-278. - Complaint-Procedures. 
    In the impeachment and removal of any officer of the city from office, it shall be necessary that the charges be set out in writing in sufficient fullness to correctly advise the officer of the nature and character of the complaint, sworn and subscribed to by the person making the complaint before some person authorized by the laws of the state to administer oaths. Such complaint shall be filed with the city clerk or with the mayor and shall be laid before the city council by such officer without delay. 
(Code 1980, § 2-275) 
Sec. 2-279. - Same-Bond may be required of person making complaint. 
    Before ordering the issuing of summons as provided in section 2-280, the city council may order the person making the complaint in the case to give a bond to the city with proper security in a sum sufficient to cover the costs and expenses of the investigation, and, unless such bond is given, the charges may be disregarded by the council or the council may proceed with the investigation without any security for costs. The expenses of the investigation may be paid by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-280. - Same-Hearing. 
    If the council desires to proceed with an investigation after the filing of a complaint pursuant to section 2-278, or if the city officer against whom the charges are directed demands an investigation, the council shall, by order entered of record, fix a time and place for the hearing of the matter and shall direct the city clerk to issue a notice under the clerk's hand and seal of the city, directed to the defendant in the complaint and stating the time when and the place where the proceedings of the investigation will be held. Such notice, together with a true copy of the charges filed made out by the city clerk attached thereto, shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer upon the city officer named as the defendant in the complaint. The manner of service shall be the same as provided by the laws of the state for the service of summons in civil courts. 
(Code 1980, § 2-277) 
Sec. 2-281. - Same-Determination of date of investigation. 
    The date fixed by the council for an investigation of any complaint filed pursuant to section 2-278 shall be such as to give the city officer against whom the charges are made opportunity to secure attendance of witnesses and otherwise prepare for trial in a reasonable manner. 
(Code 1980, § 2-278) 
Sec. 2-282. - Fees of officers serving in investigation. 
    The several officers rendering services in any investigation pursuant to this division shall be entitled to and shall receive the same fees as are or may be given by state law of officers performing similar services in courts of record in the state. 
(Code 1980, § 2-279) 
Sec. 2-283. - Subpoenas for witnesses. 
    The city clerk shall issue proper subpoenas for witnesses upon the application of a complaint under this division or the defendant, and such subpoenas may be served by the chief of police or any police officer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-280) 
Sec. 2-284. - Council to sit as court of impeachment. 
    The trial and proceedings under this division shall be had and held before the city council, sitting as court of impeachment, and the proceeding shall be the same, as far as applicable, as prescribed by law for the trial of civil cases in courts of record in the state. 
(Code 1980, § 2-281) 
Sec. 2-285. - Presiding officer. 
    In all impeachment proceedings before the council pursuant to this division, the mayor or person exercising the office of mayor shall preside. If the mayor or any councilmember shall be the person against whom the complaint is filed, such mayor or councilmember shall not preside over or vote in the impeachment proceedings. 
(Code 1980, § 2-282) 
Sec. 2-286. - Oaths. 
    At the time and place appointed for a trial under this division and before proceeding therewith, the mayor or, if the mayor is accused, the deputy mayor of the council, shall administer to the members of the council present and the presiding judge shall at the time administer to the mayor or, if the mayor is accused, to the deputy mayor of the council, an oath or affirmation impartially to try to determine the charges and do justice according to law and the evidence. The officer presiding at the trial shall administer the usual oath to all witnesses. 
(Code 1980, § 2-283) 
Sec. 2-287. - Public trial; record of proceedings. 
    All trials under this division shall be public, and the council shall cause the city clerk to keep a full and accurate record of the proceedings in the journal of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-284) 
Sec. 2-288. - Accused entitled to counsel. 
    Upon any trial held pursuant to this division, the accused shall be entitled to be heard by himself and his counsel in his defense. 
(Code 1980, § 2-285) 
Sec. 2-289. - Duty of counselor; procedure when counselor accused. 
    Pursuant to this division, the city counselor shall conduct and prosecute all trials on behalf of the city for the removal of any city officer. If the city counselor is the accused, the city attorney shall act in the city counselor's stead during the trial proceedings. 
(Code 1980, § 2-286) 
Sec. 2-290. - Vote on question of guilt; roll call and votes to be recorded. 
    Upon the completion of any trial held pursuant to this division, the clerk shall call the roll upon the questions of the defendant's guilt or innocence under the complaint or under each separate qualification contained in the complaint if there are more than one such specifications, and the members of the council shall vote guilty or not guilty upon the complaint or upon each such specification. The roll call and votes shall be made a part of the record of the clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-287) 
Secs. 2-291-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PERSONNEL RULES 

Sec. 2-301. - Employees at will. 
    All employees of the city are employees at will, serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council of the city, but subject to certain administrative protections as hereinafter set forth. These administrative procedures do not change the character of employment by the city from that of employees at will. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-302. - Rules to be promulgated. 
    The director of administration shall, from time to time, promulgate personnel rules and regulations which shall be published and distributed to city employees. It shall be the responsibility of each employee to be familiar with the rules and regulations and to obey the same. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-303. - Discipline imposed. 
    Discipline under the published personnel rules may be imposed by an employee's department head. Discipline shall be, to the extent possible, progressive in nature and shall be intended to correct an employee's behavior if required, rather than to be punitive in nature. Such discipline will be imposed in accordance with the published personnel rules and regulations. Notwithstanding the desire that discipline be progressive in nature, and that employees' behavior be improved rather than having employees replaced, it may be necessary from time to time that employees be terminated from municipal service. Such personnel actions shall be based upon guidelines established by the director of administration. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Secs. 2-304-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REVIEW OF PERSONNEL ACTIONS 

Sec. 2-311. - Generally. 
(a)  Any employee who is aggrieved by any personnel action shall have the privilege, within seven days of such personnel action, to request a meeting with and discussion of that personnel action with the director of administration. Such meeting and discussion with the director of administration shall occur within seven days of the request. The director of administration shall have the discretion to suspend the personnel action, to leave it in place, or to modify that action as shall seem appropriate. 
(b)  Following the meeting with the director of administration, if the employee is still aggrieved by the personnel action, the employee shall have the privilege, within five days, of having a meeting and discussion with the city's personnel advisory board, as established herein. The meeting of the personnel advisory board shall not be considered a "hearing" as the term is used in the State Administrative Procedures Act but shall be a meeting and discussion separate from the State Administrative Procedures Act procedures. The purpose of this meeting and discussion is to provide guidance in the internal operations of the city, to ensure an even application of discipline, but shall not be construed to provide any rights of further redress in the court system of the state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-312. - Personnel advisory board-Membership. 
    The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint a personnel advisory board consisting of seven persons who shall hold office for a term of three years. The members of the personnel advisory board shall have staggered terms, two or three members' terms ending on the last day of June of each year. Upon the establishment of the personnel advisory board, the existing six-member personnel board shall continue to hold office until the expiration of their terms, and a seventh member shall be appointed to have a three-year term. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-313. - Same-Procedures. 
    Upon the timely receipt of any request for a meeting and discussion regarding any adverse personnel action, the personnel advisory board shall schedule a closed meeting in which this matter will be addressed. The meeting will be scheduled at the convenience of the parties but, whenever possible, within ten days of the request. At such meeting, the following procedures will be observed: 
(1)  The director of administration shall first present an explanation of the reasons for the personnel action. The city counselor shall represent the director of administration and may present whatever witnesses seem appropriate. 
(2)  The employee, or the employee's legal representative, shall be entitled to cross-examine these witnesses. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the presentation of all evidence for the director of administration, the employee shall be permitted to present whatever evidence the employee desires. The director of administration shall have the right to cross-examine such witnesses. 
(4)  The rules of evidence shall not apply to this procedure, and it is especially understood that hearsay evidence and documentary evidence may be received when offered by either party. 
(5)  When it appears necessary in order to be fair to the parties, the personnel advisory board may continue the meeting to permit inquiry and may permit the use of rebuttal evidence as seems appropriate. 
(6)  Proceedings at this meeting shall be transcribed, but such transcription shall remain a closed record of the city available only to the employee and his representative and to the city and its representatives except as otherwise provided by law. 
(7)  The personnel advisory board shall consider, at this meeting, the following question: 
"Does cause exist for the discipline of this employee?" 
and shall answer to that question either in the affirmative or the negative. 
(8)  The personnel advisory board may make recommendations as to the appropriate level of discipline that should be imposed if cause for such discipline is found, but that recommendation shall not be binding upon the director of administration. 
(9)  The decision of the personnel advisory board shall be prepared in writing regarding the answer to the questions as to whether cause for discipline exists, as well as any recommendation that the personnel advisory board may choose to provide. This written decision regarding the cause for discipline and the recommendation shall be publicly disclosed immediately after the employee has been notified of such decision or within 72 hours of the decision, whichever occurs first. 
(10)  The decision of the personnel advisory board, if it is not implemented by the director of administration, shall be reported to the city council together with the director of administration's reasons for refusing to impose the decision or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-314. - Claims regarding discriminatory treatment. 
    The personnel advisory board is specifically authorized to inquire into claims of alleged discriminatory treatment by the city and, for that purpose, may inquire into the treatment afforded to other employees of the city in the same or similar circumstance as the aggrieved employee who brings the matter before it. Any employee who has a claim of discriminatory or unequal treatment in violation of the laws of the United States or the state is expected to bring that complaint first to the personnel advisory board, although it is recognized that such employee is not legally required to do so. In addition, the personnel advisory board is entitled to consider claims of unfair or discriminatory treatment based upon categories, factors or characteristics that are not protected under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Sec. 2-315. - Exception to personnel advisory board procedures. 
    Employees who test positive in the city's random drug testing program, and who thereafter fail to conform to the city's direction regarding rehabilitation and treatment by refusing or declining to participate in any rehabilitation program established by the director of administration, shall be immediately terminated, unless the director of administration shall order otherwise. Employees terminated for failing to participate in a drug rehabilitation program, or failing to successfully complete it in satisfactory manner, shall have no right to have that termination considered and discussed by the personnel advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 649-93, §§ I, II, 8-24-93) 
Secs. 2-316-2-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-321. - Creation. 
    The administrative service of the city shall include at a minimum the boards and commissions provided for in section 2-323, in compliance with the city Charter and the ordinances of the city. The boards and commissions shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 32-17(A)) 
Sec. 2-322. - Membership. 
    The boards and commissions created in section 2-323 shall be composed of the number of members and for the terms of office designated by ordinance creating such board or commission. 
(Code 1980, § 32-17(B)) 
Sec. 2-323. - Titles; other boards and commissions; ex officio members. 
(a)  The names of city boards and commissions are as follows: 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Commission on human rights and community relations. 
(3)  Personnel board. 
(4)  Board of public utilities. 
(5)  Parks and recreation board. 
(6)  Board of adjustment. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor and city council to appoint such other committees, boards or commissions from time to time as may be necessary to the effective operation of the city, provided that such committees, boards and commissions are not inconsistent with the Charter. 
(c)  The mayor and the director of administration shall serve as ex officio members of all committees, commissions and boards, without a vote, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Code 1980, § 32-17(C)) 
Secs. 2-324-2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL BOARD 

Sec. 2-336. - Established; purpose; appointment, composition and qualifications of members. 
(a)  There is established a personnel board to oversee the development of sound personnel practices which provide for impartial and nondiscriminatory standards for all employees of the city. 
(b)  The personnel board shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall consist of six members selected from the citizens of the city. Citizens appointed to the personnel board shall be qualified voters and shall have resided in the city at least one year. They shall hold no city office nor shall they be employees of the city government during their terms. 
(Code 1980, § 2-401) 
Sec. 2-337. - Terms of members; removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the personnel board shall hold office for three years from July 1 following their appointment. Annually, the mayor shall before July 1 of each year appoint two members who shall hold office for three years and until their successors are appointed. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, a member of the personnel board may be removed by a vote of five members of the city council. A member may also be removed by six votes of the city council independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(c)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being formally excused by the board shall forfeit his membership. 
(Code 1980, § 2-402) 
Sec. 2-338. - Officers. 
(a)  Annually, the personnel board shall elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice-chairman. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary and keep a record of all actions taken at the meeting. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the personnel board shall be delivered to the city council. All regular meetings shall become public record, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-403) 
Sec. 2-339. - Meetings. 
    The personnel board shall meet upon the call of the director of administration. 
(Code 1980, § 2-404) 
Sec. 2-340. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Members of the personnel board shall in their deliberations consider the best interests of effective and efficient services to the public, as well as consistent, equitable application of rules, policies, procedures and regulations. 
(b)  The board shall hear appeals from corrective or disciplinary actions against city employees which might result in disciplinary demotion, suspension or dismissal of an individual. 
(Code 1980, § 2-405) 
Secs. 2-341-2-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCES, PURCHASING AND BID PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-361. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of January and terminate on the thirty-first day of December of each year, and the books, accounts and reports of all officers shall be made to conform thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 2-7; Ord. No. 718-96, § 2, 6-25-96) 
Charter reference- Council to establish fiscal year by ordinance, § 8.1. 
Sec. 2-362. - Competitive bidding. 
    When the city negotiates any purchase, sale or other contract, there shall be provided ample opportunity for competitive bidding in the following manner: 
(1)  If the consideration is $500.00 or less, these items shall be exempt from the bid procedure but purchased with due regard for competitive prices and quality. 
(2)  If the consideration is for more than $500.00 but not more than $2,000.00, at least three bids shall be solicited by mail or telephone request from at least three prospective vendors, from which the lowest bid, with proper qualifications, shall be accepted. A record of the quotations shall be maintained, as directed. 
(3)  If the consideration is for more than $2,000.00 but less than $5,000.00, three written bids shall be solicited from which the lowest bid, with proper qualifications, shall be accepted. 
(4)  All supplies and contractual services estimated to cost $5,000.00 or more shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. Whenever possible, at least three bids should be obtained from prospective, qualified vendors. 
(5)  Individual contracts, purchases or sales, be they for goods, supplies, commodities or services, shall not be excluded from the requirement of competitive bidding described in this section. 
(6)  Individual contracts or purchases shall not be subdivided for the purpose of evading the requirement of competitive bidding. 
(7)  A list of items to be exempted from competitive bidding shall be made a part of the annual budget and reviewed at least annually. Reasons for exemption shall be set out in writing and made a part of the budget. Such reasons shall be limited to price volatility or limited supply or available source. 
(8)  Professional service shall be selected on the basis of a policy set out in detail in the administrative manual. 
(9)  Purchases up to $500.00 shall be approved by the department head. Purchases of more than $500.00 but less than $1,000.00 shall be approved by the department head and the chief financial officer. Purchases of $1,000.00 or more shall be approved by the director of administration or the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-243; Ord. No. 621-92, § 1, 8-25-92) 
Sec. 2-363. - Bid notice procedure. 
    The notice required by section 2-362 shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Notice inviting bids shall be published in at least one newspaper of the city at least seven working days preceding the last day set for the receipt of the proposals. The newspaper notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and shall give the time and place for opening bids. 
(2)  The city clerk shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names be added to a bidders' list, which the city clerk or designee shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidder's list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
(Code 1980, § 2-244) 
Sec. 2-364. - Bid opening procedure. 
    Bids shall be submitted sealed to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. They shall be opened in public and read aloud at the time and place stated in the public notice with at least two persons present at the opening. The city clerk shall send each bidder a copy of the bid tabulation and shall also furnish the bid tabulation to any requesting party. 
(Code 1980, § 2-245) 
Sec. 2-365. - Rejection of bids; award to lowest and best responsible bidder. 
    The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest and best responsible bidder. Bids shall not be accepted from nor contracts awarded to a vendor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. In determining the lowest and best responsible bidder, in addition to price, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(10)  Life cycle costs of products. 
(Code 1980, § 2-246) 
Sec. 2-366. - Tie bids. 
    If all bids received or the lowest bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where there is no city low bidder, the award shall be made on the basis of a drawing of lots, to be held in public. 
(Code 1980, § 2-247) 
Sec. 2-367. - Petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(a)  There is appropriated out of money in the city treasury, not otherwise appropriated, the sum of $300.00 which shall be known as the petty expenditures revolving fund. From this fund shall be paid all purchases not in excess of $25.00 each, made by the head of a using agency for incidentals with the approval of the chief financial officer. Amounts greater than $25.00 may be paid by obtaining prior approval from the chief financial officer. A written explanation shall accompany the purchases explaining in detail the reasons for the expenditure. 
(b)  The chief financial officer shall promulgate rules and regulations for use of the petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(Code 1980, § 2-248) 
Sec. 2-368. - Emergency purchases. 
    If an apparent emergency occurs which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the department head may authorize the purchase, at the lowest obtainable price, of any supplies or contractual services not in excess of $1,000.00. A full explanation of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be reported to the director of administration in writing and a copy filed with the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-249) 
Sec. 2-369. - Cooperative procurement. 
    The director of administration or designee shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the city would be served and after approval of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-250) 
Sec. 2-370. - Sale of surplus material. 
(a)  Surplus material may be sold or disposed of without prior consideration and approval from the city council, but with signed approval from the mayor, director of administration, department head, and one member of the city council in accordance to the following: 
(1)  That said materials shall not consist of real property, but rather, tangible goods, materials, supplies, or equipment. 
(2)  That said materials shall have an estimated value of less than or equal to $10,000.00. 
(3)  That said materials shall be sold in accordance to the competitive bidding procedures set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to any verified open market competition to the highest bidder. 
(4)  That the purchasing agent or other designee as determined by the director of administration may set a minimum sale price and may reject any bid that, in said designee's judgment, is not a fair sale price. 
(b)  That all real property declared as surplus must be given city council approval by ordinance prior to sale. 
(Ord. No. 1427-16, § 1, 11-22-16) 
Secs. 2-371-2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS 

Sec. 2-401. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
    Closed meeting, closed record or closed vote means any meeting, record or vote closed to the public. 
    Copying, if requested by a member of the public, means photocopies provided in accord with the cost schedule established by this article, if duplication equipment is available. 
    Public business means all matters which relate in any way to the performance of the city's functions or the conduct of its business. 
    Public governmental body means any legislative, administrative governmental entity created by the constitution or statutes of this state, orders or ordinances of the city, judicial entities when operating in an administrative capacity, or by executive order, including: 
(1)  Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the mayor or city council. 
(2)  Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body under the direction of three or more elected or appointed members having rule-making or quasi-judicial power. 
(3)  Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities and which is authorized to report to any of the above named entities. 
(4)  Any quasi-public governmental body. The term "quasi-public governmental body" means any corporation organized or authorized to do business in this state under the provisions of RSMo chapter 352, 353 or 355, or unincorporated association which either (a) has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public governmental bodies, or to engage primarily in activities carried out pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental bodies; or (b) performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily or ordinance-based capacity to confer or otherwise advance, through approval, recommendation or other means, the allocation or issuance of tax credits, tax abatement, public debt, tax exempt debt, rights of eminent domain, or the contracting of lease-back agreements on structures whose annualized payments commit public tax revenues; or any association that directly accepts the appropriations of money from the city, but only to the extent that meetings, a record or vote relates to such appropriation. 
    Public meeting means any meeting of a public governmental body subject to this article at which any public business is discussed, decided or public policy formulated, whether corporeal or by means of communication equipment. The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this article. 
    Public record means any record, whether written or electronically stored, retained by or for any public governmental body including any report, survey, memorandum, or other document or study prepared and presented to the public governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in whole or in part by public funds. 
    Public vote means any vote cast at any public meeting of any public governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 1, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-402. - Meetings, records and votes to be public; exceptions. 
    All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except that any meeting, record or vote relating to one or more of the following matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in this article, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes to make them public: 
(1)  Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body and any confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body or its representatives and its attorneys. However, any vote relating to litigation involving a public governmental body shall be made public upon final disposition of the matter voted upon; provided, however, in matters involving the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be announced or become public immediately following the action on the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal work product shall be considered a closed record. 
(2)  Lease, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any vote or public record approving a contract relating to the lease, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the real estate. 
(3)  Hiring, firing, discipline or promotion of particular employees by a public governmental body when personal information about the employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire, promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body must be made available to the public within 72 hours of the close of the meeting where such action occurs; provided, however, that any employee so affected shall be entitled to prompt notice before such decision is made available to the public. As used here, the term "personal information" means information relating to the performance or merit of individual employees. 
(4)  Nonjudicial mental or physical health proceedings involving an identifiable person, including medical, psychiatric, psychological or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment. 
(5)  Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again. 
(6)  Welfare cases of identifiable individuals. 
(7)  Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf of a public governmental body or its representatives for negotiations with employee groups. 
(8)  Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation thereof. 
(9)  Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the specifications are officially approved by the public governmental body or the specifications are published for bid. 
(10)  Sealed bids and related documents, until the earlier of either when the bids are opened or all bids are accepted or all bids are rejected. 
(11)  Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment, except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions, salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public agencies once they are employed as such. 
(12)  Records which are protected from disclosure by law. 
(13)  Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 2, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-403. - Records pertaining to internal investigations and investigations of allegedly illegal conduct. 
(a)  In order to allow the fullest cooperation by employees and members of the public in investigation of matters wherein an employee of the city is alleged to have engaged in any form of misconduct, all files, records and documents relating to investigations of allegations of misconduct by city employees will be considered to be personnel records and shall be closed records under the custody of the respective department head. 
(b)  In order to protect the integrity and efficacy of investigations of criminal conduct and the safety and well being of witnesses, complainants, law enforcement officials and members of the public who cooperate with investigations, any information acquired by a law enforcement agency by way of a complaint or report of a crime made by telephone contact using the emergency number, "911," shall be inaccessible to the general public and shall only be available upon request by law enforcement agencies or as otherwise provided by law. For the same reasons, records of an administrative department or law enforcement agency relating to reports, associations or investigations of conduct alleged or believed to be illegal or otherwise contrary to law shall be closed records until: (a) the investigation is terminated; or (b) all suspected wrongdoers have been arrested or charged with an offense; or (c) the department head determines that public disclosure of the record would not unreasonably jeopardize such investigation. In addition, for the foregoing reasons and in order to recognize and protect rights of personal privacy, the efficient suppression and punishment of crime and protection of third parties, reports, records and materials containing information identifying witnesses, complainants, covert law enforcement personnel, confidential informants or others who may be compromised or subjected to the risk of retaliation or injury upon disclosure of their participation in any report or investigation of allegedly illegal activity, together with any information which could reasonably lead to identification of such persons, shall be deleted from any records prior to examination by or delivery to members of the public. In the event an objection to the deletion of such information is lodged by the requesting party, the custodian of the record may employ a supplemental request, notification and hearing process consistent with the provisions of section 2-405 below, and/or the question resolution procedures pursuant to section 2-412 below prior to allowing access to the information in question. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 3, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-404. - Records pertaining to medical condition or history. 
    All information obtained by the city regarding medical examinations, medical condition or medical history of city employees or job applicants, if retained by the city, shall be collected and maintained on separate forms and in separate medical files and shall be treated as closed and confidential records, except that: (a) supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary restrictions on the work duties of employees and necessary accommodations; (b) first aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate, if the information reflects the existence of a disability which might require emergency treatment; or (c) government officials investigating compliance with state or federal law pertaining to treatment of persons with disabilities may be allowed access to such records. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 4, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-405. - Records containing confidential, proprietary or private information. 
(a)  In order to protect reasonable expectations of privacy on the part of persons having dealings with the city, city records containing information or entries of a personal, confidential, private or proprietary nature including, but not limited to, income, sales data, financial circumstances, household and family relationships, social security numbers, dates of birth, insurance information and other information which reasonable persons generally regard as private and not a customary subject for public discourse, which information or entries have been provided to the city by one complying with regulations requiring the disclosure of such information, shall be excised from copies of city records disclosed or provided to members of the public other than those persons to whom the information or entries pertain. Persons desiring access to information or entries excised from such records may file a supplementary written request with the city clerk for disclosure of material to be specified in the request, which request should state: (a) whether or not the requesting party has informed persons to whom the requested information pertains of the request; and (b) all reasons why the requesting party believes disclosure by the city of the specified information is in the public interest. 
(b)  The director of administration may afford all interested parties, including the persons to whom the information pertains, a reasonable time within which to comment on the requested disclosure prior to acting further on the request. If an interested person objects to the disclosure of the requested information, the director of administration may conduct a hearing at which all interested parties may be heard. At such hearing, the director of administration shall consider, among such other factors as may be reasonable and relevant: (a) the requirements and intent of state law, city ordinances and this policy; (b) the legitimate expectations of privacy on the part of interested parties; (c) the personal, confidential, private or proprietary nature of the information at issue; (d) whether the information was obtained by the city under compulsion of law or was freely and voluntarily provided by the persons objecting to the disclosure; and (e) the public purposes to be served by disclosure of the requested information. If the director of administration determines that disclosure is legally required or would otherwise serve the best interests of the public and that such requirements or purpose outweigh the legitimate concerns or interests of the persons to whom the information pertains, the director of administration shall provide the requested information to the requesting party. 
(c)  In addition to or in lieu of the hearing described above, the director of administration may afford all interested parties a reasonable opportunity to seek judicial review of or relief from the proposed disclosure. The director of administration may also utilize the procedures for judicial determination and/or opinion solicitation provided in section 2-412 below. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 5, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-406. - Notices of meetings. 
(a)  Each governmental body shall give notice of the time, date, place and tentative agenda of each meeting. The notice shall be placed on the appropriate bulletin board at the city hall at least 24 hours prior to the meeting, exclusive of weekends and holidays when the city hall is closed. If an emergency makes it impossible to give 24-hours notice, the reason must be reflected in the minutes. Notice shall also be given to any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings of a particular public governmental body. 
(b)  Each governmental body shall give notice of the time, date, place of a closed meeting and the reason for holding it by reference to a specific exception. The notice shall be the same as described in the preceding paragraph. No other business may be discussed in a closed meeting which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to close the meeting to the public. 
(c)  A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may conduct a meeting without notice during a lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 6, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-407. - Closed meetings, how held; journals of meetings and records of voting. 
    Before closing a meeting to the public, a majority of a quorum of the governmental body must vote to do so in a public vote. The vote of each member of the governmental body on the question of closing the meeting or vote and the reason for closing the meeting by reference to a specific exception shall attribute each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of the individual member of the body. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 7, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-408. - Accessibility of meetings. 
    Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than 24-hours notice or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated in the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 8, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-409. - Separation of exempt material. 
    If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall separate the exempt and nonexempt material and make the nonexempt material available for public examination and copying in accord with the policies provided herein. When designing a public record, the custodian shall, to the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from nonexempt information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe the material exempted, unless that description would reveal the contents of the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 9, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-410. - Arrest record. 
    Records shall be maintained of all arrests made by city law enforcement personnel. Records of arrests shall be made available to the public. If any person is arrested and not charged with an offense against the law within 30 days of the arrest, official records of the arrest and of any detention or confinement incident thereto shall thereafter be closed records, except that the disposition portion of the record may be accessed for purposes of exculpation. If the person arrested is charged but the case is subsequently nolle prossed, dismissed, or the accused is found not guilty or imposition of sentence is suspended in the court in which the action is prosecuted, official records pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records when such case is finally terminated, except that the disposition portion of the record may be accessed for purposes of exculpation and except as provided by RSMo 610.120. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 10, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-411. - Custodian designated; response to request for access to records. 
(a)  The director of administration shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible for maintenance and control of all records. The custodian may designate deputy custodians in operating departments of the city and such other departments or offices as the custodian may determine. Deputy custodians shall conduct matters relating to public records and meetings in accord with the policies enumerated herein. 
(b)  The custodian shall provide public access to all public records as soon as possible but no later than the third business day following the date the request is received by the custodian. If additional delay is necessary, the custodian shall give an explanation for the delay and the date the record will be available for inspection. 
(c)  If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of the third business day following the date that the request for the statement is received. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 11, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-412. - Procedures for resolving questions of public accessibility. 
    A public governmental body or record custodian in doubt about the legality of closing a particular meeting, record or vote may, subject to approval by the city council, bring suit in the circuit court for the county to ascertain the propriety of such action. In addition, subject to approval by the city council, the public governmental body or custodian may seek a formal opinion of the attorney general or an attorney for the city regarding the propriety of such action. In such events, the proposed closed meeting or public access to the record or vote shall be deferred for a reasonable time pending the outcome of the actions so taken. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 12, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 2-413. - Fees. 
    The custodian shall charge $0.25 per page for duplication costs and $10.00 per hour for document search. The custodian shall receive (or may require) payment prior to duplicating documents. 
(Ord. No. 658-93, § 13, 11-9-93) 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; food service establishments, § 58-51 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 90; signs, ch. 92; taxicabs, § 118-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of, either directly or indirectly, promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; provided, however, that this subsection of this definition shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of such is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided further, however, that nothing contained in this subsection of this definition shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of the state or under any ordinance of the city; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds and building. 
    Public poles and structures means any public utility pole, lamppost, street sign, fence, wall, bridge, tree, pole, post or any structure belonging to the city. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1; Ord. No. 759-97, § 1, 10-28-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Civic signs in public rights-of-way. 
    Signs, banners, billboards and similar structures and objects directly relating to charitable, historical, religious or other civic services and nonprofit activities may be installed in the public rights-of-way upon a permit issued by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-5) 
Sec. 6-3. - Stickers attached to vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any gummed sticker to any vehicle within the city without the consent of the owner of such vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 3-6) 
Sec. 6-4. - Obscene advertisements. 
    No person shall post, stick or put upon any street, alley, sidewalk, wall, fence, bridge, billboard or other public place within the city or suffer, permit or cause such to be done any printed advertisement, bill, poster or circular which is obscene under state law, or any notice of an illegal trade or business nor shall any person leave or place or cause to be left or placed any such advertisement, bill, poster, circular or notice in or upon any house, building, yard or premises, whether such is enclosed in an envelope or in any other form nor shall any person give or cause to be given to anyone any such advertisement, bill, poster, circular or notice. 
(Code 1980, § 3-8) 
Sec. 6-5. - Posting notices, etc. to public poles and structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix any advertisement, notice, handbill, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public on any public lamppost, utility pole, fence, wall, bridge, tree or upon any other public structure, pole or building except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 759-97, § 2, 10-28-97) 
Secs. 6-6-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 6-26. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers; provided, however that newspapers shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 3-26) 
Sec. 6-27. - Distribution in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 3-20(a)) 
Sec. 6-28. - Distributing on posted property. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisement" or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbill left upon such premises. 
(Code 1980, § 3-22) 
Sec. 6-29. - Depositing on inhabited, private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. However, for inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in section 6-29, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, provided that such handbill shall be so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and provided that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 3-24) 
Sec. 6-30. - Dropping from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object, except as permitted by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 3-25) 
Secs. 6-31-6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMPLIFICATION OF SOUND 

Sec. 6-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bel is a unit of level when the base of the logarithm is ten. Use of the bel is restricted to levels of quantities proportional to power. 
    Decibel is one-tenth of a bel and is a unit of level when the base of the logarithm is the tenth root of ten, and the quantities concerned are proportional to power. 
    Noncommercial use for purposes of this section shall mean any use other than for commercial advertising purposes. 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound amplifying equipment and includes megaphones, amplifiers, walkie-talkies, amplifiers on fronts of business buildings or other sound devices. The term "sound amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic purposes. 
    Sound-level meter is an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighing networks for the measurement of noise and sound levels in a specified manner. 
    Sound pressure level, in decibels, of sound is 20 times the logarithm to base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which reference pressure must be explicitly stated. 
    Sound truck or other conveyance includes any vehicle, whether motorized or not, and any airplane, balloon, dirigible or any other type of aircraft having mounted therein, thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1980, § 20-91; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-57. - Commercial advertising prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck or other conveyance for commercial advertising purposes on any street or on any public or private alley in the city or in the air over the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound amplifying equipment on any public square, public street or public playground for commercial advertising purposes in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-92) 
Sec. 6-58. - Noncommercial use-Registration statement required-Exemptions. 
    Before any person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck or other conveyance with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes on any street in the city or in the air above the city and before any person shall use or cause to be used any sound amplifying equipment in any public park or public playground or on private property in the city, he shall file a registration statement with the city clerk. No registration statement shall be required for schools, churches, colleges or universities when the sound amplifying equipment is used in conjunction with religious or athletic events. 
(Code 1980, § 20-93; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-59. - Same-Form and contents of statement. 
    The registration statement required by section 6-58 shall be in writing, shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)  Address of place of business of applicant. 
(3)  Type, license number and motor number of sound truck. 
(4)  Name and address of person who owns the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(5)  Name and address of person having direct charge of the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(6)  Name and address of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(7)  The purpose for which the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(8)  A general statement as to the section of the city in and over which the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(9)  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(10)  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(11)  A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(12)  The maximum sound producing power of the sound truck or, otherwise, state the following: 
a.  The wattage to be used. 
b.  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced. 
c.  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment. 
(13)  Written permission from any schools, churches or hospitals within 100 yards of the proposed location. 
(Code 1980, § 20-94; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-60. - Amendments to registration statement. 
    All persons using or causing to be used sound trucks or sound amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to section 6-58 within 48 hours after any change in the information furnished in such statement. 
(Code 1980, § 20-95) 
Sec. 6-61. - Certified copy of registration statement used as identification. 
    The city clerk shall return to each applicant under section 6-58 one copy of such registration statement, duly certified by the city clerk as a correct copy of such application. The certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck or sound amplifying equipment at all times while the sound amplifying equipment or any stationary sound amplifying equipment is in operation. Such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1980, § 20-96) 
Sec. 6-62. - Permitted use of sound amplifying equipment. 
    The noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech. 
(2)  Operations shall be permitted between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 midnight each day, except Sundays and legal holidays when operations shall be authorized only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated from sound trucks unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least five miles per hour, except when such truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools or churches without the written approval of the hospital, school or church within the 100-yard limit. 
(5)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be obscene under state law. 
(6)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 300 feet from the location of the sound amplifying equipment and so that such volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility; provided, however, the limitation of audibility to a distance not in excess of 300 feet shall not apply to sound issued from aircraft. 
(7)  All sound amplifying equipment operated shall have limitations on the decibel levels and sound pressure levels allowable. Measurements shall be taken only with properly calibrated sound measurement equipment used in accordance with accepted sound measurement practices. These levels are as follows: 
a.  For outdoor use of any sound amplifying equipment, the decibel levels allowable shall not exceed 100 decibels when measured at a distance of ten feet from in front of the center of the speakers, nor shall it exceed 85 decibels when measured at a distance of 100 feet. 
b.  For indoor use of any sound amplifying equipment, no registration statement shall be required, the decibel levels allowable shall not exceed 75 decibels when measured from the nearest public property. Public property shall include but not be limited to sidewalks, streets and alleyways. 
(8)  Waivers of any part of this section may only be granted by a majority vote of the city council and shall be noted on the registration statement provided by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 20-97; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-63. - Use in public parks and playgrounds. 
    Section 6-62, insofar as applicable, shall also apply to any noncommercial use of any sound amplifying equipment in any public park or public playground within the corporate limits of the city. No such sound amplifying equipment shall be used on any public playground in connection with any public school building on days on which such public building is being used for school purposes, without permission from school officials. 
(Code 1980, § 20-98; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-64. - Use for dances in streets or in yards. 
    Section 6-62, insofar as applicable, shall apply to any noncommercial use of any sound amplifying equipment on any property or in connection with any street dance or dance being held outdoors on any property; provided, however, the hours during which use shall be permitted for dances shall be between 4:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight of any day of the week except Sundays and legal holidays when operations shall be authorized only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1980, § 20-99; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-65. - Other uses of sound amplifying equipment. 
    Any other uses of sound amplifying equipment on any property within the corporate limits of the city not addressed by other ordinance(s) shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, except Sundays and legal holidays when operations shall be authorized only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., the volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 300 feet from the location of the sound amplifying equipment, the distance shall be 50 feet during all other hours and at all times the volume shall not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of the defined distances. 
(2)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or obscene under state law. 
(3)  At no time shall the volume of sound from any sound system located in or near a motor vehicle be at a level so as to be audible more than 50 feet from the vehicle while the vehicle is not located upon the property of the vehicle owner. This subsection shall apply to all portable sound systems commonly known as jamboxes, boomboxes and car stereos. It shall include any battery-operated sound system even if it is not designed to be permanently mounted or attached to a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 774-98, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 828-99, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 855-00, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 6-66. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating sections 6-57 through 6-65, where no penalty is otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-20. 
(Ord. No. 774-98, § 1, 4-14-98) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; traffic regulations, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages includes all beverages of alcoholic content, whether intoxicating or nonintoxicating. 
    Church means a church building or student center building in which services are regularly held; provided, however, the mere holding of religious services in any building not built and constructed as a church or student center building shall not bring such building within the definition of a church as set out in this chapter. 
    Closed place means a place where all doors are locked and where no patrons are in or about the premises. 
    Intoxicating liquor means alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations for mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess of one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, except nonintoxicating beer as defined in this section. 
    Nonintoxicating beer means any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops, pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals, wholesome yeast, pure water, free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight. 
    Open container means any alcoholic beverage except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed. 
    Original package means, with reference to the sale of malt liquor, any package containing three or more standard bottles of beer. With reference to the sale of intoxicating liquor, other than malt liquor, the term "original package" means a package or container containing a quantity of 50 milliliters or more of intoxicating liquor in the manufacturer's original package. With reference to nonintoxicating beer, the term "original package" means any package containing three or more of any size bottle or any other container when such bottles or other containers contain nonintoxicating beer, as defined in this section. 
    Person means and includes any individual, association, joint stock company, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator or other officer appointed by any state or federal court. 
    Restaurant bar means any establishment having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises, at least 50 percent of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least $275,000.00 from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the premises. 
    School means any building which is regularly used as a public, private or parochial school, elementary school, high school, college or university. 
    Substantial quantities of food means the amount of prepared meals and food from which at least 50 percent of the gross income of an establishment is derived. 
    Wholesalers or distributors means persons selling intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer to retailers for resale. 
(Code 1980, §§ 4-1, 4-20; Ord. No. 612-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this chapter, where no penalty is otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 4-21) 
Sec. 10-3. - Selling to persons under influence or underage persons. 
(a)  No person shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer or permit intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to be sold or supplied to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of alcohol. 
(b)  Intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of 21 years, except that this shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to a person under such age for medicinal purposes only or by the parent or guardian of such person or to the administering of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to such person by a physician. 
(Code 1980, § 4-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.310, 312.400. 
Sec. 10-4. - Consumption by underage persons. 
    The drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer shall not be permitted in, upon or about any licensed premises by any person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 4-14) 
Sec. 10-5. - Sale by underage persons. 
    No person under the age of 21 years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, except where such person is permitted to do so under the laws of this state. 
(Code 1980, § 4-15) 
State Law reference- Permitted sales of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer by persons under 21, RSMo 311.300. 
Sec. 10-6. - Misrepresentation of age. 
    No person of the age of 17 years and under the age of 21 years shall represent that he has attained the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(Code 1980, § 4-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.320, 312.405. 
Sec. 10-7. - Purchase or possession by underage persons. 
    Any person under the age of 21 years who purchases or attempts to purchase or has in his possession any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 4-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.325, 312.407. 
Sec. 10-8. - Intoxication of public officials. 
    Any person elected or appointed to any public office of the city who shall be intoxicated while in the performance of any official act or duty or who shall become so intoxicated as to be incapacitated to perform any official act or duty at the time or in the manner required by law shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 4-18) 
Sec. 10-9. - Intoxication of firefighters. 
    Any officer or member of the fire company who shall be found in a state of intoxication at any fire or any officer or member of the fire company who shall use or permit the use of any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in or about any engine house or fire station thereafter shall be ineligible to be an officer or member of the fire company. 
(Code 1980, § 4-19) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 50-56 et seq. 
Sec. 10-10. - Possession in open container in public places. 
(a)  Prohibited in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in an open container when upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or public thoroughfare or on or in any public building or parking lot. 
(b)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the consumption of any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or nonintoxicating beer opened and consumed inside an establishment licensed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink. 
(c)  Permits for parks and recreational areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in an open container on any property maintained as a park or recreational area by the city without first obtaining a permit. No permit shall be issued for any area within 150 feet of a recreational area on which a person 18 years of age or younger will be involved in an organized recreational activity. When organized recreational activities involve persons 19 years of age or older, permits may be issued for an area outside the actual participating field. Permits may not be issued for a period of time more than 18 hours during any calendar day. Those hours must be between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Permits may not be issued for more than four consecutive days. No permit may be issued for the following areas: 
(1)  Municipal swimming pool. 
(2)  Hensley Field (inside fences). 
(3)  Memorial Field. 
(4)  McBride Field. 
(5)  Murphy Field. 
(6)  Seaman Field. 
(7)  Municipal tennis courts. 
(Code 1980, § 4-20; Ord. No. 612-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Secs. 10-11-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - License-Required; term; renewal. 
    It is unlawful for any person, either by himself or through the use of agents or servants, to engage in the manufacture, brewing, sale or distribution of intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer within the city without first having obtained a license in compliance with this chapter. Such license shall be issued for a period of one year from July 1 of each year. Persons desiring to secure licenses after July 1 shall pay for such portion of the license year remaining at the time such license is issued. Thereafter, all renewals of licenses shall be made on June 30 each year. 
(Code 1980, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-32. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    No person shall be granted a license under this article who does not meet the qualifications of the state for a state license. The requirements for a license pursuant to this article, except where expressly increased, shall be the same as the requirements and qualifications set forth in state law. 
(Code 1980, § 4-3) 
Sec. 10-33. - Application. 
(a)  Each person desiring a license under this article shall make an application on a form to be prescribed by the city attorney and shall answer each question thereon under oath. Each applicant shall file his application with the city clerk prior to the time he initially begins business and thereafter shall file his application for renewal on or before June 1 of each year. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $250.00, such fee to cover the cost of processing the original application. For processing each application for renewal, a fee of $50.00 shall be charged. 
(c)  If the applicant for a license is a nonresident of the state, such applicant shall designate in the application a resident of the state to whom all notices concerning the license can be delivered, and such designated person shall be as responsible as the licensee for the compliance of the licensee or the licensed premises with this chapter or with any other ordinance of the city, and in such case the designated person shall also sign the application assuming such responsibility. 
(d)  The failure to answer any required questions shall constitute sufficient grounds for disapproval or refusal of the license, and a false answer to any of the required questions shall constitute sufficient grounds for refusal, suspension or revocation of the license and shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 4-4) 
Sec. 10-34. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  The city clerk, upon receipt of an application for a license under this article, shall forward the application to the chief of police who shall cause an immediate investigation to be made of the statements contained therein, the character of the applicant and the location of the premises or place and the conditions surrounding such. When such investigation is completed, the application shall be returned to the city clerk by the chief of police with a report of his investigation. 
(b)  On each new application for a license, the fire department, the public works department and health department, through their duly authorized agents or employees, shall make an immediate investigation of the safety and sanitation of the premises of the applicant and the equipment and furnishings contained in the applicant's premises and shall report to the city clerk the findings of such investigations. 
(c)  After the original license has been issued, the city clerk may at any reasonable time request a new investigation of the premises of the licensee and the results of such investigation shall be reported to the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 4-5) 
Sec. 10-35. - Approval of application. 
    Upon completion of the investigation of an application for a license to sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, if the city clerk shall find that the applicant meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this chapter, he shall approve such application and issue the license. 
(Code 1980, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-36. - Denial. 
    If an application for a license under this article is denied by the city clerk, the applicant may request, in writing, a review of such denial by the city council, such request to be made by the applicant within ten days after the application for license has been denied by the city clerk. Upon the written request for review made within the time specified, the city council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of such request, investigate and examine the applicant, his qualifications, the proposed place of business and the facts and circumstances surrounding such application and the denial of such application by the city clerk. If a majority of its members determines that the application should be granted, the city council may order the city clerk to issue the license applied for. If the city clerk does not approve or disapprove such application within 30 days from the date such application is filed, it shall be assumed that the application is denied, and the applicant may perfect his appeal to the city council as provided in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 4-7) 
Sec. 10-37. - Issuance, contents. 
    On approval of the application for a license under this article by the city clerk or upon the order of the city council granting the license as provided in this division, and upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue the applicant a license to conduct business at the location specified in the application for the period set forth in section 10-31. Every license issued under this article shall set forth the type of license granted and shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer may be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at any place other than that described therein. 
(Code 1980, § 4-8) 
Sec. 10-38. - Transfer; license required for each place of business. 
    No license issued under authority of this article shall be transferred from one person to another nor shall such license be used at any place except on the premises for which such license is issued, and the proper license shall be procured for each place of business for which a state license is required. However, if licensee dies, the widow or widower or the next of kin of such deceased licensee who shall meet the other requirements of this article may make application and the city clerk may transfer such license to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for the remainder of the period for which the license fee has been paid without obtaining a new license. 
(Code 1980, § 4-10) 
Sec. 10-39. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Scope of authority. Whenever it shall be shown that a licensee under this article has not at all times kept an orderly place or house or has violated this chapter, the city council may suspend or revoke the license of such licensee after hearing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Hearing required. The city council, after not less than ten days' notice to the licensee, shall hold a hearing to ascertain all of the facts relating to the proposed suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee shall have full right to be represented by counsel at such hearing and may produce witnesses and evidence in his behalf at such hearing. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. The notice of the hearing relative to revocation or suspension of such license shall set out the grounds for such suspension or revocation and shall command the licensee to be present at the regular meeting or called meeting of the city council and show cause, if any, why such license should not be suspended or revoked. A police officer shall serve such notice of hearing by leaving a copy thereof with the licensee or any person or employee in charge of the place of business of such licensee. Upon suspension or revocation of any license, no license fee paid shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(d)  Automatic revocation upon conviction for violation. Upon final conviction of any person for a violation of any of the sections of this chapter, such conviction shall automatically operate to revoke the license issued under this article to such person. No person having been convicted of a violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be issued a license or a renewal thereof for a period of one year from the date of such conviction. Upon conviction of any person under this chapter, the duty of the judge of the municipal court shall be to certify such conviction to the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 4-11) 
Sec. 10-40. - Changing location of premises. 
    No licensee under this article shall be permitted to move the location of his establishment as pertains to intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer without the express approval of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 4-12) 
Secs. 10-41-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR 

Sec. 10-51. - Fees. 
    A separate license shall be required for each place of business operating under this division, and the annual charges for each license shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the privilege of manufacturing and brewing in the city malt liquor containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight, $300.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(1). 
(2)  For the privilege of manufacturing in the city intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of 22 percent of alcohol by weight, $150.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(2). 
(3)  For the privilege of manufacturing, distilling or blending intoxicating liquor of all kinds within the city, $300.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(3). 
(4)  For the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of malt liquor containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within the city, $75.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(4). 
(5)  For the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of 22 percent of alcohol by weight to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within the city, $150.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(5). 
(6)  For the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor of all kinds to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within the city, $375.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(6). 
(7)  For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight by a wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such malt liquor at retail, $75.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(7). 
(8)  For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of 22 percent of alcohol by weight by a wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating liquor at retail, $150.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(8). 
(9)  For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor of all kinds by a wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating liquor at retail, $375.00; provided, however, a license authorizing the holder to sell to a duly licensed wholesaler and to solicit orders for sale of intoxicating liquor to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler shall not entitle the holder thereof to sell within the city direct to retailers; provided, further, a wholesaler's license shall not authorize or entitle the holder thereof to sell to other wholesalers or to solicit orders for the sale of intoxicating liquors to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.180(9). 
(10)  For the privilege of manufacturing, in quantities not to exceed 500,000 gallons, light wines containing not in excess of 18 percent of alcohol by weight, exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables grown in the state, there shall be paid to and collected by the city, in lieu of the charges provided in subsections (1) through (9) of this section, a license fee for each 500 gallons or fraction thereof, $450.00. A manufacturer licensed under this subsection shall be privileged to sell to consumers at the winery in lots not to exceed 4 7/8 gallons and to sell to duly licensed wholesalers or duly licensed retail dealers in lots of five gallons or more. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.190. 
(11)  For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail but not for resale, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, $75.00. No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package not to be consumed upon the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in one or more of the following businesses or in cases where such license is to be used in connection with the operation of one or more of the following businesses: 
a.  Drugstore. 
b.  Cigar and tobacco store. 
c.  Grocery store. 
d.  General merchandise store. 
e.  Confectionery or delicatessen store. 
In addition, no license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package not to be consumed upon the premises where sold to any such person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value according to invoices of at least $1,000.00, exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. 
Not withstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, any person possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements for the issuance of a liquor license, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under RSMo § 311.200 and the ordinances of the city, may apply for a special license to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail on Sundays in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto. A licensee under this section shall pay the city an additional fee of $300.00 for this license and the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail on Sundays in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.200(1). 
(12)  For the privilege of selling malt liquor at retail but not for resale, containing alcohol in excess of 3.2 percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight of alcohol by grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package direct to consumers but not for resale, $22.50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.200(2). 
(13)  For the privilege of selling light wine containing alcohol not to exceed 14 percent by weight and malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of 3.2 percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, $52.50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.200(3). 
(14)  Retailers selling all kinds of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensee, $450.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.200(4). 
(15)  In addition to the license fee required by subsection (14) of this section: 
a.  Retailers operating a restaurant bar on Sunday, $300.00. 
b.  Retailers operating on Sunday and by the drink establishment in a club operated by a charitable fraternal, religious, service or veteran's organization which has obtained an exemption from the payment of federal income taxes as provided in sections 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(d) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, $300.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.090(2). 
(16)  Annual license fee for operation described in section 10-53, $90.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.480(3); cities authorized to levy 11/2 the amount of state licenses, RSMo 311.220. 
(Code 1980, § 4-34; Ord. No. 644-93, § I, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 947-03, § 1, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 10-52. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No license to sell intoxicating liquor shall be issued for any premises when such premises are within 100 feet of a school, college, university or church, unless the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the city council, except that when a school, church or place of worship shall hereafter be established within 100 feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license shall not be denied for this reason. Such consent shall not be granted until at least ten days' written notice has been provided to all owners of property within 100 feet of the proposed licensed premises. 
(b)  When the entire building is to be used for the sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor, the distance shall be measured in a straight line on a horizontal plane from the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the building to be used for the sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor to the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the school, college, university or church building. If only a part of the building is to be used for the sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor, the distance shall be measured in a straight line on a horizontal plane from the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the room in such building where intoxicating liquor is to be sold or consumed to the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of such school, college, university or church building. 
(Code 1980, § 4-35; Ord. No. 1337-13, § 1, 1-8-13) 
Sec. 10-53. - Consumption on unlicensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating any premises where any food, beverages or entertainment is sold or provided for compensation who does not possess a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor to permit the drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor in, on or about such premises between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. the following day without having a license as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 4-41) 
Secs. 10-54-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONINTOXICATING BEER 

Sec. 10-66. - Application, form and contents. 
    Any person desiring to secure a license under this division to sell nonintoxicating beer shall make application in duplicate to the city clerk in writing and under oath, a copy of which application shall be delivered to the chief of police. Such application shall state the same information as required by section 10-33. 
(Code 1980, § 4-57) 
Sec. 10-67. - Fees. 
    A separate license shall be required for each place of business operating under this division and the annual charges for each license shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the privilege of manufacturing and the sale by the manufacturer of nonintoxicating beer, $375.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.100(1). 
(2)  For the privilege of selling in the city by a distributor or wholesaler other than the manufacturer or brewer thereof of nonintoxicating beer, $75.00. 
(3)  For the privilege of the sale of nonintoxicating beer for consumption on the premises where sold, $37.50. This license shall also permit the sale of nonintoxicating beer in the original package direct to consumers but not for resale. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.100(3). 
(4)  For the privilege of selling nonintoxicating beer by grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package direct to the consumer but not for resale, $22.50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.100(4). 
(5)  For the privilege of selling to duly authorized wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of nonintoxicating beer, $75.00. 
(Code 1980, § 4-58) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy 11/2 times state license, RSMo 312.140. 
Sec. 10-68. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No license to sell nonintoxicating beer shall be issued for any premises when such premises is within 100 feet of a school, college, university or church, unless the applicant for such license shall present with his application to the city clerk the written consent, verified before a notary public, of the majority of the governing authority of such school, college, university or church consenting to the location of the applicant's place of business. 
(b)  When the entire building is to be used for the sale or consumption of nonintoxicating beer, the distance shall be measured in a straight line on a horizontal plane from the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the building to be used for the sale or consumption of nonintoxicating beer to the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the school, college, university or church building. If only a part of the building is to be used for the sale or consumption of nonintoxicating beer, the distance shall be measured in a straight line on a horizontal plane from the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of the room in the building where nonintoxicating beer is to be sold or consumed to the nearest point of the enclosing wall or vertical extension thereof of such school, college, university or church building. 
(Code 1980, § 4-59) 
Secs. 10-69-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR 

Sec. 10-91. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    The operation or possession of any gambling device in or about the premises where intoxicating liquor is sold, either in the original package or for consumption on the premises where sold, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license required by this chapter, and no licensee shall permit any gambling device to be set up or used in or about such premises. 
(Code 1980, § 4-36) 
Sec. 10-92. - Authorized liquor only to be kept on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license authorized by this chapter for the sale of any intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold to keep or secrete or to allow any other person to keep or secrete in or upon the premises described in such license any intoxicating liquor other than the kind of liquor expressly authorized to be sold by such license. 
(Code 1980, § 4-37) 
Sec. 10-93. - Applicability of article to drugstores. 
    Regularly licensed drugstores may be lawfully in possession of intoxicating liquor to be used in connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicines or as a solvent or preservant without being subject to this chapter. However, any druggist or drugstore operator desiring to sell intoxicating liquors in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises, shall procure the proper license therefor and shall be in all matters subject to the sections of this chapter relating to the location, license fees to be paid and hours at which such intoxicating liquor may be sold. 
(Code 1980, § 4-38) 
Sec. 10-94. - Hours of sale and consumption. 
(a)  Package liquor. No person having a valid liquor license under this chapter shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of on or about his premises any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday. Not withstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, any person possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements for the issuance of a liquor license, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under RSMo § 311.200 and the ordinances of the city, may apply for a special license to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail on Sundays in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto. A licensee under this section shall pay the city an additional fee of $300.00 for this license and the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail on Sundays in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto within the city. 
(b)  Liquor by the drink. The premises of persons having a valid liquor license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink shall be and remain a closed place between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday. Not withstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, any person operating a restaurant bar possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements for the issuance of a liquor license, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under RSMo § 311.200 and the ordinances of the city, may apply for a special license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink on Sundays in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto. A licensee under this section shall pay the city an additional fee of $300.00 for this license and the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor by the drink on Sundays in compliance with state statues and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  Applicability. Where such license authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink is held by a club or hotel, this section shall apply only to the rooms in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. Where such license held by a restaurant whose business is conducted in one room only and substantial quantities of merchandise, other than intoxicating liquors are dispensed, the licensee shall keep securely locked during the hours and on the days specified in this section, all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. 
(Code 1980, § 4-39; Ord. No. 644-93, § I, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 947-03, §§ 2, 3, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 10-95. - Sale when December 31 falls on Sunday. 
    When December 31 falls on Sunday, any person having a valid license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day in compliance with state statutes and any amendments thereto, not withstanding section 10-94 or any other ordinance to the contrary. 
(Code 1980, § 4-40; Ord. No. 947-03, § 4, 12-16-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.298. 
Sec. 10-96. - Effect of signs prohibiting consumption on premises. 
    No intoxicating liquor shall be drunk, consumed or publicly exhibited in any place where the owner or manager exhibits on the premises signs or placards to the effect that intoxicating liquor may not be drunk in or about the premises. Such signs or placards shall be of sufficient size and in sufficient number to be easily discernible to the general public. 
(Code 1980, § 4-42) 
Sec. 10-97. - Display of bottles, packages in window; exterior signs resembling bottles, packages. 
    It shall be unlawful to display in any street window or show window any intoxicating liquor or any package, bottle or container bearing the label or brand of any intoxicating liquor or to display any exterior sign resembling a liquor bottle or package. 
(Code 1980, § 4-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.350. 
Sec. 10-98. - Possession of illegal liquor. 
    No person shall possess intoxicating liquor within the city unless the intoxicating liquor has been acquired from some person holding a duly authorized license to sell the intoxicating liquor under this chapter, or unless the intoxicating liquor is had or kept with the written or printed permission of the state supervisor of liquor control and the package in which intoxicating liquor is contained and from which it is taken for consumption has, while containing intoxicating liquor, been labeled and sealed with the official seal prescribed under the state law and regulations made thereunder. Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prevent the natural fermentation of fruit juices in the home for the exclusive use of the occupants of the home and their guests. 
(Code 1980, § 4-44) 
Sec. 10-99. - Sanitation and inspection of premises. 
    Each licensee and each of the premises covered by the license under this chapter where intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises is sold shall be subject to the sanitation and inspection provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 4-45) 
Secs. 10-100-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONINTOXICATING BEER 

Sec. 10-121. - Requirements for original package sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any nonintoxicating beer unless the nonintoxicating beer is sold or offered for sale in the original bottle or can or in the original package containing bottles or cans bearing the original label and the full name of the brewer or manufacturer thereof, both upon the label of the bottle or can and upon the cap or cork of such bottle. In the sale of nonintoxicating beer on draught, the nonintoxicating beer must be drawn from the original keg or barrel having stamped on the ends thereof the full name of the manufacturer or brewer of the nonintoxicating beer therein contained. 
(Code 1980, § 4-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.300. 
Sec. 10-122. - Hours of sale. 
    No person having a license for nonintoxicating beer under this chapter shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any nonintoxicating beer in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. or permit such to be done upon his premises. 
(Code 1980, § 4-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.410. 
Sec. 10-123. - Hours of consumption; effect of signs prohibiting consumption on premises. 
(a)  No person having a license for nonintoxicating beer under this chapter shall permit the drinking or consumption of any nonintoxicating beer by any person in any quantity upon or about his premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  No nonintoxicating beer shall be drunk, consumed or publicly exhibited in any place where the owner or manager exhibits on the premises signs or placards to the effect that nonintoxicating beer may not be drunk, consumed or publicly exhibited in or about the premises. Such signs or placards shall be of sufficient size and in sufficient number to be easily discernible to the general public. 
(Code 1980, § 4-62) 
Sec. 10-124. - Increasing alcoholic content. 
    It shall be the duty of every holder of a license to manufacture and sell or to sell nonintoxicating beer to use every precaution to prevent any person on the premises described in such license from pouring into, mixing with or adding to such nonintoxicating beer any alcohol or other liquid or any alcohol cube or any other ingredient that will increase or tend to increase the alcoholic content of such nonintoxicating beer. Any such license holder who shall knowingly permit any person on the premises described in such license to pour into, mix with or add to such nonintoxicating beer any alcohol or other liquid or any alcohol cube or other ingredient that will increase or tend to increase the alcoholic content of such nonintoxicating beer shall be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 4-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.440. 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, RSMo 578.005; animal fights and cockfights, RSMo 563.660. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild. 
    Animal at large means any animal not under the restraint of a person capable of controlling the animal or an animal off the premises of the owner. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society or municipal agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this chapter or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption or euthanasia. 
    Auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
    Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or boarding or breeding kennel, training school or any other like facility. 
    Dangerous animal means: 
(1)  Any animal which, according to the records of the police or animal control officer has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; 
(2)  Any animal which bites or otherwise injures any person or domestic animal or pet; 
(3)  Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting; 
(4)  Any dog, not owned by a governmental or law enforcement unit, used primarily to guard public or private property; 
(5)  Any animal which habitually snaps at, growls or otherwise manifests a disposition to bite, attack or injure any person or domestic animal or pet; or 
(6)  Any animal which causes any person to have a reasonable fear of immediate serious physical injury. 
    No animal may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person or animal who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other wrongdoing upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or who was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or who has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or who was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
    Electronic pet containment system means an in-ground or wireless electronic system designed to keep a pet or other domestic animal within a set of predefined boundaries without the use of a physical barrier. This definition specifically excludes electric fences used for livestock. 
    Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
    Guard dog means any dog specially trained to attack and warn its handler or owner that an intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured. 
    Harbored means any animal fed or sheltered for three consecutive days. 
    Humane officer or animal control officer means any person designated by the state, the city or a humane society as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state. 
    Kennel means an establishment where small domestic animals are boarded for compensation or where two or more dogs are bred or raised for commercial purposes. 
    Owner means any person owning, in care or control of, possessing, harboring, keeping or sheltering any animal. If the owner is a minor, the term shall include the parent or legal guardian of such minor. 
    Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event, other than a circus, in which performing animals are used. 
    Pet or companion animal means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter. 
    Pet shop means any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise (except for a licensed kennel), that buys, sells or boards any species of animal. 
    Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than its owner, to the enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" means and includes, but is not limited to any animal that: 
(1)  Is found at large off the premises of the owner. 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner. 
(3)  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby. 
(4)  Chases vehicles. 
(5)  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to continued/repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(6)  Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors and others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(7)  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(8)  Is offensive or potentially dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number or types of animals maintained. 
(9)  Attacks other domestic animals. 
    Restraint means any animal, when off the premises of the owner, secured by a leash or lead under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands. Any animal within the real property limits of its owner shall be considered under restraint. Any animal determined to be dangerous shall be restrained as provided in subsection 14-66(e). 
    Riding school or stable means any place that has available for hire, boarding or riding instruction any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro or any place that regularly buys, sells or trains such animals, including a racetrack, trotting track or rodeo. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring extensive medical care, multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
    Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licenses veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
    Wild animal means any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, any captive-bred species of common cage birds, any animal for which the owner has previously obtained a permit from the state department of conservation. 
    Zoological park means any facility operated by a person, partnership, corporation or governmental agency, other than a pet shop, kennel or cattery displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals. 
(Code 1980, § 5-2; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1308-11, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement. 
    The animal control officer of the city is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5-3; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and all costs associated with impoundment as follows: 
(1)  First offense, not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(2)  Second offense, in a 12-month period, not less than $75.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(3)  Third offense, in a 12-month period, not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(4)  Fourth offense and thereafter, in a 12-month period, not less than $150.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Violations accumulate per owner, not per animal. 
(c)  If a violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Code 1980, § 5-52; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 952-04, § 1, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 1308-11, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-4. - Animal control officer. 
    There is created the position of animal control officer. The animal control officer shall be appointed by the planning and codes administrator with the consent of the director of administration. He shall be a resident of the state and at least 21 years of age. The animal control officer shall have the powers of police officers insofar as may be reasonably necessary in carrying out the duties and functions of this chapter, including the power to issue summonses to violators of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5-4; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-5. - Running at large prohibited; declared nuisance. 
(a)  Animals and fowl. Any animal or fowl running at large in the city off the property of the owner is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Domestic animals afflicted with contagious diseases. No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed to the public in such a manner to affect the health of man or beast. Such animal shall be under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1980, § 5-6; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-6. - Impoundment of animals and fowl running at large. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, in all cases, when he shall be notified by any citizen or resident of the city or when he shall otherwise find that any animal or fowl is running at large in violation of section 14-5 to immediately take up or cause to be taken up any such animal or fowl so running at large and place and confine it in a pen or pound provided for that purpose. The animal control officer shall immediately thereafter notify the owner of such animal or fowl that such animal or fowl has been taken up and impounded, if such owner is known to the animal control officer. 
(Code 1980, § 5-7; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-7. - Redemption of impounded animal. 
    The owner or agent of the owner of any animal or fowl taken up and impounded pursuant to section 14-6 may redeem the animal or fowl at any time before the disposition provided for in section 14-67 by paying to the city all fees and charges as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5-8; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-8. - Breaking into pound; interfering with enforcement. 
    If any person shall willfully break into or otherwise open any pen, pound, trap or enclosure and let out or take out or take therefrom any animal or fowl taken up and therein confined in accordance with section 14-6, or if any person shall interfere with the animal control officer in the discharge of his duties under this article by taking out of the possession or custody of the animal control officer any animal or fowl that may be in his custody for the purpose of impounding, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 5-9; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-9. - Restrictions on number of dogs and cats. 
    No person shall harbor more than a combined total of four dogs and cats, except that litters of such animals under the age of three months shall be excluded, unless such person is operating a commercial business. 
(Code 1980, § 5-2; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-10. - Keeping swine-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine within the city. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Livestock sale barns or livestock truckers who transport, buy and sell swine for commercial purposes. 
(2)  Duly certified educational institutions conducting academic or research activities. Each such institution shall obtain authorization from the city on an annual basis to conduct such activities. 
(Code 1980, § 5-10; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-11. - Same-Notice to remove. 
    The animal control officer, upon learning of any person keeping swine within the city in violation of section 14-10, shall notify the person to remove the swine from the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 5-11; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-12. - Same-Removal after notice. 
    Any person keeping swine within the city in violation of section 14-10 shall remove the swine from the city within ten days after notification by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1980, § 5-12; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-13. - Dead animals. 
    No dead animal shall be disposed of in any manner that will jeopardize public health and safety. 
(Code 1980, § 5-13; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-14. - Exhibiting certain male animals in indecent manner; breeding. 
    No person shall, within the city, exhibit in an indecent manner any stallion, jack, bull, boar or ram or cause or permit any such animal to be let to any animal of the opposite sex, unless the animals are in some enclosed shed or stable and entirely out of public view and hearing. 
(Code 1980, § 5-14; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-15. - Abandoning domestic animals. 
    Any person abandoning any domestic animal in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 14-3 for each animal so abandoned. 
(Code 1980, § 5-15; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-16. - Animal care. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food and water in sufficient quantities; proper air, shelter space and protection from the weather; veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and humane care and treatment. 
(b)  No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(c)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. 
(d)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. Any animal that, in fact, has been so handed over to animal control officer authorities after being injured, if the owner cannot be ascertained, may be humanely euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or the animal control officer, if such injury is of such severity that the animal is in pain and unlikely to survive. 
(e)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the substance shall be liable to be eaten by an animal, provided that it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his own property common poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Code 1980, § 5-16; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
State Law reference- Animal abuse, RSMo 578.012. 
Sec. 14-17. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No person may sponsor, promote or train a wild animal to participate in, contribute to the involvement of a wild animal in or attended as a spectator any activity or event in which any wild animal is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically harassed or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or stressed mentally or physically or is induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner that will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. This subsection applies to events and activities taking place in either public or private facilities or property and applies regardless of the purpose of the event or activities and irrespective of whether or not a fee is charged to spectators. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Code 1980, § 5-27; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-18. - Animal waste. 
    The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas, public property or private property. 
(Code 1980, § 5-28; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-19. - License for kennels, commercial animal establishments and animal shelters-Required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a kennel or commercial animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a business license in compliance with this section. 
(b)  The licensing authority shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of licenses and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws. The licensing authority may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for the public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
(c)  When a license applicant has shown that he is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the licensing authority, a business license shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee. 
(d)  No person shall train any dog to be used as a guard or sentry dog without possessing a valid license. This section shall not apply to the city government or any of its agencies. The application for a guard or sentry dog training license shall state the name and address of the owner and trainer, location of the facility, and the maximum number of dogs to be housed at the training facility. 
(Code 1980, § 5-24; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-20. - Same-Issuance and revocation. 
(a)  After an application for a license pursuant to section 14-19 is filed, the licensing authority or his designee shall inspect the facility prior to issuing the license. The licensing authority may revoke any license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the licensing authority or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(b)  Any person whose license is revoked shall within ten days thereafter humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored. No part of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any such license that the licensing authority shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the license of the refusing owner. 
(d)  If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue a license and shall have authority to revoke any such license already issued. 
(e)  No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a license to operate a commercial animal establishment. 
(f)  Any person having been denied such license may not reapply for a period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 5-25; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-21. - Keeping wild animals. 
(a)  No person shall own, possess or have custody on his premises of any wild or vicious animal for display, training or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) accredited facilities. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet, unless having previously obtained a permit from the state department of conservation. 
(c)  The licensing authority shall have the power to release or order the release of any infant wild animal under temporary permit that is deemed capable of survival. 
(Code 1980, § 5-26; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-22. - Limitations on livestock and fowl. 
    This section shall establish the limit on the number of livestock or fowl (in any combination of species) on property consisting of no less than one acre. Any property containing less than one acre shall not keep livestock or fowl. 
(1)  The following per acre limits apply to the keeping of livestock or fowl in any combination of species: 
a.  One adult horse, mule, donkey, or other animal of like kind or cow, per acre, 
b.  Three adult goats, sheep, llamas, alpacas, ostriches, or emus, per acre; and 
c.  Ten adult rabbits, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, geese, or ducks, per acre. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more livestock or fowl on any premises than as set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1308-11, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-23. - Enforcement. 
    The civil and criminal sections of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1980, § 5-29; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1308-11, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Secs. 14-23-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESTRAINT, CONTROL, CONFINEMENT AND COMPLAINT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2002, repealed the former art. II and renumbered the existing arts. III and IV as II and III. The former art. II, §§ 14-41-14-43, pertained to the animal control commission and derived from Code 1980, §§ 5-5(1), (1)(a), and (1)(b)(2)-(6). 

Sec. 14-66. - Restraint. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be the duty of all persons owning and controlling any animal, including dogs and cats, to keep it under restraint. 
(b)  Animals in heat. Any female dog or cat in heat shall be confined by the owner thereof during the term of heat. 
(c)  An operable electronic pet containment system shall be considered a fence in compliance with this chapter provided it is effective in restraining the intended animal. Any area contained with an electronic pet containment system must be placed a minimum of three feet back from any city easement and must be marked with at least two signs, at least eight inches by 12 inches in size. The signs must be visible from the street and shall be placed on all corners of any property line facing a public thoroughfare. 
(d)  An electronic pet containment system will not be considered a sufficient form of containment for a dog deemed dangerous by an animal control officer or a police officer. 
(e)  Disturbing the peace by animal. No person shall own, keep, harbor, or allow to be in or upon his/her premises or property, any animal which by howling, barking, baying, yelping, or other frequent continual noise that disturbs the peace of any person; provided, however that this section shall not apply to the city dog pound, veterinary offices and hospitals, or licensed kennels or pet shops. Repeated violations as a peace disturbance may result in the animal being a nuisance. 
(f)  Public nuisance animal. It shall be the duty of any person, owner keeper or harborer to exercise proper care, control and restraint of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Any person who knowingly shall own, keep, harbor, or allow to be in or upon his/her premises or property any animal that excessively makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to continued repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored may, upon receipt of a complaint signed by one or more residents of the city, made before a person authorized by law to take statements and setting forth the nature and the date of the incident, be subject to a misdemeanor or fine. 
(g)  Confinement during rabies outbreak. Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders such action necessary to protect the public health and safety, the mayor shall issue a proclamation ordering every owner to confine his dog or cat on his premises unless it is muzzled so that it cannot bite. No person shall violate such proclamation, and any dog or cat running at large during the time fixed in the proclamation shall be destroyed by the animal control officer or any police officer without notice to the owner. 
(h)  Restraint, control and confinement of dangerous or vicious animals. Dangerous or vicious animals shall be restrained, controlled and confined as follows: 
(1)  Every dangerous or vicious animal, as may be determined by the animal control officer or police department, shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure. 
(2)  While on the owner's property, a dangerous or vicious animal must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must be at least five feet high with posts anchored in the ground at least two feet and must have secure sides and secure top. The animal must be chained within such enclosure unless under direct physical supervision of a responsible person. If the enclosure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(3)  The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his premises warning that there is a dangerous or vicious animal on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway or thoroughfare. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(4)  A dangerous or vicious animal may be off the owner's premises if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain and collar or leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(5)  The owner or keeper shall notify the animal control officer immediately upon knowledge that a dangerous or vicious animal is loose, has attacked another animal, has attacked a human being, has died or has been sold or given away. If the dog has been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, who must comply with this chapter. 
(i)  Affidavit of complaint, conviction and judgment of a dangerous or vicious animal. Upon receipt of a complaint signed by one or more residents of the city, made before a person authorized by law to take statements and setting forth the nature and the date of the incident, and upon conviction of a violation of this section, the municipal judge may, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, order the animal control officer to forthwith take up and euthanize such vicious animal. Any case filed under this section shall go to the top of the docket in the municipal court and shall have priority over other matters. 
(Code 1980, § 5-22; Ord. No. 892-01, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1308-11, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-67. - Impoundment and violation notices. 
    The animal control officer shall comply with the following pertaining to the impoundment of animals and shall give notice as follows: 
(1)  Unrestrained dangerous and nuisance animals shall be taken by the police or animal control officer and impounded in an animal shelter or other secured facility and there confined in a humane manner. 
(2)  Impounded animals shall be kept for not fewer than seven days, except for sick, injured or vicious animals which may be humanely euthanized. 
(3)  If the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall, upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or certified mail. 
(4)  An owner reclaiming an impounded dog, cat or other animal shall pay a fee established from time to time by the city council plus the cost of keeping and feeding the animal. If the owner of any dog or cat impounded pursuant to this article can be determined, the charges specified in this subsection shall be charged to the owner, whether the animal is redeemed or not. Upon conviction, the court shall assess, in addition to any fine and other costs, the amount of such charges as costs of the action. 
(5)  Any animal not claimed by its owner within seven days shall become the property of the city and may be adopted by anyone. No person shall be permitted to adopt more than two animals in a one-year period. Any unclaimed animals may be offered for adoption for a period not to exceed 14 days. No person shall be permitted to adopt any animal that has not been spayed or neutered. In addition to adoption fees, animals will be spayed or neutered at the adopter's expense. Adopters must pay in advance for the spaying or neutering of animals prior to scheduling veterinary services. No animal shall be sold to an educational or scientific institution or an agent thereof. All animals not redeemed or adopted shall be properly disposed of by the animal control officer. 
(6)  The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for violation of this chapter. 
(7)  The animal control officer shall keep complete and accurate records of the care, feeding, veterinary treatment and disposition of all animals impounded at the shelter. 
(8)  Any animal involved in a fatal attack on a human being or attack that results in severe injury to a human being, whether provoked or unprovoked, shall be confiscated. The animal shall be humanely euthanized or returned to the owner after payment of the fees if good reason is shown to the municipal court judge that the animal should not be euthanized. 
(9)  If the animal is not vaccinated against rabies, the required vaccination, at the owner's expense, shall be obtained prior to release from impoundment or the animal will be confiscated by the appropriate authority. 
(10)  No person shall open any secured area for the purpose of removing, freeing or stealing an animal. 
(Code 1980, § 5-23; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1002-05, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Secs. 14-68-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- See the editor's note for art. II. 

Sec. 14-91. - Exemption. 
    Government-operated zoos or animal shelters, hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from this article, except where expressly stated. 
(Code 1980, § 5-51; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-92. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    Rabies vaccination of all dogs and cats over three months of age within the city limits is required every three years. 
(Code 1980, § 5-36; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1403-15, § 1, 11-24-15; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-93. - Duty to produce rabies certificate. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog or cat to produce the appropriate certificate of rabies vaccination, duly issued by a licensed veterinarian, upon the request of the animal control officer or any law enforcement official. The owner of any dog or cat shall affix to the collar of any vaccinated dog or cat a tag as issued at the time of vaccination. 
(Code 1980, § 5-37; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-94. - Failure to vaccinate. 
    Any owner of a dog or cat who fails to vaccinate the dog or cat as required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 5-38; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-95. - Quarantine of suspected animal. 
    Any animal that is suspected of or otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall be immediately reported to the animal control officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of 14 days at the animal shelter. The animal shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of an animal control officer upon documented proof of current rabies vaccination. For stray animals or for animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city pound. 
(Code 1980, § 5-39; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-96. - Surrender of animal; redemption. 
    The owner, upon demand by the animal control officer or other designated official, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the city. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees determined by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 5-40; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-97. - Disposition of dead rabid animal. 
    When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian and the animal dies while under observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health authorities of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. 
(Code 1980, § 5-41; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-98. - City-wide quarantine-Authority to impose. 
    When a report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the city may order a city-wide quarantine for a period of 60 days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no pet animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without permission of the animal control officer or other designated official. 
(Code 1980, § 5-42; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-99. - Same-Vaccination. 
    During the city-wide quarantine period and as long thereafter as he decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the animal control officer may require that all animals three months of age or older shall be vaccinated against rabies. All vaccinated animals shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the animal control officer is empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the area of the health jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 5-43; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-100. - Redemption of strays restricted. 
    No animal impounded because of its being a stray that is unclaimed by its owner shall be allowed to be adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the animal control officer. 
(Code 1980, § 5-44; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-101. - Destruction, isolation of bitten animals. 
    Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel designated by the animal control officer for six months shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated within time limits established by the public health service based on the kind of vaccination used, re-vaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for 30 days shall be carried out. 
(Code 1980, § 5-45; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-102. - Extension of quarantine. 
    If there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of city-wide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional period of time. When, in the determination of the county health officer, an outbreak of rabies occurs in close proximity to the city limits, a city-wide quarantine may be imposed. 
(Code 1980, § 5-46; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-103. - Destruction, removal of rabid animals. 
    No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as provided in this article, or remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the animal control officer. 
(Code 1980, § 5-47; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-104. - Surrender of carcass. 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
(Code 1980, § 5-48; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-105. - Report of bite cases. 
    Every physician or other medical practitioner shall report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Code 1980, § 5-49; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Sec. 14-106. - Report of suspected cases. 
    Every licensed veterinarian shall report to the animal control officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1980, § 5-50; Ord. No. 912-02, § 1, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 1498-19, § 1, 5-28-19) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, adopted August 8, 2017, repealed the former chapter 18, §§ 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56-18-58, 18-81-18-83, 18-107, 18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-144-18-147, 18-156, 18-157, 18-166-18-167, 18-176-18-178, 18-186-18-190, 18-202-18-207, and enacted a new chapter 8 as set out herein. The former chapter 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1195-07, § 1, adopted October 23, 2007; and Ord. No. 1417-16, § 1, adopted June 28, 2016. 
Cross reference- Cable communications, ch. 26; stormwater runoff and management, § 46-56 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 86; signs, ch. 92; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Engaging in building trades. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from securing a permit to do work on his or her own property, provided that all work shall be in compliance with city codes and shall receive the required inspections. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-2. - Fees for failure to obtain a permit. 
    In addition to any other remedy of law, the following schedule of increased permit fees shall be in effect: 
(1)  When work for which a permit is required by this Code is started prior to obtaining the permit, the fee specified shall be doubled. Should a second offense by committed by starting the same work without a permit, the fee shall be three times the customary permit fee. 
(2)  If a permit is not obtained within five days after receipt of written notification to do so, the fee shall be, in addition to the usual fee or increased fee as provided in subsection (1) of this section, a sum established by the city council from time to time, for each day in excess of the five days that transpire prior to obtaining the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-3. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    Building permit and re-inspection fees shall be charged in accordance with the schedule established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-4. - Penalty for violation; removal of prohibited conditions. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or who shall violate any order made under this chapter or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under this chapter or any certificate or permit issued under this chapter and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the board of adjustment or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed in this chapter shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-20. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable amount of time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the forced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-5. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the board of adjustment shall be conducted in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance in appendix A of this Code. Such appeals must be made within 30 days from the date of official notification of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-6. - Tax bill for city's cost to repair, demolish or remove building-Generally. 
    If after being duly ordered by the planning and code enforcement officer to repair, demolish, or remove a building, an owner fails to repair, demolish, or remove a building, the city shall do so. The cost of repair, demolition, or removal of such building shall be certified to the city clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill to be entered upon the records of the city as an assessment against the property to be collected as other city property taxes. However, at the request of the taxpayer, the bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years. If the taxpayer elects to pay the tax bill in installments, the installments shall be due monthly and shall bear interest from the date of the assessment at the rate of ten percent per annum. The tax bill shall be a lien on the property from the date of issuance until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-7. - Same-Personal debt of owner. 
    If a building or structure is damaged by fire, explosion, or other casualty loss, and if an order is issued by the planning and code enforcement officer requiring the repair, demolition, or removal of the building, and if a special tax bill or assessment is issued against the property, it shall be a personal debt of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-8. - Same-Insurance proceeds. 
    If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment for damage or loss to a building or structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or casualty loss and if the covered claim payment is in excess of 50 percent of the face value of the policy covering the building or other structure, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment ten percent thereof and shall pay such monies to the city to deposit into an interest bearing account; except, however, monies due or owed to a mortgagee as shown by the policy of insurance shall be paid in full before such monies are withheld. 
(2)  The city shall release the proceeds and any interest which has accrued on such proceeds under subsection (1) of this section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within 30 days after receipt of such insurance monies, unless the city has instituted legal proceedings to enforce the tax bill and assessment against the property and the property owner. All monies in excess of those necessary to repair, demolish, or remove the structure or building, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured. 
(3)  The property owner and taxpayer shall not be entitled to pay the tax bill in installments if there are insurance proceeds available for the payment of the tax bill. 
(4)  The tax bill shall be a lien on the property until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-9-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Building Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted by this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the building code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-32. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the building code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-33. - Amendments. 
    The building code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 1612.3 Insert: November 1, 2017 
SECTION 423 (DELETE): DOES NOT APPLY 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 1468-18, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Secs. 18-34-18-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-45. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 Existing Building Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the existing building code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-47. - Amendments. 
    The existing building code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 1401.2 Insert: November 1, 2017 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-48-18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-56. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2017 National Electric Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-57. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the electrical code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-58-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 18-81. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-82. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the property maintenance code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-83. - Amendments. 
    The property maintenance code adopted in this article is hereby amended as follows: 
Section PM-101.1 Insert: City of Fulton 
Section PM-103.5 Insert: Fee Schedule as reviewed and established by the City Council from time to time. 
Section 111 (DELETED) - DOES NOT APPLY 
Section 112.4 Delete: Not less than ________ dollars or more than ________ dollars. 
Insert: Not more than $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 302.4 Insert: 8 
Section PM-304.14 Insert: March 1, November 30 
Section PM-602.3 Insert: November 15, March 15 
Section PM-602-4 Insert: November 15, March 15 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 1477-18, § 1, 11-27-18) 
Secs. 18-84-18-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-106. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Mechanical Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-107. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the mechanical code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-108. - Amendments. 
    The mechanical code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Fee Schedule as reviewed and established by the City Council from time to time. 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: 50%, 50% 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500, 90 
Section 108.5. Insert: $250, $500 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-109-18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-131. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Plumbing Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-132. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the plumbing code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-133. - Amendments. 
    The plumbing code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 106.6.2. Insert: Fee Schedule as reviewed and established by the City Council from time to time. 
Section 106.6.3. Insert: 50%, 50% 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500, 90 
Section 108.5. Insert: $250, $500 
Section 305.4.1. Insert: 24, 24 
Section 903.1 Insert: 6 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-134-18-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEAD BAN 

Sec. 18-144. - General policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is: 
(1)  To ban the use of lead materials in the public drinking water system and private plumbing connected to the public drinking water system; and 
(2)  To protect city residents from lead contamination in the city's public drinking water system and their own private plumbing systems. 
(b)  Application. This division shall apply to all premises served by the public drinking water system of the city. 
(c)  Policy. This division will be reasonably interpreted by the water purveyor. It is the purveyor's intent to ban use of lead based material in the construction or modification of the city's drinking water system or private plumbing connected to the city's system. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement the lead ban. 
    If, in judgment of the water purveyor or his/her authorized representative, lead based materials have been used in new construction or modifications after January 4, 2014, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall immediately comply by having the lead based materials removed from the plumbing system and replaced with lead free materials. If the lead based materials are not removed from the plumbing system, the water purvey shall have the right to discontinue water services to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-145. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division: 
(1)  Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
(2)  Lead based materials means any material containing lead in excess of the quantities specified in subsection (a)(3) below; 
(3)  Lead free means: 
a.  When used with respect to solder and flux, refers to solders and flux containing not more than 0.2 percent lead. 
b.  When used with respect to pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and fixtures, refers to pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and fixtures containing not more than a weighted average of 0.25 percent lead. 
(4)  Public drinking water system means any publicly or privately owned water system supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes, and meets the requirements of the state department of natural resources; and 
(5)  Water purveyor means the owner, operator, or individual in responsible charge of a public water system. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-146. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings or fixtures, including backflow preventers that are used exclusively for non-potable services such as manufacturing, industrial processing, irrigation, outdoor watering, or any other uses where the water is not anticipated to be used for human consumption; (S.W.D.A. 1417(a)(4)(A)) 
(b)  Toilets, bidets, urinals, fill valves, flushometer valves, tub fillers, fire hydrants, shower valves, service saddles, or water distribution main gate valves that are two inches in diameter or larger. (S.W.D.A. 1417 (a)(4)(B)) 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-147. - Lead banned from drinking water plumbing. 
(a)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where lead based materials were used in new construction or modifications of the drinking water plumbing after January 4, 2014. 
(b)  If a premises is found to be in violation of subsection (a) above, water services shall be discontinued until such a time that the drinking water plumbing is lead free. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-148-18-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE 

Sec. 18-156. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-157. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the one and two family dwelling code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-158. - Amendments. 
    The one and two family dwelling code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section R101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Table R301.2(1) AS SPECIFIED IN THE ADOPTED CODE 
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: 24, 24 
Section P2904.2 Insert: Sprinkler system requirement shall only be applicable to residential structures with three or more stories. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-159-18-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 18-166. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Fire Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-167. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the fire code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-168. - Amendments. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section F 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section F 109.4 Insert: Misdemeanor, $500, 90 
Section F 111.4 Insert: $250, $500 
Section 1103.5.3 Insert: If applicable, prior to occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-169-18-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 18-176. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-177. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the fuel gas code adopted by this article, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Board of appeals and Board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-178. - Amendments. 
    The fuel gas code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee Schedule as reviewed and established by the City Council from time to time. 
Section 106.6.3 DOES NOT APPLY 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500, 90 
Section 108.5. Insert: $250, $500 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-179-18-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-186. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to move a building into or within the city until a permit shall have been obtained from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-187. - Bond. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit required by section 18-177 shall demonstrate proof of liability insurance in effect and shall execute and deposit in the office of the city clerk a cash bond in the amount of $500.00. 
(b)  Such bond shall be conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and save harmless the city from all accidents and damages caused by negligence in protecting his work or by unfaithful or inadequate work done, or from any damage caused by the moving of any building, house or structure, or by any unreasonable delay in moving such house, building or structure from the streets or alleys. The applicant shall also condition that he will pay all fines imposed upon him for any violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The bond shall cover all permits issued for 60 days from such approval and filing of the permits or until the applicant forfeits such bond because of his failure to comply with all of the conditions therein. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-188. - Display of permit. 
    The holder of a permit to move a building shall, at all times while engaged in such work, have said permit and exhibit it upon request of authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-189. - Clarification of permit. 
    No permit required by this article shall be construed to allow anything not stated in the application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-190. - Notice upon completion of work; inspection. 
    Immediately after the moving of any house, building or structure to the place designated in the permit required by this article, the holder of such permit shall notify the city engineer, who shall, within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, inspect all public and private property along which the moving was done, and ascertain what damage, if any, was caused because of such moving and accordingly approve or disapprove the work. If any damage was caused, the city engineer shall report same to the director of administration and take appropriate action to recover the cost of repair or replacement of such damaged property. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-191-18-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 18-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building inspector means the city building inspector. 
    Family pool means a body of water and auxiliary structures operated and maintained in conjunction with a community association or operated and maintained at a private residence and intended only for the use of the owner and invited guests. 
    Swimming pool means an artificial or natural receptacle containing a body of water, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private swimming, whether or not any change or fee is imposed for such uses, operated and maintained by any person, including all swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels, and shall include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool, excluding family pools. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-203. - Powers and duties of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall have the authority to make further reasonable rules and regulations to ensure safe and sanitary operation of swimming pools and family pools. The building inspector shall be required to inspect all swimming pools and family pools regularly and to take samples of water is use for the purpose of determining the sanitary condition of the pool and pool area, and for this purpose shall have the right to enter upon the pool premises. If the condition of the pool area or water fails to meet the requirements of this Code or if the pool is not being operated in accordance with this article, the building inspector shall have the power to abate or cause a suspension of the use of such pool until such time as compliance is obtained; provided, however, that the owner and operator of the pool shall have first been notified of the unsatisfactory conditions and given a reasonable period of time to correct the conditions to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-204. - Operating permit required; issuance. 
    Every person owning, operating or maintaining a swimming pool, other than a family pool, shall be required to hold an unrevoked operating permit from the building inspector, such permit to be issued annually upon application and after certification by the building inspector to the effect that all requirements of this article and this Code regarding safety and sanitation have been complied with. If the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-205. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Any person owning or operating a swimming pool, other than a family pool or a pool operated as an ancillary service of a motel or hotel, shall provide and maintain the following: 
(1)  At least one lifeguard on duty and at an appointed station for each 50 persons in the pool area during the time that such pool is in use. Such lifeguard shall have completed the senior lifesaving course conducted by the American National Red Cross and shall have in his possession a valid, unexpired card duly authenticated to that effect. However, when organized classes are being conducted by an educational institution, this subsection shall be satisfied by the presence of an appointed swimming instructor of the institution conducting the classes. All such lifeguards or instructors on duty must be physically able and fit to rescue any bather in danger of drowning. 
(2)  Rules for the conduct of bathers to minimize danger of injury to persons using the pool. All such rules shall be approved by the health department. 
(3)  Swimming pools operated in conjunction with a hotel or motel shall at all times when a lifeguard is not on duty have conspicuously posted at the entrance to the pool a sign with letters not less than two inches in height reading "no lifeguard on duty. Swim at own risk". 
(4)  A telephone in working order and the telephone numbers of the fire department and six available doctors posted adjacent to such pool, or the owner or operator of such pool shall provide some other manner or means approved by the health department of effectively summoning the fire department and a doctor. 
(5)  Convenient means of ingress and egress, and shall clearly mark or indicate the depth of water and any dangerous irregularities of the bottom. 
(b)  Any person owning or operating a swimming pool or family pool shall provide and maintain the water in such pool so that it is in conformity with section E4207 of the building code adopted in this chapter at all times when the pool is in use, except that natural bodies of water shall only be required to be certified free of pollution and approved for swimming by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-206. - Locking of gates and opening. 
    All openings or holes in the fence required by section E4207 of the building code adopted in this chapter shall be fastened and locked at any and all times that each swimming or family pool is not in use or is unattended. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-207. - Sanitation and safety of premises. 
    The buildings, grounds, dressing rooms and all other swimming pool or family pool facilities shall be kept in a sanitary and safe condition and maintained free from garbage, trash and other refuse and objects hazardous to health and safety of bathers. 
(Ord. No. 1439-17, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate businesses, occupations, professions, vocations, activities or things, § 12.1. 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; alcholic beverages, ch. 10; cable communications, ch. 26; cemetery interment certificate and city burial permit, § 30-56 et seq.; flood regulation development permits, § 54-46 et seq.; food service establishment permits, § 58-76 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 90; signs, ch. 22; utilities, ch. 114; taxicab business license, § 118-36 et seq.; taxicab chauffeur's license, § 118-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Restriction on licensing of businesses, RSMo 71.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and business designations, unless expressly defined in this chapter or by another chapter of this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Auctioneer means every person who shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise or other personal property or any real estate or interest therein at any stand, store or other place in the city at public outcry for his own gain or who shall advertise or in any way hold himself out as an auctioneer for public patronage or who shall receive any fee as commission for his services. 
    Bakery means a business carried on or conducted by any person engaged in the sale or manufacture of bread or other bakery products. 
    Bakery trucks or wagons means trucks or wagons used in the business of selling or delivering bakery products by bakeries or businesses other than bakeries which have their places of business within the city. 
    Broker means a person dealing in stocks and securities or providing an investment service. 
    Circuses and menageries means all circuses, animal shows, wild west shows, menageries and traveling tent shows or museums. 
    Contractor means every person who, in pursuit of his independent business, undertakes to perform a job or piece of work, retaining in himself control of the means, method and manner of accomplishing the desired result, regardless of any limitation as to the means, method and manner of accomplishing the desired result. 
    Garage keeper means every person who shall keep any place or location where motor vehicles or any parts thereof are repaired, stored, cleaned or otherwise worked on. 
    Hotel, inn or public roominghouse means any house or building, the rooms and accommodations of which are offered to the traveling or transient public for hire. 
    Insurance agent means an agent who represents only one insurance company. 
    Insurance broker means a person who represents several insurance companies. 
    Junk and secondhand dealer means one of the following: 
(1)  Generally. Every person buying, selling or offering to buy or sell or in any manner dealing in junk and secondhand goods, with the exception of furniture and household goods, shall be deemed to be a junk or secondhand dealer. 
(2)  Itinerant junk and secondhand dealer. A junk or secondhand dealer temporarily engaged in the business in the city and not permanently located therein and not having any permanent stand or location therein shall be deemed to be an itinerant junk dealer. 
(3)  Regular junk and secondhand dealer. A junk or secondhand dealer having a permanent location in the city and a permanent place of business therein shall be deemed to be a regular junk or secondhand dealer. 
    Loan agent means every person, other than bankers or banking corporations or institutions, who, for a commission, negotiates, obtains or effects loans of money or real estate security or on collateral security or personal guarantees or who effects or negotiates for the purchase or sale of stocks, bonds, bills of exchange, bullion, coin, money or currency, promissory notes or other securities for himself or others. Every person thus defined who is not a licensed real estate agent must obtain a license provided for in section 22-38 before transacting any such business. 
    Newspaper agency means any person who shall engage in the regular daily distribution of daily metropolitan newspapers. 
    Posting agency means any person engaged in the business of posting on signboards, walls or other places bills, posters or other advertising matter or distributing in public places or from store to store or from house to house in the city circulars, handbills, samples or other advertising matter. 
    Public bus means any motor vehicle with a capacity of ten or more people offered to the public as a public bus business for the mere purpose of carrying or transporting passengers for a charge or fee. 
    Real estate agent means every person or firm composed of one or more persons who shall act as agent for any party in the leasing, renting or selling of houses or real estate at private or public sale or who shall receive or collect rents for another for a commission or other compensation or who shall advertise or hang out any sign or device which shall designate him as an agent for the renting, collecting of rents, leasing or selling of houses or real estate and every person who for commission or other compensation is engaged in the selling of or negotiating for the sale of real estate belonging to others. 
    Solicitor means any person who shall go about from place to place in the city selling or offering to sell work, services or merchandise of any kind. 
    Transient vendor means any person traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance within the city from place to place in and upon private residences or who shall make use of a telephone to take or attempt to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or any personal property of whatever nature for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sales. This definition shall include any person who, for himself or another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, mobile home, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop 
or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of whatever nature and taking orders for the sale of such property for future delivery. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Enforcement; filing complaints; police record and report of new or changed businesses. 
(a)  The city clerk shall see that this chapter is fully complied with and shall file complaints against all persons known to be violating this chapter. 
(b)  During the normal course of patrol of a police officer, the officer shall make a report to the chief of police of each new place of business subject to license or occupation tax or of each change in or removal of any such business. Such report shall show the name of the person subject to license or occupation tax, the location of the place of business, the kind of business, the date of opening and the license number, if any. 
(c)  The chief of police shall make a report to the city clerk of all businesses subject to license or occupation tax which have been reported by city police, such reports to be accompanied by the city police report referred to therein. 
(Code 1980, § 16-15) 
Secs. 22-3-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION LICENSES 

Sec. 22-26. - Required. 
    Every person who shall maintain, operate or conduct any of the businesses, trades, vocations, avocations or places of amusement or exercise the privileges specified in this chapter shall obtain a license and shall pay the license fee or tax prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2) 
Sec. 22-27. - Application. 
(a)  Any person seeking a license required in this article shall file with the city clerk an application for such license, which application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The classification of the license to be obtained; 
(2)  The nature of the license; 
(3)  The place or location in the city at which the license shall be effective or the business shall be conducted; and 
(4)  If the application is for a license to carry on or conduct a business or vocation, a brief description of the nature of the business, setting forth the kind of merchandise to be sold or the nature of the business, vocation or service to be rendered by the applicant for a license. 
(b)  Condition precedent. No license provided for under this chapter shall hereafter be issued by the city clerk to any person or entity until the proposed licensee produces a copy of a retail sales license issued by the State of Missouri, a statement from the department of revenue that the licensee owes no tax due under RSMo 144.010-144.510 or RSMo 143.191-143.261 and proof that any and all tax, utility or other obligations of the proposed licensee to the city for all preceding years lawfully due shall have been paid. Any proposed licensee who is a contractor in the construction industry shall also be required to provide a certificate of insurance for worker's compensation coverage or an affidavit, the form of which shall be developed by the state division of labor and industrial relations, signed by the applicant attesting that the contractor is exempt from such requirement and no business license shall be issued to any contractor applicant failing to provide such certificate of insurance or affidavit. 
(Code 1980, § 16-3; Ord. No. 1241-09, § 1, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 22-28. - Classification of applicants; appeals from classification. 
    The city clerk shall classify all applicants for a license required in this article, putting them into appropriate classes, and issue appropriate licenses to them. Any person feeling aggrieved by his decision may pay his fee under protest and appeal within 30 days to the city council who shall have power to order the license canceled, the fee repaid and a new and more appropriate license issued. 
(Code 1980, § 16-4) 
Sec. 22-29. - Issuance. 
(a)  All licenses required by the city, unless otherwise specified in this chapter or by ordinance, shall be issued by the city clerk, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  No license or permit shall be issued to any person owing the city any delinquent personal, merchants', or other city taxes until such taxes shall be paid in full to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 16-5) 
Sec. 22-30. - Record of licenses issued. 
    The city clerk shall keep an accurate record of all licenses issued, showing the nature of the business or acts licensed, the name and address of the licensee, the expiration date and any other information as he deems proper. 
(Code 1980, § 16-6) 
Sec. 22-31. - Proration. 
    When any person shall apply for a license from the city and the period for which the license shall run shall be less than 12 months, the license fee or tax charge shall be as follows: 
(1)  If such period is more than three months and less than six months, the license fee charged shall be one-half of the license fee charged for the full 12 months. 
(2)  If such period is more than six months and less than nine months, the license fee charged shall be three-fourths of the license fee charged for the full 12 months. 
(3)  If such period is for more than nine months, the license fee shall be the same as for 12 months. 
(Code 1980, § 16-7) 
Sec. 22-32. - Transfer or assignment. 
    All licenses issued by the city shall be deemed to be mere personal privileges and shall not be transferable or assignable without the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 16-8) 
Sec. 22-33. - Exhibition; inspection of licensed premises; display. 
(a)  No person operating under a city license shall refuse to exhibit his license to any city official or his deputy upon demand. 
(b)  Any police officer or other properly designated city official or employee shall have the power to enter any place requiring a license under this article during business hours, free of charge, to ascertain whether this chapter is being observed. 
(c)  Every person to whom a license shall be issued under this chapter shall keep the license conspicuously posted in his place of business. 
(Code 1980, § 16-9) 
Sec. 22-34. - Delinquency fee. 
    For each and every month or fraction thereof, except the month of March, that any license tax that remains unpaid, after such becomes due and payable, there shall be added to such license a delinquency fee of five percent per month of the amount of the license tax. The fee provided for in this section shall be in addition to any penalties provided for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-10) 
Sec. 22-35. - Revocation. 
(a)  All licenses are revocable at any time by the city council upon satisfactory proof that the licensee has: 
(1)  Violated this chapter or any of the ordinances of the city or any of the federal or state statutes relating to the business or acts done under the license; 
(2)  Misrepresented his goods or services sold or offered for sale in the city; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud upon the public; 
(4)  Sold for food for human beings or animals any unwholesome or unfit substances; 
(5)  Conducted a business not covered by his license; or 
(6)  Conducted any immoral or disorderly place of business dangerous to public health or safety or detrimental to public morals. 
(b)  If any license shall be terminated by revocation, death of the licensee or other cause, all fees or taxes paid the city therefor shall be forfeited to the use of the city. 
(c)  No person whose license has been revoked by the city council shall be entitled to engage in the business or do the acts for which the license was issued in the city unless the council, for good cause, shall remove such disqualifications. 
(Code 1980, § 16-11) 
Sec. 22-36. - Operating without license. 
    Any person engaged in any business, conducting any place or doing any act for which a license is required in the city without first having secured such license and performed the conditions relating thereto or, having obtained a license, violates any of the ordinances relating to his business shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and such conviction shall operate ipso facto, without action by the city council, as a revocation of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 16-12) 
Sec. 22-37. - Expiration. 
    All annual licenses issued by the city, unless specifically stated otherwise within this chapter or other ordinance, shall expire on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 16-13) 
Sec. 22-38. - Same-Fees for businesses or occupations generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether by himself as owner or proprietor or through any office, manager, superintendent, agent, servant or employee to exercise, or carry on vocations, businesses or agencies within the corporate limits of the city without first taking out and having a license therefor; and the charge for such license shall be as set out in a schedule established by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 16-14) 
Sec. 22-39. - Pawnbrokers. 
    Pawnbrokers operating within the City of Fulton shall be required to furnish the city police department with copies of the following information as required by RSMo 367.031: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnshop; 
(2)  The name and address of the pledgor, the pledgor's description, and the driver's license number, military identification number, identification certificate number, or other official number capable of identifying the pledgor; 
(3)  The date of the transaction; and 
(4)  An identification and description of the pledged goods, including serial number if reasonably available. 
    Upon satisfactory proof of failure to comply with this section, the city council in accordance with city Code section 22-35, may revoke the pawnbroker's business license. 
(Ord. No. 843-00, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Secs. 22-40-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIGARETTE DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 1996, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 22-61-22-81 and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1980, §§ 16-27-16-47. 

Sec. 22-61. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Cigarette means a roll of tobacco or any substitute thereof wrapped in paper and used for smoking. 
    Consumer means a person who comes into possession of tobacco for the purpose of consuming it, giving it away or disposing of it in any way. 
    Dealer means any person dealing directly with the manufacturer of cigarettes in their purchase and in the business of selling cigarettes as a first seller doing any business in the city. 
    First seller means and includes all persons who make the initial or first sale or distribution of cigarettes within the city. 
    Occupation license tax means the tax imposed by the city under this article upon the business and for the privilege of selling cigarettes at retail in the city. 
    Package means the individual package, box or other container from which sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, or any combination of individuals. 
    Retailer includes persons other than a dealer or wholesaler as defined in this section, who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes at retail, who shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes, irrespective of quantity, number of sales, giving the same away or exposing the same where it may be taken, or purchased, or otherwise acquired. 
    Sale means any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration, or any agreement therefor. 
    Vending machine operator includes all persons engaged in the distribution or sale of cigarettes by means of coin-operated vending machines. 
    Wholesaler includes persons whose principal business is that of a wholesale jobber and who is known to the trade as such, who sells cigarettes for only the purpose of resale or giving them away, or exposing the same where they may be taken or purchased or otherwise acquired by the retailer. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-62. - Occupation tax levy on sale of cigarettes. 
    Every dealer or wholesaler, as defined in section 22-61, engaged in the business of selling cigarettes or offering or displaying the same for sale within the city shall pay an occupation tax at the rate of $2.00 per 1,000 for all cigarettes sold or offered or displayed for sale. This tax shall be paid but once, as provided for in section 22-63, and only by the dealer selling cigarettes or displaying or offering them for sale. This is the one and only license or other tax that cigarette dealers or wholesalers shall pay. The intent and meaning of this article is that the same shall levy an occupation tax based upon and pursuant to the methods provided for by RSMo, 1959, Section 92.040, and pursuant to the powers therein granted and the powers contained in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-63. - Monthly payment. 
    It shall be the duty of every dealer or wholesaler, as defined in section 22-61, selling, offering or displaying for sale any package of cigarettes, to remit the monthly cigarette tax reporting form and full payment to the city clerk by the 15th day of each following month. The canceled check, accompanied by the monthly cigarette tax reporting form, shall be proof of payment. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-64. - Rules and regulations-Records. 
    For the purpose of enabling the city clerk to enforce the terms of this article, the following provisions are enacted: 
(1)  Each dealer in the city and those wholesalers and retailers as defined in section 22-61 shall procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of the shipment of cigarettes received by him, the date thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a period of three years subject to the use and inspection of the city clerk. 
(2)  All dealers, wholesalers and retailers as defined in section 22-61 within the city shall maintain and keep for a period of three years such other records of cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the city as may be required by the city clerk. 
(3)  The city clerk or his duly authorized representatives, are authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records, stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where they are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any such dealer, wholesaler, or retailer pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this article. 
(4)  To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and assessed by this article, each person, as defined in section 22-61, is directed and required to give to the city clerk or his duly authorized representatives, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations as are provided for and required by this article. 
(5)  In addition to the power granted by this article to the city clerk, he is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the delegation of his powers to a deputy or other employee of his office and any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Cigarette tax reporting information received from the state shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax payments. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-65. - Refunds. 
    The city clerk is authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations including a monthly cigarette tax reporting form with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for refunds and credits as he may deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-66. - Oaths and subpoenas. 
    The city clerk or his employees or agents duly designated and authorized by him shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The city clerk shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-67. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating this article by failing to file the report and make the payment provided for in section 22-63 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Failure to file each monthly report and make each monthly payment shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-68. - Dealers outside city. 
    Any dealer whose place of business is outside the corporate limits of the city shall be bound by all of the provisions of this article for any business conducted within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 22-69. - Severability clause. 
    The provisions of this article shall be severable. In the event that any provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this article are valid unless the court finds the valid provisions of this article are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provision that it cannot be presumed that the city would have enacted the valid provisions without the void ones or unless the court finds that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. 
(Ord. No. 730-96, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Secs. 22-70-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MERCHANTS 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Merchant means a person who deals in the selling any goods, wares or merchandise at any store, stand or place occupied for such purpose within the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 16-59) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-102. - Applicability of certain sections to article. 
    Sections 22-1, 22-2, 22-26 through 22-30, 22-32, 22-33, and 22-35 through 22-37, with the exception of section 22-31, shall apply to this article. 
(Code 1980, § 16-64) 
Sec. 22-103. - License required; application; inspection of records. 
(a)  Every merchant, before doing or offering to do business as such, shall procure from the city clerk a license for his business pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Any person required to obtain a license under this article, the amount of whose license shall be determined otherwise, shall, at the time of applying for such license, file with the city clerk a proper application, signed under the penalties of perjury, by the person applying for such license or someone for him, showing such information as may be required to fix the amount of such license. Any person who shall for himself or for some other person make a false statement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any inspection of records, as provided by this section, shall be done at the direction of the city council only and shall be for the sole purpose of determining compliance with this article. The person doing the annual audit for the city shall be the only authorized authority permitted to make this inspection, and such person shall not disclose any information so obtained to any other person, but shall merely state whether or not the business being inspected is in the properly designated category. 
(d)  For the purpose of this inspection, the business copies of the state sales tax returns covering the period in question shall be deemed sufficient. 
(Code 1980, § 16-60) 
Sec. 22-104. - Separate license for each business; fee for engaging in more than one business. 
(a)  Under this article, if a person shall operate a business in more than one location but all are operated as parts of one business, the license required shall be for the one business and not each separate part. 
(b)  Under this article, separately identified businesses must be separately licensed. When any merchant or corporation is engaged in more than one of the businesses, trades or occupations named in this chapter for which a separate license shall be required, the amount of this license shall be two-thirds of the total of the licenses required for the separate businesses. For this purpose, one wholesale and one retail business operated from the same location are separate businesses. 
(Code 1980, § 16-61) 
Sec. 22-105. - Form of license. 
    The city clerk shall furnish blank merchant licenses, which licenses shall be in the form prescribed by section 22-27. 
(Code 1980, § 16-62) 
Sec. 22-106. - Tax. 
(a)  Retail and wholesale merchants shall pay the tax specified in a schedule adopted by the council from time to time, based on a total gross volume of business or receipts for the previous calendar year. 
(b)  Every such person commencing any business shall procure a temporary license and pay therefor the minimum amount applicable to such business and at the next succeeding March 1 or September 1, whichever date is sooner, shall obtain a new license. The amount of such license tax will be determined and computed on a pro rata average gross business basis during the term such business was conducted under a temporary license, and such monthly average shall be multiplied by 12 or six, if a half-year license is required, to obtain the yearly anticipated gross sales or receipts. For each and every succeeding year thereafter, the amount of such license tax will be determined on a gross business basis per year as provided in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 16-63) 
Secs. 22-107-22-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY OCCUPATION TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-126-22-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 22-136. - Levied. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of supplying telecommunication service for any purpose in the city shall pay to the city clerk, by the 15th of the second month after the first month of doing business, a monthly license tax equal to 8 percent of each month's gross receipts from such business (maximum allowable by law pursuant to information received from Missouri Department of Revenue). 
(b)  This monthly license tax shall be due on the 15th of each month and shall be based on 8 percent of the gross receipts for the preceding month. 
(Code 1980, § 16-113; Ord. No. 1136-06, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1149-06, § 1, 10-24-06) 
Sec. 22-137. - Statement of gross receipts; investigation by clerk. 
    Every person engaged in the business of supplying telephone service for any purpose in the city shall file with the city clerk, on June 15 and December 15 of each year a sworn statement of the gross receipts from such business for the six calendar months preceding April 1, in the case of the June 15 report, and October 1, in the case of the December 15 report. The city clerk or his duly authorized deputy is authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statement required for that purpose and shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 16-114) 
Sec. 22-138. - Construction of division. 
    The license tax required in this division shall be in lieu of any other occupation tax required of any person engaged in the business of supplying telephone service for any purpose in the city; provided, however, that nothing contained in this division shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon real or personal property belonging to any such person nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything other than telephone service nor shall the tax required by this division exempt any such person from the payment of any other tax which may be lawfully required other than an occupation tax on the business of supplying telephone service. 
(Code 1980, § 16-115) 
Secs. 22-139-22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COIN-OPERATED SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-161. - Gambling devices. 
(a)  Prohibition. Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law, and no license shall be issued pursuant to this article upon any machine or mechanical device which under the law constitutes a gambling device. 
(b)  Seizure and destruction. If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any device required to be licensed under this article is being used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded, and if, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, the exhibitor is found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police. 
(Code 1980, § 16-125) 
Secs. 22-162-22-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSES 

Sec. 22-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term includes such devices as marble machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
    Person includes the following: 
(1)  Any person who owns any coin-operated machine; 
(2)  The person in whose place of business any coin-operated machine is placed for use by the public; and 
(3)  The person having control over any coin-operated machine; 
provided, however, the payment of the license fee by any one of such persons enumerated in this definition shall be deemed a compliance with this division. 
(Code 1980, § 16-133) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-172. - Required generally. 
    Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical amusement device shall be required to obtain a license from the city. 
(Code 1980, § 16-135) 
Sec. 22-173. - Required for each machine. 
    Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license required by this division, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each machine displayed or operated by him. 
(Code 1980, § 16-143) 
Sec. 22-174. - Application; qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Application for the license required in this division shall be made to the city clerk. 
(b)  The application for such license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address. 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth of the applicant. 
(3)  Prior convictions of applicant, if any. 
(4)  Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place. 
(5)  Description, mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number of the machine to be covered by the license. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 16-136) 
Sec. 22-175. - Application in duplicate. 
    Application for a license required in this division shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police and the other copy to the city electrical inspector or electric department. 
(Code 1980, § 16-137) 
Sec. 22-176. - Approval or disapproval of application. 
(a)  The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the machine for which a license is being sought as required by this division, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character and either approve or disapprove the application. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall inspect all wiring and connections to the machine, determine if the wiring complies with the electrical code of the city and shall either approve or disapprove the application. 
(Code 1980, § 16-138) 
Sec. 22-177. - Fee. 
    Every applicant for a license required in this division, before being granted such license, shall pay an annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each mechanical amusement device. The fee shall be established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 16-139) 
Sec. 22-178. - Issuance. 
    No license required in this division shall be issued to any applicant unless his application is approved by the chief of police and the electrical inspector pursuant to section 22-172. 
(Code 1980, § 16-140) 
Sec. 22-179. - Posting. 
    The license required by this division shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(Code 1980, § 16-141) 
Sec. 22-180. - Expiration date. 
    Each license issued under this division shall expire on the last day of February each year. 
(Code 1980, § 16-142) 
Sec. 22-181. - Transfer to new machine or device. 
    The license required in this division may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect and upon giving a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. 
(Code 1980, § 16-144) 
Sec. 22-182. - Transfer when licensee moves place of business. 
    If any person licensed pursuant to this division shall move his place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the chief of police and the city electrical inspector in the same manner as required in section 22-176. 
(Code 1980, § 16-145) 
Sec. 22-183. - Revocation. 
(a)  Every license issued pursuant to this division may be revoked should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to this division, the ordinances of the city or state law. 
(b)  Every license issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the city council after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged and if, after a hearing, the licensee is found guilty of such violations. 
(c)  Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in his defense. 
(Code 1980, § 16-146) 
Sec. 22-184. - Inspections. 
    The police department shall make regular inspections to ascertain compliance with this division. 
(Code 1980, § 16-134) 
Secs. 22-185-22-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ORGANIZED TRADE FAIR AND CRAFT SHOWS 

Sec. 22-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Organized trade fair and craft show means the sale or offering for sale of miscellaneous goods, wares or merchandise to the public under the auspices of any organization, under generally informal circumstances in the city and not on a regular basis as limited in section 22-206. 
(Code 1980, § 16-161) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-207. - Limitation on number. 
    No organized trade fair and craft show may be held by any organization more frequently than three times in any calendar year. No such sale shall be held for more than three consecutive days. Any activity in the nature of a trade fair and craft show which occurs more frequently than limited in this section shall be deemed the establishment of a mercantile business, and the person or organization engaging in such business shall be deemed a merchant within the meaning of that term as defined in section 22-101. 
(Code 1980, § 16-162) 
Sec. 22-208. - Permit required; application; fee. 
(a)  Anyone desiring to hold an organized trade fair and craft show shall first apply for and obtain from the city clerk a permit to be issued on forms approved by the clerk. 
(b)  The application for such permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed dates for holding the organized trade fair and craft show. 
(3)  The proposed location of the fair or show. 
(4)  A statement to the effect that the applicant has not applied for or obtained three such permits within the calendar year for which this permit is sought, such statement to be signed by the applicant under oath. 
(c)  Such application shall be accompanied by a permit fee established by the city council from time to time. 
(d)  Any person not in compliance with this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 16-163) 
Sec. 22-209. - Permit forfeiture for false statements in application. 
    If any statement made in the application for a permit required by this article is false, any permit issued pursuant thereto shall be forfeited ipso facto, and the applicant shall be deemed guilty of making a false affidavit and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 16-164) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Vital statistics, RSMo 193.010 et seq.; transportation and disposition of dead bodies, RSMo 194.010 et seq.; cemeteries generally, RSMo 214.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Pioneer Cemetery designated. 
    The plot of ground originally known as the Old Cemetery and located in the northwest corner of block 56 according to the new city plat of the city as recorded in plat book 3, pages 44 and 72, records of the county, and being on the south side of West Fourth Street of the city, except for that portion lying in Westminster Avenue, shall be officially known and designated as the Pioneer Cemetery. 
(Code 1980, § 7-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Hillcrest Cemetery designated. 
    The tracts of ground as shown in plat book 1, page 58, survey book S, page 102, and warranty deed in book 252, page 508, records of the county, and being bounded on the north by East Eighth Street and Smith Branch, on the west by Hillcrest Street and on the south and east by the property of the Missouri School for the Deaf shall be officially known and designated as the Hillcrest Cemetery. 
(Code 1980, § 7-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Southside Cemetery designated. 
    The tracts of ground as shown in plat book 3, pages 43 and 71 and plat book 7, page 86, third addition, records of the county, shall be known as the Southside Cemetery. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Conveyance procedures. 
    All conveyances made in the cemeteries by the city or owners shall be by a certificate showing grave, lot and block number as shown on the plat of the respective cemetery on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3.1) 
Sec. 30-5. - Duties of city engineer and sexton. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer and sexton to lay off all graves in the city-owned cemeteries and perform such other duties and work as directed by the streets and sidewalks committee of the council, and all burials shall be done under their supervision. 
(Code 1980, § 7-81) 
Sec. 30-6. - Workers subject to control of city engineer and sexton. 
    All workers employed in the construction of vaults, erecting monuments or other similar activities in the cemeteries shall be subject to the control and direction of the city engineer or sexton. 
(Code 1980, § 7-82) 
Sec. 30-7. - Special permit for certain workers. 
    Any worker failing to conform to section 30-6 shall not be permitted afterwards to work in the cemetery, unless such person shall have a special permit from the council, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, which permit may be revoked at any time. 
(Code 1980, § 7-83) 
Sec. 30-8. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 7-84) 
Sec. 30-9. - Establishment of grades; responsibility for improvements. 
    The city shall establish the grade of all graves, lawns and avenues and shall direct generally all improvements within the cemeteries, upon all graves, before as well as after interments have been made therein. The city will have charge of all planting, sodding, surveying and improvements generally at the cemeteries. 
(Code 1980, § 7-8) 
Sec. 30-10. - Planting. 
    Permanent plantings of grasses, shrubs, flowers, etc., in cemeteries are made by the city, and private plantings may be permitted only at the discretion of the sexton. The purchase of the graves does not confer any right to do planting, etc., without the express approval of the proper officials of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7-10) 
Sec. 30-11. - Traffic rules. 
(a)  No person or vehicle will be allowed to enter the cemetery, except through regular entrances maintained for the public for such purpose, without the permission of the sexton. 
(b)  The use of roads and paths in the cemeteries as thoroughfares or public highways, either by vehicles or on foot, is prohibited. Violators of this subsection shall be considered as trespassers. 
(c)  There shall be no driving allowed over the graves or upon the lawns under any pretense whatsoever, except for the normal maintenance and operation of the cemeteries. 
(d)  Buses, trucks or other conveyances of cumbersome description will not be allowed to enter the grounds, except by special permission. 
(e)  Admission of vehicles upon the roads of the cemetery will be permitted as a privilege and not as a right inherent to the purchase of a grave or otherwise. As a privilege it is restricted to those who observe the traffic rules adopted by the city officials. 
(f)  The speed limit for vehicles is limited to a maximum of 15 miles per hour. 
(g)  Vehicles are not permitted to make U-turns upon roads, but must go around the section. 
(h)  Visitors on foot have the primary right to the use of the roads, and all vehicle drivers are required to observe their right by careful driving and a strict adherence to the rules. 
(i)  Drivers will carefully observe and obey any traffic signs or markings displayed in the cemeteries. 
(j)  Any driver who runs any vehicle upon the lawns, across gutters or anywhere else where damage results therefrom shall be required to make good such damages. 
(k)  The sounding of horns, sirens or other audible signals within the cemetery is prohibited, except in connection with a funeral service. 
(Code 1980, § 7-15) 
Sec. 30-12. - Visitors. 
(a)  The cemeteries are open to visitors from 7:00 a.m. to sunset, from April 1 to October 31 and from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. from November 1 to March 31. 
(b)  All visitors are expected to respect the solemnity and beauty of the cemetery and strictly observe the rules established by the city for the purpose of securing quiet and good order at all times within the cemeteries. 
(c)  Children under age 16 without permission of the sexton will be excluded at all times, unless accompanied by an adult who will be responsible for their conduct. School children under supervision of a teacher, art students, botanists, ornithologists, students of forestry or others who may benefit from a study of the works of art and nature will be welcome to the cemeteries. 
(d)  All persons are strictly prohibited from plucking any plants, whether wild or cultivated, disturbing birds, breaking or injuring any tree or shrub, fountain, pool, tower or in any way defacing the grounds of the cemeteries. 
(e)  The proprietors of graves and their families shall be allowed access to the grounds of city cemeteries at any time during normal operating hours or otherwise by permission. 
(f)  The city engineer shall have the right to order from the cemetery any person who has no business therein at any time. 
(Code 1980, § 7-16) 
Sec. 30-13. - Removal of detrimental or dangerous trees or shrubs. 
    If any trees or shrubs situated on any grave shall, because of their roots, branches or otherwise, become detrimental to the adjacent lots, avenues or streets or dangerous or inconvenient to passersby, the city engineer shall enter upon such grave and remove such trees or shrubs or parts thereof as may be detrimental, dangerous or inconvenient. 
(Code 1980, § 7-17) 
Sec. 30-14. - Corner posts. 
    All corner posts in cemeteries shall be level with the ground so that it will be possible for a lawnmower to pass over them. 
(Code 1980, § 7-18) 
Sec. 30-15. - Pond or fence enclosure prohibited; grounds to be uniform. 
    No pond or fence enclosure shall be built, kept or maintained within city cemetery grounds, and the ground shall be placed and kept in a uniform condition. 
(Code 1980, § 7-19) 
Secs. 30-16-30-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-36. - Certain forms of burial prohibited. 
    Any form of burial which will leave the remains above the level of the ground is prohibited, except in a mausoleum approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 7-30) 
Sec. 30-37. - Grave space costs. 
    The cost of grave spaces in city cemeteries shall be $200.00 for a standard four-foot by ten-foot grave space and $120.00 for a four-foot by five-foot grave space. 
(Code 1980, § 7-31) 
Sec. 30-38. - Perpetual care cemetery fund. 
(a)  Under RSMo 214.020 there is established a perpetual care cemetery fund for Hillcrest Cemetery and Southside Cemetery owned by the city. 
(b)  Ten percent of the income derived from sale of lots in Hillcrest Cemetery and Southside Cemetery shall be deposited in the perpetual care cemetery fund. Such funds shall be invested from time to time in United States government bonds or of the state or may be placed in any bank or savings and loan association which is authorized to do business in this state, so long as the funds so deposited are protected by federal deposit insurance. 
(c)  The principal of the perpetual care cemetery fund shall not be used for any purpose whatsoever and no money shall be transferred out of such perpetual care cemetery fund except for the purpose of being invested and for repurchase of cemetery lots previously sold. 
(d)  The income derived from the perpetual care cemetery fund shall be used for the preservation, care, upkeep and adornment of such cemeteries or the repurchasing of cemetery lots previously sold and for no other purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 7-31.1) 
Sec. 30-39. - Interment procedures. 
(a)  The number of interments which may properly be made upon a grave in cemeteries is definitely fixed at one per grave space at the time of purchase, and no more will be permitted. 
(b)  The arrangement and location of graves upon a lot is determined by the city, as it is necessary that uniformity shall prevail. 
(c)  No interment may be made unless the remains are accompanied by a city burial permit or written approval by the city clerk's office. 
(d)  Except in emergency cases, one working day's notice is required for the preparation of a grave, and interments are not to be made before 10:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. 
(e)  No bands are allowed to enter the cemetery except for a funeral or on Memorial Day or at other times by permission from the sexton. 
(f)  As a minimum, all standard interments will incorporate the use of a casket and a concrete grave liner with lid in which the casket will be placed. Cremated or infant interments shall incorporate the use of a container approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  Normal graves will be four feet wide by ten feet long and may be used for either one standard burial or two cremated burials. Additionally, some four-foot by five-foot graves are available and can be used for one cremated burial or one memorial grave. 
(Code 1980, § 7-32) 
Sec. 30-40. - Permission from mayor required for disinterments. 
    Disinterments will be allowed only upon notarized written consent or request of the purchaser of the grave or surviving heirs of a deceased purchaser or by appropriate court order and only after permission in writing is first obtained from the mayor and in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-33) 
Charter reference- Mayor to sign instruments binding the city, § 4.3(f). 
Sec. 30-41. - Interments for remuneration prohibited. 
    No owner shall allow interments in his grave spaces for remuneration. 
(Code 1980, § 7-34) 
Sec. 30-42. - Owner to designate intended interments. 
    Whenever possible, the owner of a grave is required, during his lifetime, to designate in writing to the city the names of those members of his family or others whom he wishes to have interred upon the grave. Such writing will be filed with the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 7-35) 
Secs. 30-43-30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE AND CITY BURIAL PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 30-56. - Required. 
    The city engineer shall not allow any person to be buried in a city cemetery unless a city burial permit or written permission has first been obtained from the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 7-40) 
Sec. 30-57. - Information required for burial. 
    All burial permits issued for burial in city cemeteries must state the name, age, residence, date of death, type of enclosure and time of interment of the person to be buried, the length of the graves required and the lot and block number in which the grave is to be dug. 
(Code 1980, § 7-41) 
Sec. 30-58. - Issuance restricted. 
    No city burial permit shall be issued to bury in any grave purchased or conveyed after April 8, 1920, unless such grave is conveyed directly from the city to the person demanding the permit or to the heir of such person or to an ancestor from whom the applicant shall have derived title by descent. 
(Code 1980, § 7-42) 
Sec. 30-59. - Reburials. 
    All reburials shall require a new city burial permit. 
(Code 1980, § 7-45) 
Sec. 30-60. - Burial permit and disinterment fees. 
(a)  The cost of burial permits and disinterments shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  For any special request for the closing of graves after 5:00 p.m. any day of the week, the cost shall be the same as for weekends and holidays. 
(c)  No permit shall be granted until the price specified has been paid. 
(Code 1980, § 7-46) 
Secs. 30-61-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRAVES 

Sec. 30-81. - Right to use of grave. 
    Upon the death or judicially declared incompetency of a grave owner, it is the duty of the heirs, devisees, guardian or personal representative to file with the city competent proof of their right to the use of the grave and burials upon the grave may not be permitted until such proof is presented. 
(Code 1980, § 7-4) 
Sec. 30-82. - City's right of access. 
    The city reserves unto itself the right of ingress and egress over all graves at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 7-5) 
Sec. 30-83. - Markers. 
    All locations of grave markers and their foundations shall be approved by the city engineer and erected by and at the expense of the party purchasing them. 
(Code 1980, § 7-54) 
Sec. 30-84. - Depth of vault. 
    Each vault in a cemetery shall be covered by at least 32 inches of soil. 
(Code 1980, § 7-55) 
Sec. 30-85. - Level with the ground. 
    All graves shall be kept level with the ground. 
(Code 1980, § 7-56) 
Sec. 30-86. - Rights of purchasers; certificate of purchase. 
(a)  The purchaser of a cemetery lot shall have the right to set no more than one approved tree on each lot. 
(b)  No live shrubs or vines of any kind shall be planted or put upon any grave in the cemeteries belonging to the city except such as shall meet the approval of the city engineer, and only such graves as conform to this section shall receive care from the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall issue a certificate to the purchaser showing the location of the grave and granting the right of interment by issuance of a city burial permit for each grave. 
(Code 1980, § 7-57) 
Sec. 30-87. - Purchase and use restricted. 
    No person shall be permitted to own more than ten graves in a city cemetery at one time or to purchase or hold any grave for any other purpose than for burial. 
(Code 1980, § 7-58) 
Sec. 30-88. - Use of graves only for burial or memorial. 
    The graves in the three city cemeteries shall be sold only for the purpose of burying human remains or for establishing memorials to deceased humans. 
(Code 1980, § 7-58.1) 
Sec. 30-89. - Sale or transfer. 
    No purchaser of any grave or part of a grave by certificate in a city cemetery shall sell or transfer it or any part thereof to any private person. However, the city shall at all times be required to pay to such purchaser who desires to dispose of the unoccupied grave space or to his heirs an amount equal to 100 percent of the purchase price. When unoccupied grave spaces are returned to the city, the original deed shall also be returned. If a grave space is transferred, it shall be by endorsement of the certificate and shall be made at the expense of the endorser. 
(Code 1980, § 7-59) 
Sec. 30-90. - Transfer of graves with consent of city. 
    The grave owner cannot sell or convey any grave in a cemetery without first obtaining the written consent of the city. All transfers must be made through the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 7-60) 
Sec. 30-91. - Curbing, fencing or railing. 
    No person shall be allowed to put curbing around any grave in any cemetery under the control of the city. Care shall not be given by the city to any grave upon which the curbing, fencing or railing has not been removed except for existing curbing, fencing or railing. 
(Code 1980, § 7-61) 
Sec. 30-92. - Filling of graves. 
    The material used in the filling of graves shall be good, clean earth. Any owner of a grave which is low or swags because of the topography thereon or because of the height of surrounding graves which have been formerly filled shall have the right to fill his grave to a depth that will make it conform to or harmonize with the surrounding graves. Where the ground of a grave and that of adjacent graves has a uniform slope, the owner will be permitted to grade his grave to a depth of 12 inches; provided, however, the general plans of filling shall be done in accordance with the rules that may be made by the city engineer, which rules shall conform as near as may be to this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7-63) 
Sec. 30-93. - Donations for care of graves. 
    All donations or bequests made by any person for the care of any particular grave in the cemetery shall be made to the city, which funds, so received, shall be used as provided in the gift or devise or in the manner provided in the rules of the city where no special provision is made. The cost of managing the fund and doing the work shall be from time to time deducted therefrom. 
(Code 1980, § 7-64) 
Sec. 30-94. - Individual grave markers required. 
(a)  All graves must be marked by a permanent grave marker within one year of the date of burial. Temporary grave markers are allowed to mark the grave site until a permanent grave marker is erected. 
(b)  Certain areas of Hillcrest and Southside Cemeteries have been reserved for flush-type flat markers only. All other areas allow the use of either upright tombstones or flat markers. All grave markings are subject to approval by the city pursuant to section 30-83. 
(Code 1980, § 7-65) 
Sec. 30-95. - Ornamentation. 
(a)  The city retains control and supervision of all graves which are sold, and the city retains the right to have its sexton enter upon any grave and prohibit, modify or remove any structure, object, improvement or adornment on such grave which may have been placed thereon in violation of the rules or which may be considered a nuisance or injurious to the public. 
(b)  Baskets; glass, crockery, wire, metal or any other kind of receptacle for flowers; glass cases; boxes containing artificial flowers, wreaths, etc., will not be permitted upon any grave, except as set forth under section 30-97. 
(Code 1980, § 7-66) 
Sec. 30-96. - Potted plants. 
    Persons may place memorials, flowers and potted plants on graves for five working days or until removed subject to the rules provided by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 7-67) 
Sec. 30-97. - Cut flowers. 
(a)  Receptacles for cut flowers will be allowed on graves when sunk below the surface of the lawn so that they do not obstruct the lawnmower or appear unsightly when not filled with flowers. 
(b)  Upon request at the sexton's office, any particular basket or design may be stored for a period not exceeding one week after removal. If not called for in this period, it may be otherwise disposed of, without right of claim by the owner. 
(Code 1980, § 7-68) 
Sec. 30-98. - Emblems. 
    Metal emblems or markers, flags and guidons are prohibited on graves, except to celebrate Memorial Day and Veterans Day. They may be placed by authorized representatives of lodges, posts, camps, etc., not to exceed two days before Memorial Day or Veterans Day and removed not later than three days thereafter. Thereafter, such emblems will be removed from the grave by the cemetery employees and stored for a maximum of seven days, at no risk to the city. It is preferable that all such emblems be removed by the organization or person placing them. 
(Code 1980, § 7-69) 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; courts, ch. 38; stormwater runoff and management, § 46-56 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; planning, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 114; zoning regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference- Civil defense, RSMo ch. 44. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Adoption of the National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
    The city has formally adopted the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the standard for incident management. 
(Ord. No. 1454-18, § 2, 1-9-18) 
Secs. 34-2-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL ORGANIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Establishment of local disaster planning organization required, RSMo 44.080. 

Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor or other official appointed by the city council or elected by the public to administer the city government and its operations. 
(Code 1980, § 8-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-27. - Establishment and composition of emergency management agency. 
(a)  There is created within and for the city an emergency preparedness organization to be known as the city emergency management agency, which is responsible for the preparation and implementation of emergency functions required to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage due to disasters, to include emergency management of resources and administration of such economic controls as may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and emergency activities, excluding functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, in accordance with RSMo 44.080 and the state disaster operations plan adopted thereunder. 
(b)  This organization shall consist of a director and other additional members to be appointed by the mayor to conform to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the state disaster operations plan. 
(Code 1980, § 8-17) 
Sec. 34-28. - Functions. 
    The municipal organization created by this article shall perform such emergency preparedness functions within the city as shall be prescribed in and by the state Disaster Operations Plan and program prepared by the governor and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasimunicipality, entered into as provided by RSMo 44.090 and the state disaster operations plan. 
(Code 1980, § 8-18) 
Sec. 34-29. - Oath of members. 
    No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in any organization established under this article who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the government of the United States or in this state or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence or who has been convicted of or is under indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in such organization shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in this state, which oath shall be substantially as follows: 
"I, ___________, do so solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Missouri against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such a time as I am a member of the (name of the disaster or emergency organization), I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence." 
(Code 1980, § 8-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 44.115. 
Sec. 34-30. - Office space. 
    The mayor or city council is authorized to designate space in any city-owned or city-leased building for the organization established under this article as its office. 
(Code 1980, § 8-20) 
Sec. 34-31. - Director. 
    The director of the organization established by this article will be appointed by the mayor and shall serve during the pleasure of the mayor. The director's responsibilities include the following: 
(1)  The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operations of local emergency preparedness activities. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for maintaining records and accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed under the jurisdiction of the emergency management office. 
(Code 1980, § 8-21) 
Sec. 34-32. - Executive officers' authority. 
    The mayor and the director of the organization established by this article, in accordance with RSMo 44.080(2) and 44.090, may: 
(1)  Expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency preparedness purposes; provide for the health and safety of persons, including emergency assistance to victims of an enemy attack, and for the safety of property; and direct and coordinate the development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans of the federal and state disaster and emergency planning. 
(2)  Appoint, provide or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel and other emergency operations teams, units or personnel who may serve without compensation. 
(3)  In an enemy attack, waive the provisions of statutes requiring advertisements for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts. 
(4)  With the approval of the governor and consistent with the state disaster operations plan, enter into mutual aid agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal aid. 
(5)  Accept services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds granted or loaned by the federal government for disaster planning and operations purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 8-22) 
Sec. 34-33. - Mobile support units. 
    The director of the organization created by this article shall form mobile support units as provided for in RSMo 44.080, and the state disaster operations plan and shall designate the leaders thereof. Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or officer, while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director of civil defense, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. 
(Code 1980, § 8-23) 
Sec. 34-34. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the governor, may enter into mutual aid arrangements or agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal emergency aid. Such arrangements or agreements shall be consistent with the state survival plan, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of each local organization for disaster operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements or agreements. 
(b)  The director of the local organization for emergency preparedness may assist in negotiation of reciprocal mutual aid agreements between his organization and other public and private agencies and between the governor and the adjoining states or political subdivisions thereof and shall carry out arrangements relating to the local unit. 
(Code 1980, § 8-24) 
Sec. 34-35. - Use of existing equipment, supplies and facilities. 
    In carrying out the emergency powers under this article, the governor and the chief executive officer or the city council are directed to use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state and of the city, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the governor and the state disaster and planning office upon request. 
(Code 1980, § 8-25) 
Sec. 34-36. - Acceptance of federal and state aid. 
    Whenever the federal government or state government or any officer or agency thereof shall offer to the state or through the state to this city services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for the purpose of civil defense, the state, acting through the governor, or this city, acting with the consent of the governor and through its chief executive officer, may accept such offer, and upon acceptance the governor or chief executive officer of this city may authorize any officer of the state or of this city, as the case may be, to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the state or this city, subject to the terms of the offer. 
(Code 1980, § 8-26) 
Sec. 34-37. - Emergency procedure for procurement. 
    In an emergency as defined in RSMo 44.010(4), the municipal director of local emergency preparedness is authorized on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations as authorized by RSMo 44.080(3), provided that if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 8-27) 
Sec. 34-38. - Waiver of formal contract procedure during enemy attack. 
    In an enemy attack, the mayor or city council may waive any time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by statute pertaining to the advertisement for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts. 
(Code 1980, § 8-28) 
Chapter 38 - COURTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; civil emergencies, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; traffic, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, RSMo 479.010 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Violations of ordinances to be tried in circuit court. 
    City ordinance violation cases shall be filed in division six of the 13th Judicial Circuit Court of the state for the county and shall be heard and determined by an associate circuit judge of the 13th Judicial Circuit Court, as provided by RSMo 479.040. 
(Code 1980, § 18-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Court costs. 
(a)  The court costs to be assessed under this chapter are to be in addition to the fine and according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Costs of the court in accordance with the Missouri Municipal Division Court Operating Rule 21.01. 
(2)  In all cases except those for nonmoving traffic violations, costs for the training of police officers in the amount of $2.00. 
(3)  Other costs, such as for the issuance of a warrant, a commitment or a summons, as provided before the associate circuit judge in criminal prosecutions. 
(4)  Actual costs assessed against the city by the county sheriff for apprehension or confinement in the county jail. 
(5)  Mileage, in the same amount as provided to the sheriff in criminal violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the officer must travel (both directions) in order to serve any warrant or commitment or order of the court. 
(b)  An additional court cost in the amount of $1.00 is hereby imposed upon every municipal court case (except parking violations and other nonmoving traffic offenses) to fund the "Missouri Police Officers Standards and Training Commission Fund" as created under the statutes of the state. The municipal court clerk shall collect such funds for any court case that is resolved and remit the $1.00 court costs to the finance officer, and the finance officer will remit the money to the state. 
(c)  Missouri statewide court automation program surcharge. In addition to any costs which may be assessed by the municipal division pursuant to statute, ordinance or court rule, in every proceeding filed in the municipal division for violation of an ordinance a surcharge of $7.00 shall be assessed. Such surcharge shall also be assessed in cases in which pleas of guilty are processed in the traffic violations bureau or general violations bureau. No such surcharge shall be collected when the proceeding or defendant has been dismissed by the court, when costs are waived, or when costs are to be paid to the city. Such surcharge shall be collected by the court administrator and transmitted monthly to the chief financial officer. Funds collected under this subsection shall be used by the city only to pay to the Missouri director of revenue to the credit of the Missouri statewide court automation fund as provided by RSMo 488.012.3(5) and 488.027.2. 
(Code 1980, § 18-2; Ord. No. 659-93, §§ 1, 3, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 1174-07, § 1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1406-15, § 1, 12-15-15) 
State Law reference- Fee and costs limits, RSMo 479.260(2), 590.140. 
Sec. 38-3. - Traffic violations bureau clerk. 
(a)  The position of traffic violations bureau clerk is established. The clerk and assistants appointed by such clerk shall perform the responsibilities imposed by or pursuant to RSMo 479.050, with respect to the traffic violations bureau for the city, including: 
(1)  Collecting fines and costs which are assessed in the traffic violations bureau. 
(2)  Remitting to the proper official fines and costs which are collected within the time and in the manner provided by statute, court rule or ordinance. 
(b)  The salaries of the traffic violations bureau clerk and assistants, if any, shall be established by the city clerk within the budget and appropriations which are established and made by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 18-3) 
Sec. 38-4. - Disposition of stolen property. 
(a)  When property alleged to have been stolen, purloined, embezzled or obtained by false pretenses shall come into the custody of the chief of police, he shall hold the property, subject to the order of the court authorized to direct the disposition thereof. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory proof of the title of any owner of such property, the judge may order the property to be delivered to such owner, on his paying the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the safekeeping and preservation of such property, to be certified to by the judge, which order shall entitle the owner to demand and receive such property. 
(Code 1980, § 18-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Payment of fine in installments. 
    When a fine is assessed by an associate circuit judge, it shall be within his discretion to provide for the payment of the fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1980, § 18-5) 
Chapter 42 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Law governing elections generally, RSMo ch. 115 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Wards designated; polling places. 
    Generally. The city shall be divided into four wards to be designated and numbered as first ward, second ward, third ward and fourth ward, respectively. Unless otherwise indicated ward one voting place shall be in the Fulton City Hall, Ward Two voting place shall be in the Callaway County Public Library, Ward Three voting place shall be in the South Side Baptist Church and ward four voting place shall be in the First Baptist Church. 
    Ward boundaries shall be designated as described in the attached Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out at this point. 
(Code 1980, § 9-9; Ord. No. 888-01, § 1, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 1309-11, § 1, 12-20-11) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Exhibit A is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 42-2-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTION OF CITY OFFICERS 

Sec. 42-26. - Election authority. 
    The county clerk shall serve as election authority. 
(Ord. No. 338-86, § 1(9-26), 11-11-86) 
Sec. 42-27. - Nominations. 
(a)  Petitions. Nominations of candidates for all elective offices shall be by petition, the form of which shall be as follows: 
NOMINATING PETITION 
"We, the undersigned registered voters of the City of Fulton, Missouri, respectfully petition and request that the name of ___________ residing at ___________, be placed upon the ballot as a candidate for the office of ___________ to be voted for at the election to be held on the _____ day of ________, 19___; and we, individually, signify that our names have appeared on the roll of registered voters within the last year, and that we are qualified to vote for this candidate. 
NAME STREET AND NUMBER DATE OF SIGNING  
(Spaces for signatures and required date)" 
STATEMENT OF CIRCULATOR 
"The undersigned states that he is the circulator of the foregoing petition; that each signature appended thereto was made in his presence, and each signature is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be. 
Signature of circulator _____ 
Address _____ " 
(b)  Acceptance. No nominating petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by signed acceptance of the nomination in the following form: 
ACCEPTANCE OF NOMINATION 
"I hereby accept the nomination for the office of ___________ and hereby agree to serve if elected. 
_____
Signature of Candidate  
Date and hour of filing _____ 
This petition is filed by _____ 
Whose address is _____ 
Received by ;hg; _____
(Signature of Election Authority)" 
No voter shall sign more than one nominating petition for the same office, and should a voter do so, his signature shall be void except as to the first filed of the petitions signed by him for the office concerned. The signatures shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil. Each signer shall indicate next to his signature the date of his signing and the place of his residence, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify his place of residence. 
(c)  Procedure after filing. Within ten working days after the filing of a nominating petition, the election authorities shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it is sufficient. If a petition is found insufficient, the election authorities shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying wherein it is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions, such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a different petition may be filed for the same candidate. The election authorities shall keep on file all petitions found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the candidates are nominated in those petitions. 
(d)  Filing for more than one office. No candidate shall file for more than one municipal elective office to be balloted at the same election. 
(e)  Withdrawing from candidacy. Any person nominated for an office who wishes to withdraw as a candidate shall, not later than 60 days prior to the election, file a written, sworn statement of withdrawal with the election authorities. 
(Code 1980, § 9-27) 
Sec. 42-28. - Procedure in case of tie vote. 
    If at any municipal election there shall be no choice between candidates because of two or more having an equal number of votes, the city council shall call a special election at which the candidates receiving the equal number of votes shall be the only candidates, and the special election shall be conducted and the votes counted as in other elections. The incumbent shall remain in office until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. 
(Code 1980, § 9-30(c)) 
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, adopted May 22, 2018 repealed the former ch. 46 §§ 46-26-46-35, 46-56-46-59, 46-71-46-77, 46-91-46-94, and 46-106-46-108, and enacted a new ch. 46 as set out herein. The former ch. 46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1980; Ord. No. 666-94, § B, adopted May 24, 1994; Ord. No. 905-02, § 1, adopted July 9, 2002; Ord. No. 1306-11, § 1, adopted November 8, 2011; Ord. No. 1333-12, § 1, adopted November 13, 2012; and Ord. No. 1436-17, § 1, adopted June 13, 2017. 

ARTICLE I. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose and scope. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of RSMo 67.400 et seq., and to provide a just, equitable, and practicable method for the repairing, vacation, or demolition of buildings or structures that may endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the occupants of such buildings or general public, and this chapter shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, that now are in existence or that may hereafter exist in the City of Fulton, Missouri (the "City"). All dangerous buildings, as defined by section 46-2, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be vacated, repaired, or demolished as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-2. - Definitions. 
    Dangerous buildings. The following conditions in structures or buildings within the city are determined to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city and structures or buildings containing such defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings": 
(1)  Those with interior walls, exterior walls, or other vertical structural members that list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those that, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50 percent damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded or that have insufficient strength to be reasonability safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those that have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to become dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those that are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or that so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to cause injury to the health, safety, or welfare of those occupying such building. 
(6)  Those that, because of missing, inadequate, or ineffective light, air ventilation, or sanitation facilities, including, but not limited to, no running water, no heated water, no electricity, no heat source, or no working sanitation facilities, are inadequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other adequate means of evacuation. 
(8)  Those that have parts thereof that are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those that, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration or damage, are detrimental to the sale, loan, or taxable values of surrounding properties or which render such surrounding properties uninsurable or which constitute a blighting influence upon the neighborhood or which constitute an eyesore so as to deprive owners or occupants of neighboring property of the beneficial use and enjoyment of their premises. 
(10)  Those that because of their condition are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the people of this city. 
    Interested parties. The owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in any building or structure affected by this chapter, as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-3. - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector and the building commissioner in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition of any dangerous building. 
(1)  If the dangerous building is occupied and in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and then repaired or demolished. 
(2)  If the dangerous building reasonably can be repaired so that it no longer will exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired prior to ordering any demolition. 
(3)  If the dangerous building cannot be reasonably repaired so that it no longer will exist in violation of the terms of this chapter or if it is not repaired as ordered pursuant to this chapter, then it shall be ordered demolished. 
(4)  Whether a dangerous building can reasonably be repaired shall be determined in the discretion of the city building inspector or building commissioner, as the case may be, considering the time and expense of any repairs, the costs of demolition and removal, and the value of the dangerous building and the property. 
(5)  Any dangerous building that is not repaired pursuant to the orders issued under this chapter shall be presumed to be unable to be reasonably repaired. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-4. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Building inspector. Any city employee so designated by the mayor or city administrator shall be building inspectors within the meaning of this chapter. 
(b)  Duties of the building inspector. The building inspector shall have the power and duty under this chapter to: 
(1)  Inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary, all residential, institutional, assembly, commercial, industrial, garage, special, or miscellaneous occupancy buildings to determine whether any conditions exist that render such places a dangerous building when the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that any such building is a dangerous building, including entering any building with the approval of the occupant or owner or with a warrant. 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall, or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall, or structure is or may be existing in violation of this chapter, and the building inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that such building is a dangerous building, including entering any building with the approval of the occupant or owner or with a warrant. 
(3)  Inspect any building, wall, or structure reported by the fire or police departments of this city as potentially existing in violation of this chapter. 
(4)  In accordance with section 46-6, notify, in writing, the interested parties of any building found to be a dangerous building. 
(5)  Report in writing to the city building commissioner the noncompliance with any notice to vacate, repair, or demolish or upon the failure to proceed continuously with the work without unreasonable delay. 
(6)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the building commissioner and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(7)  Post notices to interested persons on a dangerous building as provided in this chapter and as directed by the building commissioner, and post notice of any order issued by the building commissioner. 
(8)  Take any other action as directed by the mayor, city administrator, or building commissioner or as necessary for compliance with this chapter, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-5. - Building commissioner. 
(a)  Building commissioner. The planning and protective services director shall act as building commissioner under this chapter. 
(b)  Duties of the building commissioner. The building commissioner shall have the power and duty pursuant to this chapter to: 
(1)  Supervise all inspections required by this chapter and cause the building inspector to make inspections and perform all the duties required of the building inspector by this chapter. Upon receiving a complaint or report from any source that a dangerous building exists in the city, the building commissioner shall cause an inspection to be made forthwith. If the building commissioner deems it necessary to the performance of the commissioner's duties and responsibilities imposed herein, the building commissioner may request an inspection and report be made by any other city department or retain services of an expert whenever the building commissioner deems such service necessary. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a report from the building inspector indicating a failure by any interested party to commence work of reconditioning or demolition with the time specified by the notice given them or this chapter or to proceed continuously with work without unreasonable delay, the building commissioner shall call and hold a full and adequate hearing giving all interested parties notice on the matter in accordance with section 46-6. 
(3)  Take any other action, directly or through the building inspector, as directed by the mayor or city administrator, or as necessary for compliance with this chapter, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-6. - Declaration of nuisance; procedure. 
(a)  Issuance of nuisance notice. After an inspection performed by a building inspector in accordance with this chapter, the inspector shall issue a written notice ("nuisance notice") if the inspector determines a structure to be a dangerous building. 
(1)  Contents of notice. The nuisance notice shall contain the following: 
a.  A description of the building or structure at issue; 
b.  A description of the defects of the building or structure that make the building or structure a dangerous building; 
c.  A declaration that the building or structure is a nuisance; 
d.  That all interested parties shall vacate, if applicable, and the owner must, at their own risk and costs, repair or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the nuisance notice and this chapter; and 
e.  A reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, to commence the required work and to continue the same until completed without unreasonable delay, not to exceed 90 days from the date of notice. 
(2)  Service of notice. The nuisance notice shall be given either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested to all interested persons. If service cannot be had by either of these modes of service upon each interested person, then service may be had by publication in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices within the city for two successive weeks, directed to all interested parties and the general public. 
(b)  Compliance with nuisance notice; report of non-compliance. 
(1)  Compliance. If a nuisance notice is issued, then all interested parties must vacate, if applicable, and the owner of the dangerous building shall repair or demolish said building, at his, her, or its own risk and cost, in accordance with the nuisance notice. The repair or demolition shall commence within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days and be continued until completed without unreasonable delay, not to exceed 90 days from the date of nuisance notice. 
(2)  Non-compliance. Upon receipt of a report from the building inspector indicating a failure by any interested party to comply with the nuisance notice, the building commissioner shall call and hold a full and adequate hearing giving all interested parties notice on the matter in accordance with subsection (c), below. 
(c)  Hearing and notice of hearing. 
(1)  Hearing notice. The building commissioner shall give written notice of the hearing to all interested parties at least ten days in advance of the hearing date. The hearing notice shall be given either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the hearing notice cannot be accomplished by either of these methods, then it shall be given by publication for two successive weeks in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices within the city, with the last insertion being not less than one day prior to the hearing. The hearing notice shall identify the interested parties, the address of the dangerous building, the date, time, and location of the hearing, the right of interested parties to be represented by counsel and have an opportunity to be heard, and include such other information as the building commissioner determines. 
(2)  Hearing procedures. The building commissioner shall preside over a full and adequate hearing in which any interested party may be represented by counsel and all interested parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. The hearing officers shall be the building commissioner, the director of administration, and the city engineer. The building commissioner shall issue such orders as determined by the majority of the hearing officers. 
(d)  Vacation, repair or demolition order. 
(1)  Issuance of order . If there is competent and substantial evidence presented at the hearing which shows that the building or structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residence of the city and is, thus, a dangerous building as defined herein, the building commissioner shall issue an order, making specific findings of fact, based upon such competent and substantial evidence, as to the reasons, conditions, or defects making the building or structure a dangerous building, and commanding that the building or structure be vacated, repaired, or demolished and removed ("order"). If supported by such evidence, the order may direct the city to repair or demolish the dangerous building immediately or may provide the owner with a reasonable time to repair or demolish before the city does so. If the evidence does not support a finding that a building or structure is a dangerous building, no order shall be issued. 
(2)  Service of order. The order shall be served upon all interested parties by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the party to whom such order is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such party by posting the order on the building or structure described in the order. 
(3)  Compliance with order. If an order is issued providing an interested party with an opportunity to vacate, repair or demolish, then any interested party shall so vacate, repair, or demolish said building, at his, her, or its own cost and risk, in accordance with the order. The vacation shall commence in a reasonable time prior to any repair or demolition and shall continue until such repair or demolition is completed. The repair or demolition shall commence within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days from the issuance of the order and shall be continued until completion without unreasonable delay, not to exceed 90 days from the order. 
(4)  Failure to comply with the order; repair or demolition. If the interested parties fail to comply with the repair or demolition order within 30 days of its issuance or fails to continue the same until completion without unreasonable delay, not to exceed 90 days from the repair and demolition order, or if the evidence supported an order for the city to proceed to repair or demolish the dangerous building immediately, the building commissioner shall cause such building or structure to be vacated, repaired, or demolished as the repair or demolition order so provides. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-7. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Assessment and certification of costs. If the city causes a building or structure to be vacated, repaired, or demolished, the costs of such abatement shall be determined and recovered in accordance with this section. The costs incurred by the city in administering the provisions of this chapter and the actual costs incurred in vacating, repairing, or demolishing a dangerous building, shall be certified by the building commissioner to the city clerk as a special assessment represented by a special tax bill against the real property affected. 
(b)  Administrative fees and costs. The costs incurred by the city in administering the provisions of this section shall include all administrative fees and costs incurred by the city in inspection of the dangerous building, determination of the interested parties, conducting the hearing, and providing notification of the notices and orders authorized herein, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(c)  Liability created; payment of assessment; collection; lien. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the person or persons who were the owners of record of the property at the time the city caused the dangerous building thereon to be vacated, repaired, or demolished. If there was more than one owner of record of the property at the time the city caused the dangerous building thereon to be vacated, repaired, or demolished, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the personal debt. The city may initiate actions against such owner(s) to collect the personal debt once the special assessment becomes delinquent. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall also be a lien on the property until paid. The lien may be enforced by any method appropriate for the enforcement of special assessments generally. 
(d)  Repayment. Except as provided in section 46-8, at the request of the taxpayer, this special tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years and said assessment shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum until paid. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-8. - Dangerous buildings resulting from insured casualty. 
    As to damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss, if an order is issued by the building commissioner as provided in section 46-6, and a special bill or assessment is issued against the property, it shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss, the following procedure is established for the payment of up to 25 percent of the insurance proceeds, as set forth in this section. This section shall apply only to a covered claim payment that is in excess of 50 percent of the fact value of the policy covering a building or other structure: 
(1)  The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment up to 25 percent of the covered claim payment and shall pay such moneys to the city to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority over any obligation under this chapter. 
(2)  The city shall release the proceeds and any interest that has accrued on such proceeds received under subsection (1) of this section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within 30 days after receipt of such insurance moneys, unless the city has instituted legal proceedings under the provisions of this section. If the city has proceeded under the provisions of this section, all moneys in excess of that necessary to comply with this chapter for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured. 
(3)  If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in this section, at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years. The tax bill from date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property and a personal debt against the property owner(s) until paid. 
(4)  This section shall apply to fire, explosion or other casualty loss claims arising on all buildings and structures. 
(5)  This section does not make the city a party to any insurance contract, and the insurer is not liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. 
(6)  The building commissioner may certify, in lieu of payment of all or part of the covered claim under this section, that it has obtained satisfactory proof that the insured has removed or will remove the debris and repair, rebuild, or otherwise make the premises safe and secure. In this event, the building commissioner shall issue a certificate within 30 days after receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to the insured without the deduction pursuant to this section. It shall be the obligation of the insured or other person making the claim to provide the insurance company with the written certificate provided from the building commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-9. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeal. Any interested person may, within 30 days from the receipt of the order, appeal such decision to the circuit court of the county, pursuant to the procedure(s) established in RSMo ch. 536. 
(b)  Additional interested parties. In any appeal provided by this section, any person who owns or occupies property located within 1,200 feet of the perimeter of the building or structure which is the subject of the appeal shall be allowed to present evidence to the court on behalf of the city of the condition of the building or structure, whether or not such person presented such evidence at the hearing provided by section 46-6. The appellant before the court shall have the opportunity to cross-examine any such person presenting evidence to the court. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-10. - Emergencies. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building commissioner and the building commissioner may cause the immediate repair, vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building. The cost of such emergency repair, vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 46-7 and/or section 46-8. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-11. - Violation; penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  Failure to comply with order. Any person in possession or control of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with the order given by the building commissioner, including failing to vacate a building deemed to be a nuisance or failing to repair or demolish any such building, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Removal of notices. Any person removing any notices provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per occurrence. 
(d)  Continual violation. Each day that a person fails to comply with the order of the building commissioner may be deemed a separate offense for which the violator may be penalized without necessity of further notice. 
(e)  Civil enforcement. The city may institute a civil action in the circuit court of the county against any person failing to comply with any order given pursuant to this chapter to secure the vacation of such dangerous building or for the recovery of any costs as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-12. - Conflicts. 
    Any building or structure found to be a dangerous building in accordance with this chapter shall be subject to the terms and procedures of this chapter and not the property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-13. - Authority to enforce. 
(a)  Entry; inspection. The building inspector, building commissioner, or their agents, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine buildings, structures, or parts thereof; obtain information as to the identity of the interested parties in said buildings or structures; and to repair or demolish, or cause to be repair or demolished, any building or structure declared to be a dangerous building and a nuisance pursuant to this chapter, as consistent with the owner or occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy, including entering any building with the owner or occupant's consent or with a warrant. 
(b)  Orders to enforce. The municipal court of the city shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, search warrants and seizure warrants. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-14. - Miscellaneous. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval, and shall supersede any prior ordinances, including the International Building Code, to the extent such ordinances are inconsistent herewith. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city and any interested parties from reaching an agreement to address a property containing a dangerous building as all interested parties and the city agree. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Secs. 46-15-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose and scope. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of RSMo 67.398, and to provide a just, equitable, and practicable method for the abatement of certain public nuisances including those caused by debris, vegetation, grass, weeds, or rubbish located on private property or certain public property under an individual's control. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-32. - Public nuisances. 
    No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, occupant, or otherwise, shall maintain, use, place, deposit, leave, or permit to be placed or, in some cases, to remain, on property within the city any of the following items, conditions, or actions, and the same are determined to be, and are hereby declared to be, public nuisances: 
(1)  Debris of any kind; weed cuttings; cut, fallen, or hazardous trees and shrubs; rubbish and trash; lumber not piled or stacked 12 inches off the ground; piles of rocks or bricks; tin, steel, parts of derelict cars or trucks; broken furniture; any flammable material which may endanger public safety; or any material or condition which is unhealthy or unsafe. 
(2)  Any accumulation of stagnant water or any land that is not graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structure thereon. 
(3)  Any airtight enclosure which is accessible to children and which cannot be opened from the inside. 
(4)  Any sidewalk accessible to the public and/or steps which are not maintained in good repair, free of holes or protruding edges hazardous to pedestrian travel. 
(5)  Any sidewalk and/or steps accessible to the public containing accumulated mud, debris, garbage, or other items or substances upon the surface which may cause a pedestrian to lose footing. 
(6)  Any accumulation of snow and ice from sidewalks and/or steps accessible to the public not removed within 24 hours. 
(7)  Overgrown trees, shrubs, or other obstructions to pedestrian travel located on or near a sidewalk accessible to the public. 
(8)  Any electric fence or fence constructed wholly or partly of barbed wire that is maintained abutting and within three feet of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or public way, except in areas zoned agricultural (A-1). 
(9)  Growth of any vegetation harmful or irritating to the human touch, including poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac. 
(10)  Overgrown vegetation and noxious weeds (defined herein as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees, decorative shrubs, cultivated flowers, ornamental plants, or garden plants) which are eight inches or more in height, with the exception that this provision shall not apply to any lot or tract of land in excess of 60,000 square feet which is not being used for an industrial, commercial, or residential purpose, so long as such lot shall have a border within which weeds shall be cut. The border shall be measured along its perimeter 25 feet deep from the public right-of-way and from any adjoining lot or tract of land used for an industrial, commercial, or residential purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-33. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Building inspector. Any city employee so designated by the mayor or city administrator shall be building inspectors within the meaning of this chapter. 
(b)  Duties of the building inspector. The building inspector shall have the power and duty under this chapter to: 
(1)  Inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary, all residential, institutional, assembly, commercial, industrial, garage, special, or miscellaneous occupancy buildings to determine whether any conditions exist that render such places a public nuisance as defined herein when the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that such public nuisance exists, including entering any building with the approval of the occupant or owner or with a warrant. 
(2)  In accordance with section 46-35, notify, in writing, the owner and/or occupant of any lot, land, or building found to contain a public nuisance. 
(3)  Report in writing to the city building commissioner the noncompliance with any notice to abate or upon the failure to proceed continuously with the abatement work without unreasonable delay. 
(4)  If requested in accordance with section 46-35, appear at all hearings conducted by the building commissioner and testify as to the condition of the lot, land, or buildings as to the public nuisance. 
(5)  Post notices to the owner and/or occupant of the land, lot, or buildings regarding any public nuisance as provided in this chapter and as directed by the building commissioner, and post notice of any order issued by the building commissioner. 
(6)  Take any other action as directed by the mayor, city administrator, or building commissioner or as necessary for compliance with this chapter, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-34. - Building commissioner. 
(a)  Building commissioner. The planning and protective services director shall act as building commissioner under this chapter. 
(b)  Duties of the building commissioner. The building commissioner shall have the power and duty pursuant to this chapter to: 
(1)  Supervise all inspections required by this chapter and cause the building inspector to make inspections and perform all the duties required of the building inspector by this chapter. Upon receiving a complaint or report from any source that a public nuisance exists within the city, the building commissioner shall cause an inspection to be made forthwith. If the building commissioner deems it necessary to the performance of the commissioner's duties and responsibilities imposed herein, the building commissioner may request an inspection and report be made by any other city department or retain the services of an expert whenever the building commissioner deems such service necessary. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a report from the building inspector indicating a failure by any owner and/or occupant to commence abatement work within the time specified by the notice given them or this chapter or to proceed continuously with said work without unreasonable delay, the building commissioner shall cause said condition to be abated or removed in accordance with section 46-36. 
(3)  If requested by an owner or other person in accordance with section 46-35, conduct a hearing on the determination of a nuisance. 
(4)  Take any other action, directly or through the building inspector, as directed by the mayor or city administrator, or as necessary for compliance with this chapter, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-35. - Declaration of nuisance; procedure. 
(a)  Issuance of order of abatement. After an inspection performed by a building inspector in accordance with this chapter, the inspector shall issue a written notice and order if the inspector determines the land, lot, or buildings to contain any public nuisance. 
(1)  Contents of notice. The notice shall contain the following: 
a.  A description of the building or structure at issue; 
b.  A description of the condition or conditions of the land, lot, or building that constitute a public nuisance; 
c.  An order that the owner and/or occupant abate or commence removal of, at their own risk and cost, the nuisance identified by the notice; 
d.  A reasonable time, not less than ten days, to abate or commence removal of each condition identified in the notice; 
e.  A statement that the failure to abate the nuisance could result in a citation and penalties, fees, or incarceration, or abatement by the city with the costs thereof to be assessed against the owner and/or the property as set forth in this chapter; and 
f.  The right of the owner to request a hearing in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  Service of notice. The notice shall be given either by personal service or by first-class mail to both the occupant of the property at the property address and to the owner at the last known address of the owner, if not the same. Additionally, the notice may be posted upon the premises at issue. 
(b)  Compliance with nuisance notice; report of non-compliance. 
(1)  Compliance. If a notice is issued, then the owner must abate or commence removal of each condition identified in the notice in accordance with the terms of the notice. 
(2)  Non-compliance. Upon receipt of a report from the building inspector indicating a failure by the owner to comply with the notice, the building commissioner shall cause the nuisance to be abated in accordance with section 46-36. 
(c)  Request for hearing. 
(1)  Right to request. Any owner or person receiving the notice of nuisance who does not agree with the determination of a nuisance and who wishes to challenge the notice and order of abatement may request a hearing in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Form of request. The request must be made in writing and received by the building commissioner within seven days of the date of the notice. The request must state the name of the person requesting the notice, their mailing address, their phone number, a statement that they request a hearing on the determination of a nuisance, and location of the nuisance. The building commissioner may promulgate a form by which a hearing may be requested. If no such request is received within the period stated herein, the notice and any order to abate shall be come final and not subject to challenge. 
(3)  Hearing procedure. Once a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the "contested case" provisions established in RSMo ch. 536. At the conclusion of the hearing, if there is competent and substantial evidence presented at the hearing which shows a nuisance to exist, then the building commissioner may issue an order to abate the nuisance or a citation to the owner or occupant as provided in section 46-36 or, if it does not, no order of abatement shall issue. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-36. - Abatement of nuisance. 
    Upon a failure of the owner to pursue the removal or abatement of the nuisance(s) identified in the notice, or, if a hearing is requested and the building commissioner finds competent and substantial evidence of a nuisance, the building commissioner may issue an order causing the nuisance to be removed or abated or may issue a citation to the owner and/or occupant as provided in section 46-38. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-37. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Assessment and certification of costs. If the city causes a nuisance to be removed or abated, the costs of such abatement shall be determined and recovered in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Charge for abatement costs. The charge for abatement costs shall be based upon a minimum fee, plus hourly labor fee per employee, equipment cost (if necessary), and disposal costs. If the work is done by contract, the fee will be the amount charged to the city. The cost of abatement may also include a $100.00 administrative fee for the city's costs in administering this chapter. 
(c)  Notification of abatement costs. Within 30 days of the city completing the abatement work, the city shall send to the owner and occupant a notice informing them of the cost of the abatement work. The notice shall give a just and true account of the charges and/or costs the city seeks to collect. 
(d)  Collection of abatement costs. The owner shall have 45 days after notification of completion of the abatement costs to pay the costs. If the abatement bill remains unpaid 45 days after notification thereof, the costs incurred in abating the nuisance shall be certified by the building commissioner to the city clerk as a special assessment represented by a special tax bill or added to the annual real estate tax bill, at the collecting official's option, against the real property affected, and the costs shall be collected in the same manner and procedure for collecting other real estate taxes. 
(e)  Liability created; payment of assessment; collection; lien. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the person or persons who were the owners of record of the property at the time the city caused the nuisance thereon to be abated or repaired. If there was more than one owner of record of the property at the time the city caused the nuisance thereon to be abated or repaired, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the personal debt. Collection of a delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes, including those issues regarding due date, interest, and late penalties. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall also be a lien on the property until paid. The lien may be enforced by any method appropriate for the enforcement of special assessments generally. No clerical error or informality in the tax bill or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance of the tax bill shall be a defense in an action to collect the tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-38. - Emergencies. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that a condition presents an immediate, specifically identified risk to the public health or safety, the building inspector may give the property owner or occupant less than ten days to abate or remove the condition or conditions constituting a nuisance. Alternatively, the building commissioner may cause the immediate abatement or removal of such condition, and the cost of such emergency abatement or removal of such nuisance shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 46-37. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-39. - Violation; penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  Citation. Failure of the owner or other person in control of property subject to a notice issued pursuant to this chapter to abate or remove the condition or conditions constituting a nuisance within the time stated by the notice may result in a citation being issued to such owner or other person in control of the property. The citation shall define the violation and state the place, time, and date of the court appearance. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person issued a citation for violating this chapter may be charged with court costs and punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Not less than $250.00 and not more than $500.00. Note: The minimum penalty amount shall apply if it is paid before court date. 
(2)  Second offense in a 12-month period: Not less than $500.00 and not more than $750.00. 
(3)  Third offense in a 12-month period: Not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $1,500.00 and no less than four hours or no more than three days in jail. 
(4)  Fourth offense in a 12-month period: Not less than $1,250.00 and not more than $1,750.00 and no less than three days and no more than ten days in jail. 
(c)  Continual violation. Each day that a person fails to abate or remove the condition or conditions constituting a nuisance may be deemed a separate offense for which the violator may be penalized without necessity of further notice. 
(d)  Civil enforcement. The city may institute a civil action in the circuit court of the county against any person failing to comply with any order given pursuant to this chapter to secure the abatement or removal the condition or conditions constituting a nuisance or for the recovery of any costs as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-40. - Authority to enforce. 
(a)  Entry; inspection. The building inspector, building commissioner, or their agents, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine property, buildings, structures, or parts thereof; obtain information as to the identity of the owner or occupant in said property; and to abate or repair, or cause to be abated or repair, any condition or conditions declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter, as consistent with the owner or occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy, including entering any building with the owner or occupant's consent or with a warrant. 
(b)  Orders to enforce. The municipal court of the city shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, search warrants and seizure warrants. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-41. - Miscellaneous. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval, and shall supersede any prior ordinances to the extent such ordinances are inconsistent herewith. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city and any owner and/or occupant from reaching an agreement to address a property containing a public nuisance as all parties may agree. This chapter shall apply to all nuisances other than those constituting a dangerous building as defined by the unsafe building ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Secs. 46-42-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER RUNOFF AND MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 46-61. - Generally 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Catchment means the subwatershed as identified in the city storm drain study. 
(2)  Detention facility means any structure which is designed to collect and store surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
(3)  Excess stormwater runoff means that portion of stormwater which exceeds: 
a.  The safe storm drainage capacity of the downstream storm sewers within the catchment; 
b.  The predevelopment runoff in the particular tract. 
(4)  Protected channel means a channel which receives stormwater discharge and which is paved, riprapped or otherwise improved by addition of manmade materials to reduce the potential for erosion. 
(5)  Safe storm drainage capacity means the quantity of stormwater runoff that can be transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface rise above the top of the channel or conduit. 
(6)  Stormwater channel means a natural or manmade open watercourse with definite bed and banks which periodically or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. 
(7)  Stormwater runoff means water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed by the soil or vegetation or evaporated and which flows over the ground surface or is collected in channels or conduits. 
(8)  Stormwater runoff release rate means the rate at which stormwater runoff is released from dominant to servient land. 
(9)  Twenty-five-year, 24-hour frequency rainfall means a precipitation event of 24 hours duration, having a 4.0 percent chance of occurring in any one year. 
(b)  Article supplemental to development ordinances. This article further supplements ordinances regulating the following: 
(1)  The subdivision, layout and improvement of lands, as provided in chapter 102 of this Code, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The excavating, filling and grading of lots and other parcels or areas. 
(3)  The construction of buildings and the drainage of the sites on which those structures are located, to include parking and other paved areas. 
(4)  The design, construction and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and systems. 
(c)  Other permits required. Before starting any activities regulated by this article, an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with respect to the submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans, building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals and similar matters, along with those set forth in this article and as may be required by state statutes and the regulations of any department of the state. 
(d)  Conflicting standards. This article shall be deemed as additional to standards required by other ordinances of the city. In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-62. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Responsibility. The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the office of the city engineer. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  Standards. Variations from this article may be granted when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council that, owing to special conditions, a strict adherence to this article will result in unnecessary hardship and that the spirit and intent of this article will not be observed. 
(2)  Procedure. A request for variation shall be filed by the owner seeking to develop or change the use of this property or his agent with the city engineer who shall refer it, together with his recommendation, to the city council for decision. The request for variation shall be written and shall state specifically what variation is sought and the public's interest in granting the variation. 
(c)  Official maps and profiles. Responsibility for all changes to official maps and profiles remains with the city council. 
(d)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, the provisions expressed in this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(e)  Inspection. The city engineer shall be responsible for determining whether the stormwater management plan is in conformance with division 3 of this article and whether development is proceeding in accordance with approved stormwater management plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the city engineer to ensure the stormwater management plan is properly implemented. The city engineer and other duly authorized employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation and measurement in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Work suspension. If work performed does not conform to the provisions of the approved stormwater management plan and specifications, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the developer. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the correction required and the time within which corrections shall be made. Failure to comply with such notice shall result in the issuance of a stop work order applicable to all construction activity except that necessary for correction of the violation. Upon correction of the violation, the stop work order shall be voided and construction may resume. 
(2)  Bond forfeiture. For continued violation of the approved stormwater management plan, a public hearing on the matter shall be conducted by the city council. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the developer by registered mail and shall state the grounds for complaint and the time and place such hearing is to be held. Such notice shall be served at least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such hearing, the developer shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. After such hearing, if the city council concludes that the issuance of additional correction notices would be futile, any bonds or cash deposits posted with the city shall be forfeited, whereupon such security shall be used for completion of the stormwater management plan as approved. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person who violates or fails to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $200.00. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-63. - Design criteria and performance standards. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  A stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the city engineer by the owner of any proposed residential, commercial or industrial development within the city, unless the city engineer waives such requirement for one of the following reasons: 
a.  Offsite facility, two or more developments. If two or more developments, including that of the applicant, have provided for a common system. 
b.  Offsite facility by city. If an offsite stormwater management system has been either constructed or programmed or identified for construction by the city and the applicant has agreed to contribute to or participate in the construction thereof. 
c.  Contribution in lieu of facility construction. If the applicant agrees to contribute to the city fund an amount based upon square footage of the hard surface. The fee schedule to be agreed upon by the council. 
Any hard surface of 500 square feet or less can be waived by the city engineer and code enforcement officer. 
Any surface area in excess of 75,000 square feet is not eligible. This development must have their own stormwater management system. 
d.  Other management techniques. Management techniques other than detention facilities may be utilized by the development, provided the techniques proposed meet the intent of this article and provide a benefit to the watershed that equals or exceeds the benefit that a detention facility would provide. 
(2)  No final subdivision or development plat shall be approved and no building permits shall be issued until the stormwater management plan has either been waived or reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Stormwater management plans. The required stormwater management plan shall identify means for controlling the stormwater runoff release rate from the development and providing storage potential for the excess stormwater runoff. All computations, plans and specifications related to the implementation of this article must be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state. The entire catchment shall be studied to determine the runoff impact within the subwatershed. The stormwater management plan shall contain but not be limited to the following information, unless specifically excluded by the city engineer: 
(1)  A topographic map of the project site and adjacent areas, of suitable scale and contour interval, which shall define the location of streams, the extent of floodplains and calculated high-water elevations, the shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins, including their inflow and outflow structures, if any within the designated catchment. 
(2)  The location and flow line elevation of all existing sanitary, storm or combined sewers and other waterways within the catchment. 
(3)  Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project site following development indicating design volumes and rates of proposed runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage system, the calculations used to determine such runoff volumes and rates and restatement of the criteria which have been used by the project engineer throughout his calculations. 
(4)  A layout of the proposed stormwater management system, including the location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and channel sections, detention basins, and analyses regarding the effect the improvements will have upon the receiving channel and its high-water elevation. 
(5)  For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations. 
(6)  For all detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for both the 25-year, 24-hour, and 50-year, 24-hour, design runoff events for the site under predeveloped conditions and the calculated 25-year, 24-hour, and 50-year, 24-hour, peak flows from the site under predeveloped conditions. 
(7)  A profile and one or more cross sections of all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities, showing existing conditions, and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high-water elevations expected from stormwater runoff under the controlled conditions called for by this article and the relationship of structures, streets and other utilities to such channels. 
(c)  Design criteria. The following shall govern the design of improvements with respect to managing stormwater runoff: 
(1)  Methods of determining stormwater runoff rate and volume. Drainage and storage facilities shall be designed using the soil conservation service urban hydrology, TR-55, method of calculating runoff discharge rate and the total volume. 
(2)  Release rate. The controlled release rate of stormwater runoff from all developments described in section 46-91 shall not exceed the predevelopment rate. The rate at which stormwater runoff is delivered to a designated stormwater storage area shall be unrestricted. If the natural downstream channel or storm sewer system is inadequate to accommodate the release rate provided in this subsection, the allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity of the downstream channel or storm sewer system. 
(3)  Development design. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to minimize the velocity of overland flow and allow maximum opportunity for infiltration of stormwater into the ground and to preserve and utilize existing and planned streams, channels and detention basins and include, whenever possible, streams and floodplains within parks and other public grounds. 
(4)  Detention. The increased stormwater runoff resulting from the proposed development may be accommodated by providing appropriate detention facilities, including wet or dry bottom reservoirs, flat roofs, parking lots or streets. The following shall govern the design of detention facilities: 
a.  Storage volume. The volume of storage potential provided in detention facilities shall be sufficient to control the excess stormwater runoff, as determined to be the difference between the stormwater quantity from the site in its developed state for a 50-year, 24-hour frequency rainfall as published by the U.S. weather bureau, less the allowable release rate as set forth in subsection (2) of this section. The allowable stormwater release rate shall not be exceeded, regardless of the depth of stormwater contained in the required stormwater detention facility. 
b.  Release rate. At no time during the design storm shall the stormwater runoff release rate exceed the allowable release rate as set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 
c.  Release velocity. Detention facilities shall release stormwater at a nonerosive velocity. Protected channels receiving detention discharge shall incorporate features to reduce velocity to nonerosive levels at the point where such discharge enters the unprotected channel. If release is into a subsurface conduit, the energy gradient in the receiving facility shall not be increased beyond the slope of the conduit. 
d.  Spillway. Emergency spillways shall be provided to permit the safe passage of runoff generated from a 100-year, 24-hour storm, or greater, if required by regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
e.  Freeboard. Detention facilities shall have adequate capacity to contain the storage volume of tributary stormwater runoff with at least one foot of freeboard above the water surface of flow in the emergency spillway in a 100-year, 24-hour storm. 
(d)  Performance standards. 
(1)  Stormwater channel location. Generally acceptable locations of stormwater channels in the design of a subdivision may include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Adjacent to roadways. 
b.  In a depressed median of a double roadway, street or parkway, provided the median is wide enough to permit slopes of one foot drop in six feet horizontal or flatter. 
c.  Centered on lot lines or entirely within the rear yards of a single row of lots or parcels. 
d.  In each of the cases in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section, a drainage easement with sufficient width to facilitate maintenance and design flow shall be provided and shown on the plat. 
(2)  Storm sewer outfall. The storm sewer outfall shall be designed to provide adequate protection against downstream erosion and scouring. 
(3)  Lot lines. Whenever the plans call for the passage or storage of stormwater runoff along lot lines, the grading of all such lots shall be prescribed and established for the passage or storage of waters, and no structure or vegetation which would obstruct the flow of stormwater shall be allowed nor shall any change be made to prescribed grades and contours of the specified stormwater channels. 
(4)  Manholes. All utility sewer manholes constructed in an area designed for the storage or passage of stormwater shall be provided with either a watertight manhole cover or be constructed with a rim elevation of a minimum of one foot above the high-water elevation of the design storm. 
(5)  Easements. Permanent easements for the detention and conveyance of stormwater, including easements of access to structures and facilities, shall be dedicated to the city. 
(6)  Obstruction of drainage. The keeping or disposal of grass clippings, trash, debris, obstructions or unwanted materials into the storm sewers or within or along stormwater channels or in adjacent floodplain areas which may wash into sewers and channels is prohibited. 
(7)  Maintenance. Provisions acceptable to the city for perpetual maintenance of detention facilities, outlet works, and appurtenances shall be made, as provided in section 46-107. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-64. - Bonds, maintenance assurance and fees. 
(a)  Performance bonds and other assurances for completion and operation of improvements. Upon approval of the stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of a building permit or subdivision plat approval, the city engineer shall require the applicant to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, or other acceptable form of performance security in an amount sufficient to ensure the execution of the plan. After determination by the city engineer that all facilities are constructed in compliance with the approved plan, the performance bond or other securities shall be released. 
(b)  Maintenance agreement. A maintenance agreement approved by the city council ensuring perpetual maintenance of stormwater management improvements shall be executed by the city and the applicant. 
(c)  Fees. A fee per lot, as established by the city council from time to time, shall accompany the submittal of each stormwater management plan for review. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 46-65. - Miscellaneous. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval, and shall supersede any prior ordinances to the extent such ordinances are inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1460-18, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Fire and disaster contract-Authorized. 
    The city is authorized and empowered to contract with cities and fire districts to create a pool of firefighting equipment and personnel from the fire departments of the respective contracting cities and fire districts and to set up a plan of mutual assistance if a major conflagration or disaster occurs in any of the respective cities or fire districts, which contract shall be pursuant to and by virtue of the state constitution, article VI, section 16 and RSMo 70.210-70.230 and 71.370-71.420. 
(Code 1980, § 10-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Same-Powers and duties of fire chief. 
    The chief of the fire department is appointed as a member of the joint fire department committee created pursuant to the contract authorized in section 50-1 and is authorized and directed to carry out the terms of such contract and is further authorized to send such firefighting equipment and personnel owned and operated by the city to the assistance of the cities and fire districts contracted with under section 50-1 if a major conflagration or disaster call for assistance is made from any of such cities or fire districts, whenever in his judgment the equipment and personnel can be safely spared from the city at the time and under the circumstances. 
(Code 1980, § 10-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Duties of police officers during fire; entry into burning buildings by spectators. 
    When a fire alarm is sounded, the chief of police or police officer on duty shall immediately go to the location of the fire and see that all bystanders and spectators are kept at a safe distance from the fire. In no event shall spectators and bystanders be allowed to enter a burning building without the consent of the owner, fire chief or officer on duty at the fire. 
(Code 1980, § 10-6) 
Secs. 50-4-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Building code, § 18-31 et seq.; electrical code, § 18-56 et seq.; property maintenance code, § 18-81 et seq.; mechanical code, § 18-106 et seq.; plumbing code, § 18-131 et seq; one and two-family dwelling code, § 18-156 et seq.; 2000 international fire code, § 18-166 et seq. 

Sec. 50-26. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 1996 BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., with all amendments and appendices thereto, and the code is incorporated as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Should a difference in terminology or requirement exist between this article and the code adopted in this section, this article shall take precedence. 
(c)  Copies of such code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the planning and code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1980, § 6-1; Ord. No. 748-97, § 1, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 775-98, § 1, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 50-27. - Definitions. 
    When the following words and phrases are used in the fire prevention code adopted by section 50-26, they shall have the following meaning: 
    Board of appeals and board of survey mean the board of adjustment as created under the zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code. 
    Corporation counsel means city counselor. 
(Code 1980, § 6-2; Ord. No. 748-97, § 1, 6-24-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-28. - Amendments. 
    The 1996 BOCA Fire Prevention Code adopted by this article is amended as follows: 
    Section F 101.1. Insert: City of Fulton 
    Table F 107.2.3. Insert: Permit Requirements and Fees as reviewed and established from time to time by the Council. 
(Code 1980, § 10-19.1; Ord. No. 748-97, § 1, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 775-98, § 2, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 50-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fire prevention code adopted by reference in this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department and those who shall be designated by him to work under his supervision. 
(b)  The fire chief may detail and designate other employees of the city as fire inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 10-20) 
Sec. 50-30. - Modification. 
    The building inspector, fire chief or those designated by the mayor and fire chief, as provided by this article, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted and incorporated into this article upon application in writing by the interested party or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code so adopted and incorporated by reference; provided, however; the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the person granting the modification shall be entered upon the records with the building permit and a signed copy furnished the applicant for the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 10-21) 
Sec. 50-31. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector, fire chief or those designated by the mayor and fire chief, as provided by this article, shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by reference in this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision so made to the board of adjustment within 30 days from the date of the final decision. 
(b)  The provisions of the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code pertaining to the method of conducting an appeal are adopted and incorporated into and made a part of this section by reference. 
(Code 1980, § 10-22) 
Sec. 50-32. - Penalty for violation; removal of prohibited conditions. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article or who shall fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of adjustment or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-20. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 10-23) 
Secs. 50-33-50-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; intoxication of firefighters prohibited, § 10-9; police department, § 70-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-56. - Established; purpose. 
    There is established for the city in accordance with the Charter a fire department, the purpose of which is to ensure the safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1980, § 10-35) 
Sec. 50-57. - Composition; probationary period for firefighters. 
(a)  The fire department established pursuant to this article shall have a fire chief, four captains and such other members as may be required. The structure of the department shall be recommended by the fire chief to the director of administration who shall have the authority to implement the structure with the consent of the council. 
(b)  One of the four captains shall be designated as assistant fire chief pursuant to section 50-58. He shall have authority to act in the absence of the fire chief and shall assume other duties as may be assigned from time to time. 
(c)  No person shall be granted full tenure as a regular firefighter until such person shall have satisfactorily completed a probationary period of 12 months. 
(Code 1980, § 10-36) 
Sec. 50-58. - Appointment of officers. 
    The director of administration shall appoint or promote all officers within the fire department from a list of eligible candidates. 
(Code 1980, § 10-37) 
Sec. 50-59. - Term of office. 
    All persons appointed to the fire department shall be entitled to hold office during good behavior and efficient service. 
(Code 1980, § 10-38) 
Sec. 50-60. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the personnel of the fire department shall be established by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 10-39) 
Sec. 50-61. - Fire chief. 
    The director of administration, with the consent of the mayor, shall appoint a fire chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-42) 
Sec. 50-62. - Policies. 
    The fire chief shall act in accordance with policies set forth by the director of administration to ensure the safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1980, § 32-16) 
Sec. 50-63. - Suspension, demotion or discharge of personnel. 
(a)  The fire chief may suspend, demote or discharge any personnel of the fire department for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency. 
(b)  Any person so suspended, demoted or discharged for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency may appeal such suspension, demotion or discharge through the grievance procedures established in the personnel manual. 
(Code 1980, § 10-40) 
Sec. 50-64. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have command of the fire department and shall exercise general supervision over the department, taking care that each member of the fire department is properly trained and drilled in the matter of discharging the duties that may be assigned to him. 
(b)  The fire chief shall make or cause to be made frequent inspections of all fire hydrants within the city and see that they are at all times in good repair and ready for use. 
(c)  The fire chief shall inspect all property under control of the fire department and take care that such property is always kept in good condition and repair and ready for immediate use. 
(d)  The fire chief shall attend all fires in the city as far as practicable, and all orders given by him to the fire department or any member thereof shall be promptly obeyed. 
(e)  The fire chief may order the removal of any building, structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. 
(f)  Every member of the fire department shall be prompt in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1980, § 10-43) 
Sec. 50-65. - Loan or hire of fire apparatus. 
    The property belonging to the city fire department shall not be hired by or loaned to any person, unless such loan or hiring is pursuant to the fire and disaster contract authorized in section 50-1 or as authorized by the director of administration or fire chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-41) 
Secs. 50-66-50-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VOLUNTEER FIRE UNIT 

Sec. 50-76. - Established. 
    There is established a volunteer unit of the fire department to be structured, supervised and maintained by the fire chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-46) 
Sec. 50-77. - Composition; probationary period. 
(a)  The volunteer fire unit shall consist of such number of members and companies as may be organized by the fire chief. 
(b)  Each company shall elect one of its members to act as its captain, as provided for in the volunteer manual. 
(c)  Every volunteer member shall serve a one-year probationary period. 
(Code 1980, § 10-47) 
Sec. 50-78. - Selection of members. 
(a)  Each applicant for the volunteer fire unit shall complete and submit a city employment application to the selection committee. 
(b)  The selection committee shall consist of the fire chief, who shall serve as chairman, with two paid firefighters and two volunteer firefighters. Each member of the committee shall have one vote in any action taken which affects the status of a volunteer. 
(c)  The selection committee shall have the authority to enroll, suspend and remove any volunteer member. 
(d)  Any person suspended, demoted or discharged for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency may appeal such suspension, demotion or discharge through the grievance procedures established in the personnel manual. 
(Code 1980, § 10-48) 
Sec. 50-79. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The volunteer unit, under the direction of the fire chief or officer in charge in the absence of the chief, shall respond to and assist at all fire scenes. 
(b)  The volunteer unit shall participate in training as designated and required by the fire chief. 
(c)  Every member of the volunteer unit shall be prompt in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1980, § 10-49) 
Chapter 54 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 979-05, adopted February 8, 2005, repealed the former ch. 54, §§ 54-1-54-38, and enacted a new ch. 54 as set out herein. The former ch. 54 related to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 901-02, adopted March 12, 2002. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 58; historic preservation, ch. 62; law enforcement, ch. 70; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Statutory authorization; adoption. 
    The legislature of the State of Missouri has, in RSMo ch. 89, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. 
    Therefore, the council of the City Fulton, Missouri adopts Floodplain Management Ordinance Paragraph 60.3(d) of the National Flood Insurance Regulations 44 Code of Federal Regulations 59. 
(Ord. No. 979-05, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1318-12, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Chapter 58 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2008, repealed the former ch. 58, §§ 58-26-58-28, §§ 58-51-58-58, §§ 58-81-58-104, §§ 58-121-58-149, §§ 58-171-58-187, § 58-201, and enacted a new ch. 58 as set out herein. The former ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 13-17, 13-18; Ord. No. 650-93, § I, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 891-01, § 1, 11-27-01. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; offenses against public safety, § 78-106 et seq.; planning, ch. 86; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; sewers and sewage disposal, § 114-171 et seq. 
State Law reference- Health and welfare, RSM0 191.010 et seq.; duty of state department of health, RSMo 192.010 et seq.; duty of state department of health to safeguard health of people of the state, RSMo 192.020; procedure for disinfecting for contagious and infectious diseases, RSMo 192.140. 

ARTICLE I. - SANITATION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    Business license. Shall mean the same as "permit" except when referring to a "temporary food establishment permit." 
    Code. The most current rules and regulations of the state department of health and senior services relating to food service and retail food service sanitation with all amendments and appendices thereto. 
    Critical violation. A violation of a provision of this regulation, which, that, if in noncompliance, is more likely than non-critical violations to contribute to food contamination, illness, or environmental health hazard. 
    Non-critical violation. A violation of a provision of this regulation, which, that, if in noncompliance, is less likely than critical violations to contribute to food contamination, illness, or environmental health hazard. 
    Regulatory authority. The director of administration of the city or an authorized representative also known as the health authority. 
    Any words or phrases not defined herein shall have their common ordinary meaning. Any words or phrases defined in the state department of health and senior services regulations relating to food service and retail food service operations, presently known as the 1999 Missouri Food Code and any amendments, revisions, edition, compilation or consolidation thereto shall have the meaning contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-2. - Adopted. 
    The city hereby adopts the most current rules and regulations of the state department of health and senior services relating to food service and retail food service sanitation with all amendments and appendices thereto. Copies of the food code shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk, office of the director of administration and the health inspector and shall be available for public use, inspection and examination upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Secs. 58-3-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 58-26. - Requirements for business license. 
    No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid business license issued to him by the city clerk. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such business license. Licensees are not transferable. A valid business license shall be posted in every food establishment. 
    No person shall operate a temporary food establishment who does not have a valid temporary food establishment permit issued to him by the proper authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive a temporary food establishment permit. Permits are not transferable. Permits are required to be posted at the site. Temporary food establishment permits are valid for no more than 14 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-27. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to operate a food establishment or temporary food establishment shall make written application for a business license or temporary food establishment permit on forms provided by the city. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and the signature of each applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1388-15, § 1, adopted June 9, 2015, repealed § 58-28, which pertained to prior health inspection and derived from Ord. No. 1213, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2008. 
Sec. 58-29. - Fees. 
    The city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter and after payment of the appropriate fees. The license fee schedule shall be set by the city council. Such business license shall be renewable annually. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-30. - Suspension. 
    The city health inspector may, without warning, notice or hearing suspend any business license to operate a food establishment if the holder of the business license does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by section 58-34. When a business license is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-31. - Appeal of suspension. 
    Whenever a business license is suspended, the holder of the business license, or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the business license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-32. - Revocation. 
    The city health inspector may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a business license for serious or repeated violation of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the city health inspector in the performance of his/her duty. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-33. - Notification of revocation. 
    Prior to revocation, the city health inspector shall notify, in writing, the holder of the business license, or the person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the business license is to be revoked and that the business license shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the business license within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the business license becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-34. - Service of notice. 
    A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the business license, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the business license. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-35. - Hearing procedures. 
    The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by the city health inspector at a time and place designated by him/her. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The hearing officer shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify, or rescind an any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the business license by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-36. - Application for business license. 
    Whenever a revocation of a business license has become final, the holder of the revoked business license may make written application for a new business license. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-37. - Frequency of inspections. 
(a)  An inspection of all food establishments shall be performed at least once every year, with temporary food service establishments being inspected at least once every year. Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city health inspector may provide an exemption from routine inspections to any class of food establishments which is determined by the city health inspector to be subject to adequate inspections from state officials to assure protection of the public in accordance with this chapter. The exemption may be removed by the city health inspector at any time for any class of food establishments for which the food inspector determines state inspections are no longer sufficient or for any individual food establishment against which a complaint has been lodged or for which the inspector has a reasonable basis to believe a violation of this article may exist. 
(c)  Food establishments shall be assessed an administrative service fee of $100.00 per inspection for the third and any subsequent re-inspections required to correct violations noted during the inspection process by the health inspector. The administrative fee shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of any food establishment permit. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1388-15, § 1, 6-9-2015) 
Sec. 58-38. - Access to city representative. 
    Representatives of the city, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. The representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-39. - Inspection report. 
    Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth any critical and/or non-critical violations for each requirement. Inspection remarks shall be written to reference the violation and shall state the correction to be made. The rating of the establishment shall be the total of critical and non-critical violations. A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it, according to law. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 58-40. - Time period for correction. 
    The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and corrections of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If an imminent health hazard exist, such as complete lack of satisfactory refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food establishment operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority; 
(2)  All critical violations shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following inspection. A follow-up inspection may be conducted to confirm correction; 
(3)  All non-critical violations shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next inspection; 
(4)  In the case of a temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority; 
(5)  The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food establishment operations. A policy on the number of critical and non-critical violations, or combination thereof, allowed before the establishment's business license is suspended or revoked shall be set by the city council. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the city health inspector within ten days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request; 
(6)  Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 1213-08, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Secs. 58-41-58-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GREASE TRAPS 

Sec. 58-51. - Requirements. 
(a)  Every food service establishment, restaurant or facility which has the potential to discharge waste water containing animal or vegetable fats, oils, grease or solids shall have installed the appropriate grease trap or interceptor device to prevent the discharge or concentration of such substances into the sewers. All such grease traps or interceptor devices shall be installed as listed in the most recent manufacturer's recommendations, PDI (Plumbing and Drainage Institute,) ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers) and local code standards. Any food service establishment, restaurant or facility that emit oil and grease over 100 parts may be required to have both a grease trap and an exterior interceptor installed. 
(b)  Every food service establishment, restaurant or facility required to have a grease trap or interceptor device shall develop a cleaning schedule and shall have such devices serviced, maintained, inspected and cleaned, at the establishment's expense, as frequently as required to prevent discharge of grease into the sanitary sewers. The establishment shall maintain detailed records of such inspection and maintenance in a manner acceptable to the director of administration or the authorized representative. Records will remain on file for at least three years. 
(c)  Records required to be kept by this section shall be provided to the health division and public works department pretreatment inspectors during their periodic inspections and during the normal business hours of the establishment. 
(d)  The records will include maintenance and cleaning of ventilation hoods and devices which shall be designed to prevent grease or condensation from collecting on walls and ceilings, and from dripping into food or onto food-contact surfaces. Filters or other grease-extracting equipment shall be readily removable for cleaning and replacement if not designed to be cleaned in place. 
(e)  The food-contact surfaces of grills, griddle and similar cooking devices and the cavities and door seals of microwave ovens shall be cleaned at least once a day, except that this shall not apply to hot oil cooking equipment and hot oil filtering systems. The food-contact surfaces of all cooking equipment shall be kept free of encrusted grease deposits and other accumulated soil. This includes scraping or dry wiping fat, oil, grease and other food residue from cookware, utensils, etc. into the waste receptacle before washing or placing in dish machine and using garbage grinders as sparingly as possible. 
(f)  Surfaces of equipment not intended for contact with food, but which are exposed to splash or food debris or which otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be designed and fabricated to be smooth, washable, free of unnecessary ledges, projections, or crevices and readily accessible for cleaning, and shall be of such material and in such repair as to be easily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(g)  Equipment that was installed in a food service establishment prior to the effective date of this article, and that does not fully meet all of the design and fabrication requirements of this section, shall be deemed acceptable in the establishment if it is in good repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition and the food-contact surfaces are nontoxic. Replacement equipment and new equipment acquired after the effective date of this article shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270-10, § 1, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 58-52. - Right of entry. 
    The city shall notify every food service establishment, restaurant or facility by mail before the required grease trap/interceptor inspection with a set date before entering to inspect the food service establishment, restaurant or facility's grease trap and/or interceptor. The director of administration and other authorized representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties at all reasonable times for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and the performance of their duties, including inspection and copying of all records maintained, in accordance with the provisions of this article. However, the director of administration or the authorized representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. When such a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry onto the property, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director of administration or the authorized representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1270-10, § 1, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 58-53. - Perimeter controls. 
(a)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 Celsius) or causing the temperature at the influent to a sewage treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 Celsius), except where the volume of discharge represents a significant portion of the flow through a particular sewer, a lower limit may be prescribed to prevent odor nuisance. 
(b)  Wastes having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.0 or otherwise having chemical properties which are hazardous or are capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, to the sewage works or personnel. 
(c)  Insoluble oils, fats greases. So-called soluble oils may be admitted to the extent of 100 ppm., provided subsequent dilution in the sewers or treatment plant does not result in separation. 
(Ord. No. 1270-10, § 1, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 58-54. - Enforcement/violations. 
(a)  If repeated violations persist (i.e. the third inspection of the grease trap/interceptor is necessary in a food establishment, restaurant or facility,) labor and expense shall be entered with cost and billed to the property owner(s). Value cost will be subject to change upon given labor costs by the city if testing and evidence provide results that the labor and/or testing are necessary. 
(b)  Costs not paid may be forwarded to the court to set costs and fines. The court having jurisdiction may permit the city to make the requested corrections or cause them to be made and report the cost thereof to the judge who shall make such expense a part of the judgment in addition to any other fine or costs taxed in the action, negligence of paying costs and fines may result in the disconnection of water accessibility from the main lines until costs and fines are paid. 
(c)  Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1270-10, § 1, 2-9-10) 
Chapter 62 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2002, repealed the former §§ 62-30-62-37 of art. II and enacted new §§ 62-30-62-39 as set out herein. The former §§ 62-30-62-37 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 685-95, § 1, adopted Feb. 28, 1995. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; planning and zoning commission, § 86-26 et seq. 

Sec. 62-26. - Established; purpose; appointment; qualifications. 
(a)  There is established a historic preservation commission, the purpose of which shall be to effect the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects which reflect elements of the city's historic, cultural, aesthetic, archaeological and architectural heritage. 
(b)  The commission shall endeavor to encourage preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of the city's historic structures, districts and neighborhoods. 
(c)  The commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall consist of six members, residents of the city or county. Not more than two members shall reside outside the city limits. In addition, a member of the council and a member of the planning and zoning commission shall serve as ex officio members, but shall have no vote. 
(d)  To the extent available in the community, the commission shall include professional members representing such disciplines as architecture, law, real estate and other fields related to historic preservation. 
(Code 1980, § 33-21) 
Sec. 62-27. - Terms of members, removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the historic preservation commission shall hold office for three-year staggered terms from July 1 following their appointment. The mayor shall before July 1 of each year appoint two members who shall hold office for three years and until their successors are appointed. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, a member of the historic preservation commission may be removed by a vote of five members of the city council. A member may also be removed by six votes of the city council independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(c)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being formally excused by the commission shall forfeit membership. 
(Code 1980, § 33-22) 
Sec. 62-28. - Officers. 
(a)  Within 15 days after their appointment, the historic preservation commission shall meet and elect one of its members as president and one as vice-president. The term of the president and vice-president shall be for one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary and keep a record of all actions taken at the meeting. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the historic preservation commission shall be delivered to the city council and shall be public record. 
(Code 1980, § 33-23) 
Sec. 62-29. - Meetings. 
    Within 15 days after their appointment, the historic preservation commission shall meet to establish a regular meeting date, and thereafter shall meet at least quarterly. Special meetings may be called at any time as needed. 
(Code 1980, § 33-4) 
Sec. 62-30. - Powers and duties. 
    The historic preservation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Adopt its own procedural regulations, provided that such regulations are consistent with this chapter, the charter and state law; 
(2)  Provide education to the public in historic preservation; 
(3)  Maintain an inventory of national register documents and to make them accessible to the public; 
(4)  Review and recommend to the city council the identification of significant historical, architectural and archeological properties, sites, structures or areas as city historic districts or as city historic properties without attaching to those districts or properties any restrictions for receiving this identification; 
(5)  Review and recommend to the city council the designation of city properties fulfilling the requirements, as stipulated in section 62-31(h), as "A Fulton Preservation Property"; 
(6)  Confer recognition upon the owners of city historic properties or of property or structures within city historic districts by means of letters, certificates, plaques or markers; 
(7)  Make recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes for city historic districts or historic properties; 
(8)  Advise and assist owners of city historic properties or of property or structures within city historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and reuse; 
(9)  Advise and assist interested parties on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(10)  Review and comment on any national register nominations submitted to the historic preservation commission when requested by the property owner; 
(11)  Review applications for a permit for construction, alteration, removal or demolition affecting properties designated by the city council as "A Fulton Preservation Property"; 
(12)  Document photographically the historic architectural details of "A Fulton Preservation Property" as soon as the historic preservation commission is notified that changes are being considered; 
(13)  Hold public hearings as necessary; 
(14)  Interpret and apply design guidelines contained in this article relating to "A Fulton Preservation Property"; 
(15)  Review proposed amendments, applications for special use permits or applications for zoning variances that affect city historic districts or city historic properties and to make recommendations to the city planning and zoning commission or board of adjustment as appropriate, prior to any action by planning and zoning or the board of adjustment; 
(16)  Periodically review the zoning ordinance and to recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the city council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of city historic properties or property and structures within the city historic districts; 
(17)  Testify before the city council, planning and zoning and the board of adjustment on any matter affecting historically, architecturally and archaeologically significant properties, structures and areas; 
(18)  Periodically make recommendations to the city council and planning and zoning on the upgrade of the historic preservation component of the comprehensive plan; 
(19)  Make recommendations to the director of administration concerning the application for and use of any federal, state or private grant, grant-in-aid, gift or bequest awarded to the city to further the general purposes of this article; 
(20)  Request from the director of administration, available city staff members as well as other experts for technical advice; 
(21)  Promote identification, evaluation and protection of prehistoric and historic archaeological resources within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(22)  Undertake appropriate action necessary for the implementation of the powers and duties and purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-31. - Identification of historic properties; identification of, and addition to, historic districts; and designation of properties earning the title "A Fulton Preservation Property". 
(a)  Powers of identification and designation. The city council, by formal ordinance and upon the completion of the following process may identify properties as city historic properties and/or for inclusion into an historic district: Identification of city historic districts and historic properties and designation of properties earning the title "A Fulton Preservation Property" does not require either federal or state historic register certification. 
(b)  "Fulton Historic Property" identification. 
(1)  Criteria to qualify for identification as an historic property. To qualify for identification as an historic property, each property described in the application must meet at least one of the following criteria: 
a.  Its value as part of the heritage or culture of the community; 
b.  Its location as a site of a significant event; 
c.  Its identification with a person or persons who made a significant contribution to the development of the community, state or nation; 
d.  Its distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style or method of construction; 
e.  Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development of the community, state or nation; 
f.  Its elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant; 
g.  Its design elements that make it structurally innovative; 
h.  Its unique location or physical characteristic that makes it a familiar visual feature of the neighborhood or the community; 
i.  Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure with a high level of integrity or architectural significance; and/or 
j.  Its suitability for preservation or restoration. 
(2)  Application procedures for identification as an historic property. 
a.  Applications for identification as an historic property may be obtained from the city clerk or the president of the historic preservation commission. 
b.  A completed application for identification as an historic property must be submitted to the city clerk or to the president of the historic preservation commission by the owner(s) of the property for which they seek this identification. 
(c)  "Fulton Historic District" identification. 
(1)  Criteria to qualify for identification as an historic district. 
a.  At least ten properties lying within the proposed district boundaries must be identified as "Fulton Historic Properties." 
b.  A majority of properties lying within the proposed district boundaries must also be identified as "Fulton Historic Properties." 
(2)  Application procedures for identification as an historic district. 
a.  Applications for identification as an historic district may be obtained from the city clerk or the president of the historic preservation commission. 
b.  A completed application for identification as a historic district must be submitted to the city clerk or to the president of the historic preservation commission by one of the following: 
1.  A group of ten or more owners whose properties are located in close proximity to each other and who collectively seek the inclusion of their properties into an historic district; or 
2.  The historic preservation commission. 
(d)  Inclusion into a pre-existing historic district. 
(1)  Criteria to qualify for inclusion into a pre-existing historic district. To qualify for inclusion into a pre-existing district, a property must be identified as a "Fulton Historic Property" and must be located in close proximity to a pre-existing historic district. 
(2)  Application procedures for inclusion into a pre-existing historic district. 
a.  Applications for inclusion into a pre-existing historic district may be obtained from the city clerk or the president of the historic preservation commission. 
b.  A completed application for inclusion into a historic district must be submitted to the city clerk or to the president of the historic preservation commission by the owner(s) of a property located in close proximity to an already established historic district and who wish their property to be added to that district. 
(e)  Restrictions applying to properties receiving identification as an historic property or lying within an historic district. No restrictions, either stated or implied, are attached to properties because of their identification as an historic property or because they lie within an historic district. Sections 62-32 through 62-39 of this article do not apply to properties because of their identification as an historic property or because they lie within an historic district. 
(f)  Review of application(s) seeking identification as an historic property, as an historic district, or for inclusion into a pre-existing historic district. 
(1)  The president of the historic preservation commission shall add each completed application to the agenda of the next regular meeting for review, providing each member of the commission shall have at least seven days to review the application before the meeting. 
(2)  Review of all completed applications will be concluded within the 30 days following the historic preservation commission meeting at which the application was first reviewed unless the commission concludes that additional information will be necessary before it may make an informed decision. Upon receipt of the last requested additional information, the review will be concluded within 30 days. 
(3)  In its review, the historic preservation commission shall be guided by the criteria set out in section 62-31(b), (c), (d) and (e). 
(g)  Recommendation of the historic preservation commission relating to identification as a historic property, as a historic district, or for inclusion into a pre-existing historic district. Upon consideration of the completed application, the historic preservation commission shall, by majority vote, decide whether to recommend or not recommend approval of the application to the city council. 
    If the vote is to recommend approval, the president of the historic preservation commission shall notify the property owner(s) and shall submit to the city council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the commission, together with the vote and the rationale of the commission. If the vote is not to recommend approval, the president of the historic preservation commission shall meet with the property owner(s) and shall explain the commission's rationale for its decision. If the property owner(s) then wish to ask the city council to reject the recommendation of the commission, they may do so. In such case, the property owner(s) shall formally notify the president of the commission, in writing, of his/her intent to appeal the recommendation of the commission to the city council. Upon receipt of that notification, the president shall submit to the city council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the historic preservation commission, together with the vote and the rationale of the commission. 
    The decision of the city council to grant, or to deny, identification as an historic property or as an historic district or for inclusion into an historic district is final. 
    The decision of the city council to grant these designations will be conveyed to the relevant property owner(s), the planning and zoning commission, the historic preservation commission, and to the city planning and protective administration officer. 
(h)  "A Fulton Preservation Property". 
(1)  Criteria to qualify for designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property". This designation is the most prestigious recognition granted in the city to an historic property owner. To qualify for this recognition first require that each property owner(s), following the procedures outlined above, must secure for his/her property designation as an historic property. Each property owner(s) must then voluntarily agree, in writing, to abide by the restrictions described in sections 62-32, 62-33, 62-34, 62-35, 62-36, 62-37, 62-38 and 62-39. 
(2)  Application for designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property". 
a.  Applications for designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property", together with a copy of the historic preservation ordinance relating to this designation, may be obtained from the city clerk or the president of the historic preservation commission. 
b.  A completed application for designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property" must be submitted to the city clerk or to the president of the historic preservation commission by the owner(s) of the property for which they seek this designation. 
c.  Every owner of a property proposed for this designation must sign the application, which will include the following agreement: 
"The undersigned, being the owner(s) of the above described property, hereby request its designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property". I/we have read and understood the Fulton Historic Preservation Ordinance. By signing this application, I/we agree that if my/our property(ies) receive this designation, I/we accept all regulations, restrictions and protections set out in Sections 62-32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 of the ordinance relating to historic properties and districts." 
(3)  Recommendation of the historic preservation commission relating to property seeking designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property". Upon consideration of the completed application, the historic preservation commission shall, by majority vote, decide whether to recommend or not recommend approval of the application to the city council. 
If the vote is to recommend approval, the president of the historic preservation commission shall notify the property owner(s) and shall submit to the city council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the commission, together with the vote and rationale of the commission. 
If the vote is not to recommend approval, the president of the historic preservation commission shall meet with the property owner(s) and shall explain the commission's rationale for its decision. If the property owner(s) then wish to ask the city council to reject the recommendation of the commission, they may do so. In such case, the property owner(s) shall formally notify the president of the commission, in writing, of his/her intent to appeal the recommendation of the commission to the city council. Upon receipt of that notification, the president shall submit to the city council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the historic preservation commission, together with the vote and the rationale of the commission. 
(4)  Action by the city council. The decision of the city council to grant, or to deny, an historic property the additional designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property" is final. The decision of the city council to grant this additional designation will be conveyed to the relevant property owner(s), the planning and zoning commission, the historic preservation commission, and to the city planning and protective administration officer. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-32. - Restriction on properties designated as "A Fulton Preservation Property". 
    Property owners who voluntarily seek this designation and who sign the statement/agreement stipulated in section 62-31(h), contractually accept all regulations and protections provided in sections 62-32 through 62-39. 
    Property owners also acknowledge that these regulations, restrictions and protections will apply to the designated property in the future, regardless of the transfer of ownership. Current property owners also agree that, before transferring their property to a new owner, they will notify that subsequent owner, in writing, with a copy sent to the city clerk, of the property's designation as "A Fulton Preservation Property" and will provide the new owner with a copy of the current historic preservation ordinance, a copy of which may be obtained from the city clerk. 
    Restrictions on properties designated as "A Fulton Preservation Property" may be removed or modified only by formal action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-33. - Financial incentive to foster historic preservation. 
    Should the city council establish financial incentives to foster historic preservation excluding recognition by means of letters, certificates, plaques or markers, only those properties designated as "A Fulton Preservation Property" will be eligible. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-34. - Design guidelines. 
    The following design guidelines shall apply to any alteration, demolition or new construction to properties designated by the city council, following the process outlined in this article, as "A Fulton Preservation Property", so that properties will be compatible with their original style and character as well as to the surrounding historical structures: 
(1)  Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be compatible. 
(2)  Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships between doors and windows should be compatible. 
(3)  Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible. 
(4)  Roof shape. The design of the roof should be compatible. 
(5)  Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible. 
(6)  Directional expression. Facades in city historic districts should blend with other structures with regard to directional expression and orientation to the streetscape. Structures in a city historic district should not be significantly higher or wider than surrounding structures. The directional expression of a structure after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style and character. 
(7)  Architectural details. 
a.  Architectural details and materials should be treated so as to make an historic property compatible with its original design or its predominant architectural style. 
b.  The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property should be avoided. 
c.  Changes that create a false sense of historic architecture should not be undertaken. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right may be retained and preserved or the property may be restored to its original period. 
d.  Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather than replaced. When replacement is required, the new feature shall match the old design and, where economically feasible, materials. 
e.  Chemical or physical treatments for surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting is not recommended. 
(8)  Archaeological resources. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project should be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures should be undertaken. 
(9)  Signage. The character of signs should be in compliance with city ordinances and in keeping with the historic or architectural character of the individual property and the surrounding district. The historic preservation commission shall recommend approval or denial to the planning and protective administration official, prior to any installation. 
(10)  Minimum maintenance. The minimum maintenance standards shall be those outlined in the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code as adopted and updated by the city council. 
(11)  Ordinary maintenance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior element of any building or structure. Ordinary maintenance shall be defined as work, for which a building permit is not required by this Code, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage. 
(12)  Exclusion. This article shall not be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such elements which the authorized municipal officers shall certify as required by health, safety or community welfare. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-35. - Historic property construction permit. 
    The guidelines for the issuance of an historic property construction permit are: 
(1)  An historic property construction permit will be required for any construction, structural alteration, removal or demolition effecting the exterior of a structure, in whole or in part, and requiring a city building permit. 
(2)  In addition to the exterior work outlined in the BOCA Code, an historic property construction permit will be required for other work which includes, but is not limited to, addition, alteration or removal of architectural or decorative details as well as signage. 
(3)  An historic property construction permit will not be required for ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior element of any building or structure. Ordinary maintenance is defined in section 62-34(11). 
(4)  An historic property construction permit will not be required for: 
a.  Landscaping; 
b.  Paint color; 
c.  Mailboxes; 
d.  Light fixtures; 
e.  Sculpture; 
f.  Unenclosed patios; 
g.  Gazebos under 100 square feet; 
h.  Arbors; 
i.  Pergolas. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-36. - Application for an historic property construction permit. 
    When an historic property construction permit is required, the applicant shall: 
(1)  Contact the planning and protective administration officer to discuss the work and to determine the need for an historic property construction permit and/or building permit. 
(2)  If an historic property construction permit is needed, application should be made to the planning and protective administration officer. The planning and protective administration officer will forward the completed application, along with a bill, [a] current photograph of the property, to the historic preservation commission. Applicants may also be required to submit plans or other information as may be required for such review. Applicants may also submit information deemed necessary to substantiate any claim, including that regarding economic feasibility. 
(3)  Make every effort to attend the historic preservation commission meeting during which the application is reviewed. Regular meeting dates and times shall be listed on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-37. - Application review. 
    When a completed application for historic property construction permit has been submitted to the historic preservation commission, the commission shall: 
(1)  Add the application to the agenda of the next regular meeting for review. The commission may call a special meeting to review routine applications when delay to the next regular scheduled meeting would create an unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant. 
(2)  Review of all applications will be completed within 15 days. If the commission cannot meet the time frame specified, due to lack of a quorum, and the applicant desires a decision, the president or vice president designate of the commission shall have the authority to recommend the approval or denial of the permit. 
(3)  To review the economic feasibility of restoration, preservation work in all applications for an historic property construction permit so as not to impose an economic hardship on any property owner. 
(4)  Recommendation for approval or denial of the application may be made upon consideration by the commission or within 15 days if additional information is required. 
(5)  Upon recommendation of approval by the commission, the planning and protective administration official shall issue the permit. 
(6)  A recommendation of denial shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons for that recommendation. The historic preservation commission shall also include recommendations which would cause the commission to reconsider its recommendation. The commission, director of administration, and the planning and protective administration officer, shall meet with the applicant, as soon as possible, in an attempt to resolve the differences between the owner and commission. If unable to resolve those differences, the director of administration shall refer the matter to the board of adjustment if the property owner desires to appeal. The applicant may amend the application at any time during the review process or reapply at a later date. 
(7)  If the historic preservation commission fails to recommend approval or denial of the application within 45 days of its submission, the application will be automatically approved. 
(8)  Once an historic property construction permit has been issued any minor changes, as determined by the planning and protective administration official, may be approved without the submission of a new application. All major changes must be reviewed by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-38. - Stop work order. 
    When the planning and protective administration officer has reason to believe that an action for which an historic property construction permit is required has been initiated, or is about to be initiated, he/she shall make every effort to contact the property owner, occupant, contractor or subcontractor and inform them of the necessity of submitting an application for an historic property construction permit. If the planning or protective administration official determines it is necessary to issue a stop work order, he/she shall make every attempt to serve the same on the property owner, occupant, contractor or subcontractor in person and by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 62-39. - Fees and penalties. 
    Fees shall coincide with existing permit applications. Penalties shall be those set out under the existing penalty provisions in the this Code, General Provisions, Chapter 1, section 1-20, as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 898-02, § 1, 1-8-02) 
Chapter 66 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means an age of 40 or more years but less than 70 years, except that it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to require the compulsory retirement of any person who has attained the age of 65 and who, for the two-year period immediately before retirement, is employed in a bona fide executive or high policymaking position, if such person is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit sharing, savings or deferred compensation plan or any combination of such plans of the employer, which equals, in the aggregate, at least $44,000.00. 
    Commission means the city commission on human rights and community relations. 
    Covered multifamily dwelling, as used in subsection (3) of the definition of discrimination in this section, means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
    Discrimination , generally, means any unfair treatment based on race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, age as it relates to employment or handicap. For purposes of sections 66-2, 66-3 and 66-4, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of this subsection 3a. 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Employer means any business or any person employing six or more unrelated persons and any person directly acting in the interest of an employer, but does not include corporations and associations owned and operated by religious or sectarian groups. 
    Employment agency includes any person or agency, public or private, regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes any person acting in the interest of such a person. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Handicap means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities or a condition perceived as such which, with or without reasonable accommodations, does not interfere with performing the job, utilizing the place of public accommodation or occupying the dwelling in question. 
    Housing for older persons, as used in sections 66-2, 66-3 and 66-4, means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this definition, the commission shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
(4)  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
(5)  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
(6)  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
    Labor organization includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or for other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment. 
    MCHR means the Missouri Commission on Human Rights. 
    Places of public accommodation means all places or businesses offering or holding out to the general public goods, services, privileges, facilities, advantages or accommodations for the peace, comfort, health, welfare and safety of the general public or such public places providing food, shelter, recreation and amusement, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any inn, hotel, motel or other establishment which provides lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his residence. 
(2)  Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunchcounter, soda fountain or other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the premises, including but not limited to any such facility located on the premises of any retail establishment. 
(3)  Any gasoline station, including all facilities located on the premises of such gasoline station and made available to the patrons thereof. 
(4)  Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium or other place of exhibition or entertainment. 
(5)  Any public facility owned, operated or managed by or on behalf of this state or any agency or subdivision thereof or any public corporation and any such facility supported in whole or in part by public funds. 
(6)  Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of any establishment otherwise covered by this definition or within the premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment and which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered establishment. 
    Rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1980, § 15-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.010. 
Sec. 66-2. - Unlawful housing practices. 
    It shall be an unlawful housing practice to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or deny or otherwise make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status. 
(3)  Make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  Induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status. 
(6)  Discriminate in the sale or rental or to otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(7)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling because of a handicap of: 
a.  That person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that person. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 678-94, § 1, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.040(1). 
Sec. 66-3. - Discrimination in commercial real estate loans prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in fixing the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 678-94, § 2, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.045. 
Sec. 66-4. - Discrimination in selling or renting by real estate agencies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap or familial status. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 678-94, § 3, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.050. 
Sec. 66-5. - Unlawful employment practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice: 
(1)  For an employer, because of the race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap of any person to: 
a.  Fail or refuse to hire or discharge any person or otherwise discriminate against any person with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of such person's race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap. 
b.  Limit, segregate or classify his employees or his employment applicants in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any person of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an employee because of such person's race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap. 
(2)  For a labor organization to exclude or to expel from its membership any person or to discriminate in any way against any of its members or against any employer or any person employed by an employer because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap of any person or to limit, segregate or classify its membership or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any person in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any person of employment opportunities or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an employee or as an applicant for employment because of such person's race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap or for any employer, labor organization or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on the job training programs, to discriminate against any person because of his race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap in admission to or employment in any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training. 
(3)  For any employer or employment agency to print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication or to use any form of application for employment or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification or for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment or otherwise to discriminate against any person because of his race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age as it relates to employment or handicap or to classify or refer for employment any person on the basis of his race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to apply different standards of compensation or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit system or a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided that such differences or such systems are not the result of an intention or a design to discriminate and are not used to discriminate because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, sex, national origin, ancestry, age or handicap nor shall it be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test, provided that such test, its administration or action upon the results thereof is not designed, intended or used to discriminate because of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor-management committee subject to this article to grant preferential treatment to any person or to any group because of the race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap of such person or group because of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap employed by any employer, referred or classified for employment by any employment agency or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization or admitted to or employed in any apprenticeship or other training program in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of such race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry, age or handicap in any community, state, section or other area or in the available work force in any community, state, section or other area. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 678-94, § 4, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.055. 
Sec. 66-6. - Discrimination in public accommodations. 
(a)  All persons within the jurisdiction of the state are free and equal and shall be entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this state of any place of public accommodation without discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry or handicap. 
(b)  It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in section 66-1 of this chapter and this section or to segregate or discriminate against any such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national origin, sex, ancestry or handicap. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a private club, a place of accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public accommodation as defined in section 66-1 of this chapter and this section. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 678-94, § 5, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.065. 
Sec. 66-7. - Denial of credit based on sex or marital status of applicant prohibited. 
    No person, upon proper application, shall be denied credit solely because of sex or marital status, except as may be required to comply with RSMo 408.200 and except that any creditor may require the signature of both husband and wife on the credit instrument. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 314.100. 
Sec. 66-8. - Additional unlawful discriminatory practices. 
    The following additional discriminatory practices are prohibited: 
(1)  To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts prohibited by this article or to attempt to do so. 
(2)  To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any person because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by the article or because such person has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16) 
Sec. 66-9. - City to institute state and federal statutory policies. 
    In order to ensure that discrimination does not occur, the city will implement the policies embodied in the state's human rights statutes and in the federal civil rights acts which are in force or which may be enacted. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16) 
Sec. 66-10. - Cooperation with state and federal agencies. 
    The city shall cooperate with state and federal agencies in enforcing the policies and acts referred to in section 66-9. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16) 
Sec. 66-11. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law of the state or political subdivision of the state or other jurisdiction in which this article shall be effective that requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this article. 
(b)  Nothing in sections 66-2, 66-3 and 66-4 requires that a dwelling be made available to a person whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(c)  Nothing in sections 66-2, 66-3 and 66-4 limits the applicability of any reasonable local or state restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling nor does any provision in sections 66-2, 66-3 and 66-4 regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(d)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons because of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of August 28, 1992, who do not meet the age requirements of subsections (2) and (3) of the definition of housing for older persons in section 66-1, provided that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsections (2) and (3) of the definition of housing for older persons in section 66-1; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsections (2) and (3) of the definition of housing for older persons in section 66-1. 
(e)  Nothing in section 66-2, 66-3 or 66-4 shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined by RSMo 195.010. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted because of race, color or national origin. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(g)  Nothing in this article, other than the prohibitions against discriminatory advertising in subsection 66-2(3), shall apply to: 
(1)  The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual owner, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The private individual owner does not own or have any interest in more than three single-family houses at any one time; and 
b.  The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings and without publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to such sale, the exemption in this section applies to only one such sale in any 24-month period; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.040(6)-(13). 
Secs. 66-12-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RIGHTS AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 66-31. - Established; purpose; appointment; qualifications. 
(a)  There is established a human rights and community relations commission, the purpose of which shall be to: 
(1)  Foster mutual understanding and respect among all racial, religious and ethnic groups in the city; 
(2)  Discourage and prevent discriminatory practices against any such group or its members; 
(3)  Promote the general welfare of the senior citizens of this city; 
(4)  Cooperate with federal, state and municipal agencies and nongovernmental organizations having like or kindred functions; and 
(5)  Make such investigations and studies in any field of human relationship as in the judgment of the city council will aid in effectuating its general purposes. 
(b)  The commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall consist of six members selected from the citizens of the city. Each member shall have been a resident of the city for not less than one year next prior to his appointment. 
(Code 1980, § 15-18) 
Sec. 66-32. - Terms of members, removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the human rights and community relations commission shall hold office for three-year staggered terms from July 1 following their appointment. Annually, the mayor shall before July 1 of each year appoint two members who shall hold office for three years and until their successors are appointed. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, a member of the human rights and community relations commission may be removed by a vote of five members of the city council. A member may also be removed by six votes of the city council independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(c)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being formally excused by the commission shall forfeit membership. 
(Code 1980, § 15-19) 
Sec. 66-33. - Officers. 
(a)  Within 15 days after their appointment, the human rights and community relations commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice-chairman. The chairman of the commission shall preside over the meetings. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary and shall keep a record of all actions taken at the meeting. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the human rights and community relations commission shall be delivered to the city council and shall be public record. 
(Code 1980, § 15-20) 
Sec. 66-34. - Meetings. 
(a)  Within 15 days after their appointment, the human rights and community relations commission shall meet to establish a regular quarterly meeting and thereafter shall meet quarterly. 
(b)  The commission may call special meetings as needed and establish administrative rules and procedures as needed for their activity. 
(Code 1980, § 15-21) 
Sec. 66-35. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the human rights and community relations commission shall be to: 
(1)  Seek to eliminate and prevent discrimination as provided in this chapter and by law. The commission is given general jurisdiction and power as provided in section 66-6 for such purposes. 
(2)  Implement the purposes of this chapter first by conference, conciliation and persuasion so that persons may be guaranteed their civil rights and goodwill be fostered. 
(3)  Enter into a memorandum of understanding with the state commission of human rights and such other governmental agencies as may have jurisdiction in investigating discriminatory action. 
(4)  Receive, investigate and conciliate complaints forwarded to it by the equal opportunity officer regarding any discriminatory activity as provided in this chapter or by law, pursuant to the memorandum of understanding established in subsection (3) of this section. 
(5)  Foster, through community effort or otherwise, goodwill, cooperation and conciliation among the groups and inhabitants of this community. 
(6)  Formulate and carry out such educational programs, as may be directed by the city council, that will aid in eliminating and preventing all types of prejudice and discrimination based on race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or handicap; formulate and carry out a program designed to promote the general welfare of the senior citizens of this city and to investigate the problems connected with old age. 
(7)  Issue as may be directed by the city council such publications and such reports of investigations and research as may tend to minimize or eliminate discrimination and promote goodwill. 
(8)  Enlist the cooperation of the community groups in educational campaigns and programs devoted to teaching the need for eliminating discrimination and to promote the general welfare of the senior citizens of this community. 
(9)  Annually make a full report of all activities and progress to the city council, which report shall become public record. 
(Code 1980, § 15-22) 
Sec. 66-36. - Complaints to commission. 
(a)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice may make, sign and file with the human rights and community relations commission a complaint in writing through the city's equal opportunity officer of the alleged act of discrimination on such form as may be provided. 
(b)  The equal opportunity officer will file a copy of the complaint with the commission and send a copy by certified mail to MCHR and any other appropriate agency. 
(c)  The commission will notify the respondent that a complaint has been filed. 
(d)  The commission will investigate the allegations in the complaint as soon as feasible. When the commission has completed its investigation, the case file shall be reviewed by MCHR prior to notifying the parties of its findings. 
(e)  If there is probable cause to believe discrimination has occurred, the commission will attempt to conciliate such complaints through conference with both parties. If attempts at conciliation are not successful, the case shall be turned over to MCHR or other appropriate agency for processing under state or federal laws and regulations. 
(f)  If MCHR or any other appropriate agency adopts a no probable cause finding of the commission, the case will be closed. 
(g)  If a complaint is received naming the city as respondent, such complaint shall be filed with MCHR or any other appropriate agency for investigation. Such complaint shall not be investigated by the commission. 
(Code 1980, § 15-23) 
Secs. 66-37-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISABILITY GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 66-61. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article establishes the grievance procedure required by 56 Fed. Reg. 35,718 (1991) (codified at 28 CFR 35.107) pursuant to Title II of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) (42 USC 12131 et seq.) for the purpose of resolving grievances asserted by qualified individuals with disabilities. Should any individual desire to review the ADA or its regulations to understand the rights, privileges and remedies afforded by it, please contact the city's designated ADA coordinator. 
(b)  In general, ADA requires that each program, service and activity offered by the city, when viewed in its entirety, be readily accessible to and usable by qualified individuals with disabilities. 
(c)  It is the intention of the city to foster open communication with all individuals requesting readily accessible programs, services and activities. The city encourages supervisors of programs, services and activities to respond to requests for modifications or accommodations before they become grievances. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Complainant means a qualified individual with a disability who files a grievance on the form as provided in this article. 
    Designated coordinator means the person appointed by the city who is responsible for the coordination of the efforts of the city to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under Title II of ADA, including the investigation of grievances filed by complainants. The designated coordinator is the city clerk and can be contacted at 4th and Market Street, PO Box 130, Fulton, Missouri, 65251, (314) 642-6826. 
    Grievance means any complaint under ADA by an individual with a disability who: 
(1)  Meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in or receipt of the benefits of a program, service or activity offered by the city. 
(2)  Believes that he or she has been excluded from participation in or denied the benefits of any program, service or activity of the city or has been subject to discrimination by the city on the basis of a disability. 
    Qualified individual with a disability means a person with a disability who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies or practices, the removal of architectural, communication or transportation barriers or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or the participation in programs or activities provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-63. - Grievances. 
(a)  The city will endeavor to respond to and resolve grievances without the need to resort to the formal grievance procedure established by this article. A person who wishes to avail himself or herself of the formal procedure, however, may do so only by filing a grievance within 180 calendar days of the alleged discrimination in the form and manner prescribed in section 66-66. 
(b)  The city shall provide a copy of the grievance procedure and the required grievance form to anyone who requests it or expresses a desire to file a formal grievance. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-64. - Manner of filing. 
(a)  The filing of a grievance is accomplished by the complainant's submission of a grievance in writing to the designated coordinator on the prescribed form. 
(b)  In order to be deemed filed and to receive proper consideration by the designated coordinator, the grievance form must be completed in full except as otherwise indicated on the form. The designated coordinator will notify the complainant within ten business days after receipt of the form if the filing is not complete. The city will assist with completion of the grievance form upon request. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-65. - Initial response. 
    The designated coordinator or his/her representative shall investigate the grievance and shall make reasonable efforts to resolve it. The designated coordinator shall provide a written response to the complainant and the city within ten business days after receipt of the properly completed grievance form. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-66. - Review. 
(a)  If the grievance has not been resolved by the designated coordinator to the satisfaction of the complainant, the complainant may submit a copy of the grievance form and the designated coordinator's response to the director of administration for final review. The complainant shall submit these documents to the director of administration, together with a short written statement explaining the reason(s) for dissatisfaction with the designated coordinator's written response, within five days after the complainants receipt of the designated coordinator's response. The director of administration will extend the period for submitting the review request and supporting documents for up to ten additional business days upon complainant's request. 
(b)  The director of administration shall appoint a three-member panel to review the grievance. One member so appointed shall be designated as the chairperson. 
(c)  The complainant shall be afforded an opportunity to appear before the panel. The complainant shall have a right to appoint a representative to appear on his/her behalf. The panel shall review the designated coordinator's written response and may conduct interviews and seek advice as it deems appropriate. 
(d)  The panel shall make recommendations in writing to the director of administration as to the proper resolution of the grievance. All recommendations shall include reasons for such recommendations and shall bear the signatures of the concurring panel members. A dissenting member of the panel may also make a signed, written recommendation to the director of administration. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the recommendations from the panel, the director of administration shall approve, disapprove or modify the panel recommendations, shall render a decision thereon in writing, shall state the basis therefor, and shall cause a copy of the decision to be served on the parties. The director of administration's decision shall be final. If the director of administration disapproves or modifies the panel's recommendations, the director of administration shall include written reasons for such disapproval or modification. 
(f)  A complainant's failure to appeal the designated coordinator's response for review by the director of administration within the specified time limits shall mean that complainant has withdrawn the grievance or has accepted the last response given by the designated coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-67. - Accessibility. 
    The city shall insure that all stages of the grievance procedure are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Sec. 66-68. - Case-by-case resolution. 
    Each grievance involves a unique set of factors which include, but are not limited to: the specific nature of the disability; the essential eligibility requirements for, the benefits to be derived from and the nature of the service, program or activity at issue; the health and safety of others; and whether or not an accommodation would constitute a fundamental alteration to the program, service or activity or undue hardship to the city. Accordingly, termination of a grievance at any level, whether through the granting of relief or otherwise, shall not constitute a precedent on which any other complainants should rely. 
(Ord. No. 657-93, § 1, 10-26-93) 
Chapter 70 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; alcholic beverages, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; elections, ch. 42; floods, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire department, § 50-56 et seq. 

Sec. 70-26. - Established; purpose. 
    There is established for the city in accordance with the Charter a merit system police department, the purpose of which is to ensure the safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1980, § 23-16) 
Sec. 70-27. - Composition; probationary period. 
(a)  The police department established pursuant to section 70-26 shall have a chief of police, a deputy chief of police, a minimum of three sergeants and 17 other officers. The structure of the department shall be recommended by the chief of police to the director of administration who shall have the authority to implement the structure with the consent of the council. 
(b)  No person shall be granted full tenure as a regular police officer until such person shall have satisfactorily completed a probationary period of 12 months. 
(Code 1980, § 23-17) 
Sec. 70-28. - Duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall act in accordance with policies set forth by the director of administration and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances of the city and shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the proper administration, efficiency and general conduct of the police department. 
(2)  Be responsible for the assignment and reassignment of all personnel and for the efficiency, discipline, general conduct and appearance of such personnel. In this capacity he shall have the authority to prescribe and enforce the rules and regulations for the operation of the department. 
(3)  Take such action as he deems necessary for the protection of the safety and welfare of persons and property. 
(Code 1980, § 32-10(A)) 
Sec. 70-29. - Functions. 
    The police department shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Identify criminal offenders and criminal activity and, where appropriate, apprehend offenders and participate in subsequent court proceedings. 
(2)  Reduce the opportunities for the commission of some crimes through preventive patrol and other measures. 
(3)  Aid persons who are in danger of physical harm. 
(4)  Protect constitutional guarantees. 
(5)  Facilitate the movement of people and vehicles. 
(6)  Assist those who cannot care for themselves. 
(7)  Resolve conflicts. 
(8)  Identify problems that are potentially serious law enforcement or governmental problems. 
(9)  Create and maintain a feeling of security in the community. 
(10)  Promote and preserve civil order. 
(11)  Provide other services, both emergency and nonemergency. 
(Code 1980, § 32-10(B)) 
Sec. 70-30. - Appointment of officers from list of eligibles. 
    The director of administration shall appoint or promote all officers within the police department from a list of eligible candidates recommended by the personnel board. 
(Code 1980, § 23-18) 
Sec. 70-31. - Term of office. 
    All persons appointed to the police department shall be entitled to hold office during good behavior and efficient service. 
(Code 1980, § 23-19) 
Sec. 70-32. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the personnel of the police department established pursuant to section 70-26 shall be determined by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 23-20) 
Sec. 70-33. - Suspension, demotion or discharge of personnel. 
(a)  The chief of police may suspend, demote or discharge any personnel of the police department for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency. 
(b)  Any person suspended, demoted or discharged for misbehavior, malfeasance or inefficiency may appeal such suspension, demotion or discharge through the grievance procedures established in the personnel manual. 
(Code 1980, § 23-21) 
Sec. 70-34. - Appointment of chief of police. 
    The director of administration with the consent of the mayor shall appoint a chief of police. 
(Code 1980, § 23-22) 
Sec. 70-35. - Duties and responsibilities of officers. 
    Every police officer shall be prompt in the discharge of his duties and shall at all times hold himself in readiness to obey and execute all lawful orders, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 23-23(b)) 
Chapter 78 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; human relations, ch. 66; law enforcement, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Any person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared to be in violation of the ordinances of the city, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any section of this chapter is likewise guilty of such offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 20-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Obedience to lawful orders required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a lawful order of any police officer given in the line of duty. 
(Code 1980, § 20-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Interference with police officer. 
    No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, run away from or otherwise interfere with a police officer in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1980, § 20-4) 
State Law reference- Resisting arrest, RSMo 575.150; interference with legal process, RSMo 575.160. 
Sec. 78-4. - False impersonation. 
    No person shall commit the crime of false impersonation, which is committed if such person: 
(1)  Falsely represents himself to be a public servant with purpose to induce another to submit to his pretended official authority or to rely upon his pretended official acts; and: 
a.  Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or 
b.  Causes another to act in reliance upon his pretended official authority; or 
(2)  Falsely represents himself to be a person licensed to practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required by the laws of this state with purpose to induce another to rely upon such representation; and: 
a.  Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or 
b.  Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation. 
(Code 1980, § 20-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.120. 
Sec. 78-5. - False declarations-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with the purpose to mislead a public servant in the performance of his duty, to: 
(1)  Submit any written false statement, which he does not believe to be true: 
a.  In an application for any pecuniary benefit or other consideration; or 
b.  On a form bearing notice, authorized by law, that false statements made therein are punishable; or 
(2)  Submit or invite reliance on: 
a.  Any writing which he knows to be forged, altered or otherwise lacking in authenticity; or 
b.  Any sample, specimen, map, boundary mark or other object which he knows to be false. 
(b)  The falsity of the statement or the item under subsection (a) of this section must be as to a fact which is material to the purposes for which the statement is made or the item submitted, and the provisions of RSMo 575.040(2) and (3), shall apply to prosecutions under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or item, but this defense shall not apply if the retraction was made after: 
(1)  The falsity of the statement or item was exposed; or 
(2)  The public servant took substantial action in reliance on the statement or item. 
(d)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 20-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.060. 
Sec. 78-6. - Same-Proof of falsity of statements. 
    No person shall be convicted of a violation of section 78-5 based upon the making of a false statement, except upon proof of the falsity of the statement by: 
(1)  The direct evidence of two witnesses; 
(2)  The direct evidence of one witness, together with strongly corroborating circumstances; 
(3)  Demonstrative evidence which conclusively proves the falsity of the statement; 
(4)  A directly contradictory statement by the defendant under oath together with: 
a.  The direct evidence of one witness; or 
b.  Strongly corroborating circumstances; or 
(5)  A judicial admission by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false. An admission, which is not a judicial admission, by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false may constitute strongly corroborating circumstances. 
(Code 1980, § 20-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.070. 
Sec. 78-7. - Mining. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person, either in person or by agent, shall prospect or mine any property within the city. 
(b)  Permitting use of property. No person, either in person or by agent, shall permit any prospecting or mining on property owned or controlled by him within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-8) 
Sec. 78-8. - Escape and aiding in escape. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while being detained, imprisoned or held in custody by any police officer, to break away, escape or attempt to escape from such officer or place of detainment or custody. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to rescue any person from the custody of a police officer. 
(Code 1980, § 20-9) 
Sec. 78-9. - Resisting or interfering with arrest. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest, to: 
(1)  Resist the arrest of himself by using or threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from such officer; or 
(2)  Interfere with the arrest of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical interference. 
(b)  This section applies to arrests with or without warrants and to arrests for any crime or ordinance violation. 
(c)  It is no defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the law enforcement officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to bar civil suits for unlawful arrest. 
(Code 1980, § 20-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.150. 
Sec. 78-10. - Interference with legal process. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of process, to interfere with or obstruct such person. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an arrest warrant or other process or order of a court. 
(Code 1980, § 20-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.160. 
Sec. 78-11. - Misdemeanor assault. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of misdemeanor assault. A person commits the crime of misdemeanor assault if: 
(1)  He attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to another person; or 
(2)  With criminal negligence he causes physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; or 
(3)  He purposely places another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or 
(4)  He recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or 
(5)  He knowingly causes physical contact with another person knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative. 
(Ord. No. 675-94, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 78-12. - Smoking prohibited in certain locations. 
(a)  No person shall smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other tobacco product inside any building or designated portion of a building, public or private, where signs have previously been erected prohibiting smoking. 
(b)  Signs prohibiting smoking shall be deemed sufficient when the signs contain: 
(1)  A reference to this section; and 
(2)  The words "NO SMOKING" or words to similar effect, or the international "NO SMOKING" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a bar across it. 
(Ord. No. 594-92, § 1, 2-24-92) 
Secs. 78-13-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS 

Sec. 78-31. - Indecent exposure and nudity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly expose his genitals under circumstances in which he knows that his conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm. 
(b)  The owner, operator, proprietor or managing agent of any business establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or consumed on the premises, shall not permit any dance, performance or exhibition to occur on the premises wherein the dancers, employees, performers or exhibitors are nude or partially nude. A dancer, employee, performer or exhibitor shall be deemed to be nude or partially nude if either or both of the breasts or the pelvic area or the buttocks are not covered with opaque clothing. 
(Code 1980, § 20-23; Ord. No. 662-94, § 1, 2-26-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 566.130. 
Secs. 78-32-78-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Secondhand goods, ch. 90; litter, § 94-51 et seq. 

Sec. 78-51. - Petit larceny. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appropriate to his own use the property or services of another of a value less than $150.00 without consent of the owner or by means of deceit, by exercising dominion over the property in a manner inconsistent with rights of the owner, by taking, using, transferring, concealing or retaining possession of the property. 
(b)  The court shall proceed to hear evidence and determine the value thereof and may, in addition to any other punishment determined by the court, order the defendant to make restitution in the amount of the value of the property stolen. 
(Code 1980, § 20-51) 
State Law reference- Stealing, RSMo 570.030. 
Sec. 78-52. - Trespass. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of trespass if he knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property. 
(b)  A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to which notice against trespass is given by: 
(1)  Actual communication to the actor; or 
(2)  Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. 
(Code 1980, § 20-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.140. 
Sec. 78-53. - Malicious destruction of property. 
(a)  No person shall remove, break up or otherwise destroy or injure any bridge, culvert, sidewalk, pavement, crosswalk in or upon any street, thoroughfare or alley of the city without having lawful authority to do so. 
(b)  No person in the city shall willfully and without lawful authority cut down, pull or root up, saw, peel, cut, hack, injure or destroy any fruit tree or ornamental tree, shrub or cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vines or currant, gooseberry, raspberry or blackberry bushes standing or growing on or attached to the land of another or which may be growing in or along any street, thoroughfare, sidewalk, park or public place or pick, destroy or carry therefrom any portion of the fruit of any cultivated tree, vine or bush. 
(c)  No person shall willfully cut, break or otherwise injure or destroy any lamppost, awning post, awning, spouting, door, window, railing, porch, sign or fence within the city. 
(d)  No person shall remove, take or tear down, deface, mark, injure or destroy any sign belonging to another or deface, injure or remove any sign indicating the number of any street without having lawful authority to do so. 
(e)  No person in the city shall interfere with freight of any kind which shall be in any railroad car or truck or in any freight depot or warehouse, by standing or sitting on the freight or by taking it down after it has been piled up or by uncovering the freight or in any way or by any means injuring the freight. 
(f)  No person shall molest, disturb, damage, injure or in any manner interfere with the batteries, wires, poles, instruments or other appliances belonging to any telegraph, telephone, cable TV, or public utility company doing business in the city. 
(g)  No person shall knowingly or willfully damage, tamper with, operate, ride upon or in, deface or mark upon or burn any property belonging to the city without the authority to do so. 
(h)  No person shall put or cause to be put any dead animal, carcass or any part thereof or any offal or other filth into any reservoir, water tank or tower used or intended to be used for the purpose of supplying the inhabitants of the city with water or shall in any manner or by any means defile, attempt to defile or cause to be defiled the water contained in any such reservoir, water tank or tower. 
(i)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 20-53) 
Secs. 78-54-78-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 78-76. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 78-77 and 78-78, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private property means any place which at the time is not open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
    Property of another means any property in which the actor does not have a possessory interest. 
    Public place means any place which at the time is open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
(b)  If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such units are separate premises. 
(Code 1980, § 20-64) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.030. 
Sec. 78-77. - Peace disturbance. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if such person: 
(1)  Unreasonably and knowingly causes alarm to another person not physically on the same premises by: 
a.  Personally abusive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific person and uttered under circumstances such that the words have a direct tendency to cause an immediate violent response by a reasonable recipient; 
b.  Tending to incite a fight; or 
c.  Fighting. 
(2)  Is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and unreasonably and knowingly causes alarm to another person or persons by: 
a.  Personally abusive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific person and uttered under circumstances such that the words have a direct tendency to cause an immediate violent response by a reasonable recipient; 
b.  Tending to incite a fight; or 
c.  Fighting. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to commit an act of peace disturbance. 
(Code 1980, § 20-65; Ord. No. 611-92, § 1, 5-26-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.010. 
Sec. 78-78. - Private peace disturbance. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if such person is on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to another person on the same premises by fighting. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to commit an act of private peace disturbance. 
(Code 1980, § 20-66; Ord. No. 611-92, § 1, 5-26-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.020. 
Sec. 78-79. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assemble with six or more other persons and agree with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state or of the United States with force or violence. 
(Code 1980, § 20-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.040. 
Sec. 78-80. - Rioting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assemble with six or more other persons and agree with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state or of the United States with force or violence and thereafter, while still so assembled, to violate any of such laws with force or violence. 
(Code 1980, § 20-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.050. 
Sec. 78-81. - Refusal to disperse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, being present at the scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, to knowingly fail or refuse to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot. 
(Code 1980, § 20-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.060. 
Sec. 78-82. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm agent means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm device. 
    Alarm business means any business operated by a person or entity who engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, or responding to an emergency alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place. 
    Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed to be activated manually or automatically upon the detection of an unauthorized entry, intrusion, fire, or other emergency in or on any building, structure, facility, or premises through the emission of a sound or transmission of a signal or message. 
    Alarm user means any person who uses an alarm system to protect any building, structure, facility, or premises. 
    Audible alarm means a local alarm located on the building, structure, facility or premises protected and equipped with an exterior sound-producing device, such as a gong, buzzer, siren, bell or horn. 
    Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically dials a specific telephone number and transmits an emergency message by a recording over regular telephone lines when actuated. 
    False alarm means any activation of an alarm system intentionally, by inadvertence, negligence, unintentional act or malfunction of the alarm system to which the city police or fire department, respond when there is no unauthorized entry, intrusion, fire or emergency; provided that the following shall not be considered false alarms: 
(1)  Alarms caused by an attempted illegal or unauthorized entry of which there is visible or demonstrated evidence. 
(2)  Alarms caused by heat or smoke from a fire. 
(3)  Alarms caused by damage to the alarm system, provided that such incidents are promptly reported to the company providing the means of transmission. 
(4)  Alarms caused by acts over which the user has no control, such as windstorm, thunder, lightning or other similar phenomena. 
(5)  Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to summon the police or fire department, for which purpose the alarm was installed. Indiscriminate use of the alarm system to summon the police shall be considered a violation of this section. 
(6)  Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause but where reasonable effort in the judgment of the police chief or fire chief, or his designated representative is being made by the alarm user, business alarm, alarm agent, or other concerned person to correct the malfunction expeditiously. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the fine provided for. In the event of violation of false alarms after the second false alarm in any twelve-month period, the alarm user, in lieu of court appearance, may pay to the municipal court, a penalty of $50.00. 
(c)  Enforcement. For the purpose of enforcing provisions of this chapter, the police chief or fire chief, or his designee shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any building, structure, facility or premises in the city in or upon which an alarm system or alarm business is located, to inspect the installation or operation of such alarm system or alarm business. Any alarm user may request a written notice of inspection, which shall be made at alarm user's expense by a licensed electrical contractor acceptable to him and to the city. If such inspection reveals any violation of the provision of this chapter, the alarm user or alarm business shall be granted 30 days to correct such violation. 
(d)  Non-liability of the city. The city shall not be liable for any defects in operation of signal line systems for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from any such source, nor for the failure or neglect of any alarm business or alarm agent. 
(e)  Licensing. Any alarm business or alarm agent installing an alarm system within the city shall be licensed and bonded in compliance with applicable ordinances of the county and if required by applicable ordinances of the city or state statutes. 
(f)  Violations. A false alarm is declared a violation of this chapter. Upon determination by the police department that a false alarm has occurred there shall be no penalty for the first two false alarms during the first two weeks following the installation of an alarm system. 
    Thereafter, the penalty fee for false alarms shall be as provided. 
(g)  Automatic dialing of police. No person shall install or use an automatic dialing device that is programmed to dial the police or fire department's telephone number. 
(h)  Audible alarm cutoff. All alarm systems with an audible alarm shall be equipped with a ten minute cutoff timer. 
(i)  Alarm business; operational instruction. Any alarm business or alarm agent that sells, leases or installs an alarm system in the city shall furnish the alarm user with written instructions for the operation of the system. The alarm business or alarm agent shall provide training in the operation of the system and, upon request from the alarm user, refresher training. 
    Alarm systems installed after March 19, 1987, shall meet or exceed standards set by American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and/or Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) for the applicable alarm system. 
(j)  Alarm system repair service. Any alarm business or alarm agent that sells, leases or installs an alarm system within the city must offer either directly, or through an agency, repair service for the alarm system to maintain it in proper working order. 
(k)  Alarm user responsibilities. The alarm user shall be responsible for maintaining the alarm system in good repair to assure reliability of operation. 
(Code 1980, § 20-70; Ord. No. 1356-13, § 1, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 78-83. - Disorderly houses or premises. 
    No person shall conduct a disorderly dance house or keep any other disorderly house or shall knowingly permit any tenement of any building in his possession or under his control to be used for any such purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 20-71) 
Sec. 78-84. - Curfew for persons under seventeen; responsibility of parents or guardians. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or to drive or ride in an automobile, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except on Fridays and Saturdays when the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except that this section does not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any police officer finding a child violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall warn the child to desist immediately from such violation. The police officer may take the child into custody and release him to his parent or guardian or release the child at the scene with a written notice of referral to the juvenile court. 
(d)  After receiving notice of the first violation by the child, any parent, guardian or other adult person in charge of such child who knowingly permits such child to again violate this section, shall upon being convicted, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 680-94, § 1, 12-13-94) 
Secs. 78-85-78-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 58. 

Sec. 78-106. - Fencing of open well, vault or cistern. 
    No person shall dig any well, cistern or vault and leave the well, cistern or vault open or exposed and without a sufficient fence or other protection around it. 
(Code 1980, § 20-83) 
Sec. 78-107. - Leaving cellar door or grating open. 
    No person shall suffer or permit any cellar door or grating to be and remain open or in an unsafe or dangerous condition whereby persons may be in danger of falling on or over such cellar door or into such cellar or vault. 
(Code 1980, § 20-84) 
Sec. 78-108. - Abandonment of airtight or semiairtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container, which has a capacity of 11/2 cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 20-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.100. 
Sec. 78-109. - Weapons-Possession, manufacture, transport, repair or sale of certain weapons prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly possesses, manufactures, transports, repairs or sells: 
(1)  A switchblade knife; 
(2)  A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot from a firearm; or 
(3)  Knuckles, as defined in RSMo 571.010(10). 
(b)  A person does not commit an offense under this section if his conduct: 
(1)  Was incident to the performance of official duty by the armed forces, national guard, a governmental law enforcement agency or a penal institution; 
(2)  Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business transaction with an organization enumerated in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(3)  Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; 
(4)  Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or exhibition; or 
(5)  Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio, ornament or keepsake or to using it in a manner reasonably related to a lawful dramatic performance. 
(Code 1980, § 20-86(b)) 
Sec. 78-110. - Same-Unlawful use. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he knowingly: 
(1)  Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon while intoxicated; or 
(2)  Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any church or place where people have assembled for worship or into any school or into any election precinct on any election day or into any building owned or occupied by any agency of the federal government, state government or political subdivision thereof or into any public assemblage of persons met for any lawful purpose. 
(3)  Carries a concealed firearm into a city building as follows: 
a.  No person who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement by the state director of revenue under RSMo § 571.094 or who has been issued a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state, shall, by authority of that endorsement or permit, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
b.  Signs shall be posted at each entrance of a building entirely owned, leased or controlled by the city stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited. Where the city owns, leases or controls only a portion of a building, signs shall be posted at each entrance to that portion of the building stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited. 
c.  This section shall not apply to buildings used for public housing by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, or private dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
d.  Any person violating this section may be denied entrance to the building or ordered to leave the building. Any city employee violating this section may be disciplined. No other penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this section. 
e.  No person who has been issued a certificate of qualification which allows the person to carry a concealed firearm before the director of revenue begins issuing concealed carry endorsements in July, 2004, shall, by authority of that certificate, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the city. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to or affect any of the following: 
(1)  All state, county and municipal law enforcement officers possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal laws of the state or for violation of ordinances of counties or municipalities of the state or any person summoned by such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting such officer. 
(2)  Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime. 
(3)  Members of the armed forces or national guard while performing their official duty. 
(4)  Those persons vested by article V, section 1, of the state constitution with the judicial power of the state. 
(5)  Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or criminal. 
(c)  Subsection (a)(4) of this section does not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible. 
(Code 1980, § 20-86(a); Ord. No. 944-03, § 1, 11-18-03) 
Sec. 78-111. - Discharge of firearms, air rifles, bows and similar instruments prohibited. 
    No person, except the chief of police, a police officer or law enforcement officer or other officer in the discharge of his duty, shall discharge or fire off any gun, pistol, rifle, shotgun or revolver which may be used for the explosion of cartridges or any air gun, BB gun, gas-operated gun or spring gun or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a "peashooter," "slingshot" or "beany," or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth in this section or by any other name. Except, hunting and burning will be permitted on large tracts of land (unplatted 200 acres or more, and/or separated by a roadway) located within the city limits. 
    Except, bow and arrow hunting, for deer only, will be permitted during specified days and times, to be determined by the State of Missouri Department of Conservation along with the City of Fulton. All hunters must comply with state laws regarding bow and arrow hunting for deer along with specified regulations applying to the special hunt within the city limits. 
    Bow and arrow target practice will be allowed only at archery ranges. 
(Code 1980, § 20-87; Ord. No. 1111-05, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1276-10, § 1, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1345-13, § 1, 4-23-13) 
Sec. 78-112. - Sale and discharge of fireworks. 
    The provisions of this section represent the City of Fulton's regulations and prohibitions of fireworks within its city limits and shall not supersede the State of Missouri's laws and regulations concerning fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Consumer fireworks. Explosive devices designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion and includes aerial devices and ground devices, all of which are classified as fireworks, UN0336, 1.4G by regulation of the United States Department of Transportation, as amended from time to time, and which were formerly classified as Class C Common Fireworks by regulation of the United States Department of Transportation. 
Display fireworks. Explosive devices designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. This term includes devices containing more than two grains (130MG) of explosive composition intended for public display. These devices are classified as fireworks, UN0335, 1.3G by regulation of the United States Department of Transportation, as amended from time to time, and which were formerly classified as Class B Display Fireworks by regulation of the United States Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks. 
(1)  Period of sale limited. The fireworks season shall be the period, beginning on the twentieth day of June and continuing through the tenth day of July of the same year and the period beginning on the twentieth day of December and continuing through the second day of January of the next year, which shall be the only period of time that seasonal retailers may be permitted to sell consumer fireworks. 
(2)  Business license/approval required. A business license must be obtained from the city clerk's office during normal business hours and prior to the sale of fireworks in the city. Approval from the state fire marshall's office and the city fire department is also required. 
(3)  Discharge lawful-When. The discharge, detonation or shooting of consumer fireworks shall only be permitted between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on the third, fourth and fifth of July each year, and on December 31 between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. New Year's Day. 
The discharge, detonation or shooting of fireworks at any other time is prohibited except by special approval of the city council. 
(4)  Disturbance of the peace. If a written (signed) complaint is received and verified by the city police department for disturbance of the peace of the neighbors, discharging shall immediately cease. 
(5)  Restrictions on throwing/discharging fireworks. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to throw (shoot) fireworks out of vehicles, under vehicles, at vehicles, at buildings, at people, or in the vicinity of a church service (500 feet), on any public street or other public place within the city. 
(c)  Display fireworks. 
(1)  Licensed operator required. Effective August 28, 2004 Missouri State Statute (RSMo 320.126.4) became law requiring all fireworks displays "shall be supervised, managed, or directed by a Missouri licensed operator or pyrotechnic operator on site", operators must be licensed by the division of fire safety. Assistants shall be at least 18 years old. 
(2)  Permit required. The city does require a fireworks display permit. Fire department officials will conduct an inspection to make sure the display will meet all state or local laws and regulations. The fire department will also stand by at permitted public displays to ensure safety and proper handling of pyrotechnics. 
(3)  Approval to discharge in city parks. It shall be unlawful to discharge (shoot) display fireworks in city parks without the special approval of the city council. 
(d)  Cancellations. In dry, adverse or drought weather conditions the fire chief, his designate or other official designated by the city council may cancel or limit the use of fireworks in the city. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-20 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 20-88; Ord. No. 1282-10, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Chapter 82 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 86; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire, maintain parks, RSMo 90.010. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Department established; purpose. 
    There is established for the city in accordance with the Charter a parks and recreation department, the purpose of which is to provide recreational facilities and activities for all residents of the community. 
(Code 1980, § 21-16) 
Sec. 82-2. - Compensation of department personnel. 
    The salary of the personnel of the parks and recreation department, established pursuant to section 82-1, shall be determined by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 21-18) 
Secs. 82-3-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUPERINTENDENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 82-26. - Appointment. 
    The director of administration with the consent of the mayor shall appoint a superintendent of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1980, § 21-17) 
Sec. 82-27. - Duties. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation shall plan, promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive municipal park and recreation program and administer the program in the interest of the entire community and shall: 
(1)  Develop, operate and maintain all city parks, recreational areas and facilities. 
(2)  Supervise the recreational use of playgrounds, playfields, recreation centers, swimming pools, ball diamonds and such other recreation areas and facilities as may be made available to carry out the city's recreation program. 
(3)  Conduct and supervise any form of recreational, cultural or social activities assigned to him that will employ the leisure time of the citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner. 
(Code 1980, § 32-13) 
Secs. 82-28-82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; planning and zoning commission, § 86-26 et seq.; solid waste department, § 94-26 et seq.; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 110-31 et seq.; board of public utilities, § 114-51 et seq. 

Sec. 82-51. - Established; purpose; appointment; composition. 
(a)  There is established a parks and recreation board, the purpose of which is to advise the superintendent of parks and recreation regarding types of programs to be operated and facility improvements. The board shall act as a liaison to reach various community and neighborhood groups to develop an ongoing parks and recreation program. 
(b)  The board shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall consist of nine members selected from the citizens of the city, with at least one member of the board being from each ward. 
(Code 1980, § 21-20) 
Sec. 82-52. - Terms of members, removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the parks and recreation board shall hold office for three-year staggered terms from July 1 following their appointment. Annually, the mayor shall, before July 1 of each year appoint three members who shall hold office for three years or until their successors are appointed. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, a member of the parks and recreation board may be removed by a vote of five members of the city council. A member may also be removed by six votes of the city council independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(c)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being formally excused by the board shall forfeit membership. 
(Code 1980, § 21-21) 
Sec. 82-53. - Officers. 
(a)  Within 15 days after their appointment, the parks and recreation board shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice-chairman. The chairman of the board shall preside over the meetings. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary and shall keep a record of all actions taken at the meeting. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the parks and recreation board shall be delivered to the city council and shall be public record. 
(Code 1980, § 21-22) 
Sec. 82-54. - Meetings. 
    Within 15 days after their appointment, the parks and recreation board shall meet to establish a regular quarterly meeting date and thereafter shall meet quarterly. 
(Code 1980, § 21-23) 
Secs. 82-55-82-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-76. - Hours of use. 
(a)  Established. The recreation areas under the administration and supervision of the department of parks and recreation shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight each day, unless otherwise approved by the director of administration. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any person not observing the hours established in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed in violation and shall be prosecuted under section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, §§ 21-32, 21-33) 
Chapter 86 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; historic preservation, ch. 62; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; parks and recreation, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Board of adjustment. 
    In order that unwarranted hardship, which constitutes an unreasonable deprivation of use as distinguished from the mere grant of a privilege, may be avoided, the board of adjustment constituted to hear appeals from the planning and zoning commission shall be empowered to modify or vary the regulations in specific cases involving building line regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 22-6) 
Sec. 86-2. - Adoption of master development plan and program. 
(a)  For the purpose of assisting and guiding the mayor, the city council and local decision makers in the management of growth and change in the city, there is adopted by the city council the city's master development plan and program, as prepared by Booker Associates, Inc., at the direction of the city council. 
(b)  The city's master development plan and program is adopted pursuant to approval by the planning and zoning commission, as provided by RSMo 89.340. 
(c)  The master development plan and program is incorporated into and made a part of this section as fully as if set out in full in this section, with the exception of appendix E, which is deleted in full. 
(Code 1980, § 22-7) 
Secs. 86-3-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; historic preservation commission, § 62-26 et seq.; parks and recreation board, § 82-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- City planning commission, RSMo 89.310 et seq.; authority to appoint existing plan commission or zoning commission, RSMo 89.070. 

Sec. 86-26. - Established; purpose. 
(a)  There is established a planning and zoning commission, the purpose of which shall be to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(b)  The commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall consist of not more than 15 and not less then seven members, including the mayor, a member of the council selected by the council, the city engineer or similar city official and not more than 12 nor less than four citizens appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. All citizen members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The planning and code enforcement officer or his designee shall attend all meetings of the planning and zoning commission, but shall not vote. 
(Code 1980, § 22-18; Ord. No. 641-93, § 1, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 86-27. - Terms of members, removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the planning and zoning commission shall hold office for four years, except that the terms of the citizen members first appointed shall be for varying periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered. 
(b)  Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid. 
(c)  The council may remove any citizen member for cause stated in writing and after public hearing. 
(d)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being formally excused by the commission shall forfeit his/her membership. 
(Code 1980, § 22-19; Ord. No. 641-93, § 1, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 86-28. - Officers. 
(a)  The commission shall elect its chairman and secretary from among the citizen members. The term of chairman and secretary shall be for one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary and keep a record of all actions taken at the meeting. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the planning and zoning commission shall be delivered to the city council and shall be public record. 
(Code 1980, § 22-20; Ord. No. 641-93, § 1, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 86-29. - Meetings. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall meet to establish a regular meeting date and thereafter shall meet at least twice a year in January and July. Special meetings may be called at any time as needed. 
(Code 1980, § 22-21; Ord. No. 641-93, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 958-04, § 1, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 86-30. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the planning and zoning commission shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter, and the commission shall have any other duties as may be requested by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 22-22; Ord. No. 641-93, § 1, 5-25-93) 
Chapter 90 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; offenses against property, § 78-51 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RUMMAGE SALES 

Sec. 90-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Rummage sale means the sale or offering for sale of miscellaneous goods, wares or merchandise to the public under generally informal circumstances and not on a regular basis, as limited in section 90-27. The term "rummage sale" shall include all such activities whether denominated by the term "rummage sale," "yard sale," "garage sale" or any other term of like connotation. 
(Code 1980, § 16-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-27. - Limitation on number. 
    No rummage sale may be held in any one residential location by any person at any given address more frequently than four times in any one calendar year. Rummage sales shall not be held more than three consecutive days. Any activity in the nature of a rummage sale which occurs more frequently than limited in this section shall be deemed the establishment of a mercantile business, and the person engaging in such business shall be deemed a merchant within the meaning of that term as defined in section 22-101. 
(Code 1980, § 16-97) 
Sec. 90-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1420-16, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 90-28, which pertained to the requirement of purchasing a rummage sale permit, and derived from the Code of 1980, § 16-98. 
Sec. 90-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1420-16, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 90-29, which pertained to false statements on rummage sale permit applications, and derived from the Code of 1980, § 16-99. 
Chapter 92 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1128-06, adopted Feb. 14, 2006, repealed ch. 92, which consisted of §§ 92-1-92-64, and enacted new provisions to be designated as ch. 92, §§ 92-1-92-65. Former ch. 92 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 674-94, adopted Sept. 27, 1994; Ord. No. 745-97, adopted June 10, 1997; Ord. No. 769-98, adopted Feb. 24, 1998; and Ord. No. 914-02, adopted Sept. 24, 2002. 
Charter reference- Powers of city, § 2.1 et seq.; council, § 3.1 et seq.; director of administration, § 5.1 et seq.; licensing, taxation, and regulation of businesses, occupations, professions, etc., § 12.1. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; duties of chief financial officer, § 2-112; director of administration, § 2-201 et seq.; advertising, ch. 6; obscene advertisements, § 6-4; handbills, § 6-26 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 92-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in the chapter, the following words shall mean: 
    Advertising media: Banner, pennant, streamer, wind operated mechanism, flashing lights, and any other type of fluttering or flashing device, or person or animal used for attracting attention. 
    Awning: Any device or structure entirely supported by the structure to which it is attached and which is covered by canvas, cloth or other material, which may be retractable or rolled to the structure by which it is supported. 
    Canopy: Any structure other than an awning, attached to a building or structure and supported independently of that building structure. Porticos and portecocheres shall be considered canopies for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Church bulletin board: A sign attached to the exterior of a church or located elsewhere on the church premises and used to indicate the services and/or other activities of the church. 
    Director: The director of administration of the City of Fulton and any of his delegates or assistants. 
    Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, locate, relocate, paint or repaint. 
    Flagpole: A pole constructed of metal or similar material permanently affixed to the ground or a structure designed for the display of a flag. 
    Marquee: A device or structure entirely supported by the structure to which it is attached which is permanent in nature and projects over the entrance or door of a building. 
    Office building: A building occupied by one or more businesses or noncommercial entities. 
    Shopping plaza and shopping center: A tract of ground occupied by one or more businesses or commercial entities. 
    Sign: Any letter, word, model, design, device, representation, name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, supported by, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or a piece of land which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. However, the definition of a sign shall not include the flag of the United States of America, the State of Missouri, other foreign countries or states. The definition of a sign also shall not include any display of official court or public office notices, nor shall a sign include any letter, word, model, design, device, representation, name, identification, description, display or illustration located completely within an enclosed building, not otherwise endangering public health and safety. The definition of a "sign" includes all sign supports and structural trim as defined herein. 
    Sign, advertising: A sign advertising any off-premises business, product, or function, mounted above ground. Can be no higher than 35 feet above ground to the top of sign and no more than 200 square feet. 
    Sign, attached: A wall sign or projecting sign attached to a building wall or the generally vertical plane of a mansard type roof. 
    Sign, commercial neighborhood business: A ground sign allowed in a commercial neighborhood business (C-NB) zoning district, a district which is allowed only along Business Highway 54. 
    Sign, construction: A temporary sign used during construction of new buildings, or reconstruction of or additions to existing buildings, such as those identifying the project and denoting the owner, architect, engineer, contractor and/or financing institutions of the project. 
    Sign, directional/informational: A sign which indicates a direction or provides information for vehicular or pedestrian traffic or other movement information. 
    Sign, directory: An occupational or identification sign containing at least one name within a single sign. 
    Sign, flashing: An illuminated sign on which artificial light is not steady or on which colors change. 
    Sign, fluttering: A sign which flutters and includes pennants, banners, nongovernmental flags or other flexible material which moves with the wind or by some artificial means. 
    Sign, ground: Any detached sign mounted on the ground having its highest point not more than ten feet above the ground. 
    Sign, hanging: Any sign hanging entirely beneath a canopy, portico or marquee, or similar structure. 
    Sign, institutional or governmental: A sign identifying the institutional or governmental facility. 
    Sign, marquee, canopy and awning: A sign attached to or illustrated on a marquee, canopy, or awning respectively. 
    Sign, moveable: A sign which is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground. 
    Sign, moving: A sign, all or any part of which, moves by any means. Such sign includes a fluttering sign. 
    Sign, nonconforming: A sign legally erected under any previously existing ordinances of the city which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Sign, on site informational: An informational sign located on a commercial, institutional, governmental, or other similar site which gives parking, fire protection, traffic flow (other than directional signs), height clearance, pedestrian, or other similar information and which does not advertise the business or use located on the site. 
    Sign, political: A temporary sign advocating or opposing any political proposition or candidate for public office. 
    Sign, post: Any detached sign which is supported by one or more posts the bottom edge of which is the minimum of ten feet above the ground. 
    Sign, projecting: Any sign which projects more than 12 inches beyond the plane of the wall on which the sign is erected or attached. 
    Sign, reader board: Any permanent sign upon which a changeable message may be placed or which projects a moving or changing message in lights such as, but not limited to "time and temperature" readouts. 
    Sign, real estate: A sign pertaining only to the prospective rental, lease or sale of the property on which it is located. 
    Sign, roof: Any sign erected on a roof. For the purposes of this chapter, signs erected on top of a marquee, portico, canopy or similar structure shall be considered roof signs. Signs erected on the generally vertical plane of a mansard or similar style roof shall not be considered roof signs. 
    Sign, sandwich type board or "A" frame: A sign for display only during business hours and not to interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
    Sign, subdivision: An entry sign identifying a residential subdivision entry, subdivision name and/or street names within the subdivision. Such a sign may include a map of the subdivision. 
    Sign, temporary: Any sign intended for a limited period of display. 
    Sign, wall: A sign erected or attached against the wall of any building or against the generally vertical plane of a mansard type roof with the plane for the sign face parallel to the plane of the wall below the roof line. 
    Sign area: The total area of the space to be used for advertising purposes, including the spaces between open-type letters and figures, including the background structure, or other decoration or addition which is an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the area of a sign. A double-faced sign shall have double the total area of a single-faced sign. 
    Sign facing or surface: Any surface of a sign upon, against or through which the advertising message is displayed or illustrated on the sign, including structural trim, which displays or upon which is displayed any color, message, name or symbol of any kind for the purpose advertising, announcing, directing or attracting attention from the outside of a building and which can be seen from a single location on an adjacent street provided that the ends, or thickness, of a sign shall not be counted as a separate sign face unless an advertising message is conveyed thereon. 
    Sign structure: The sign and all parts associated with its construction or support. 
    Sign supports: All structures by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles, braces, guys and anchors. All such supports shall be considered part of the sign as defined herein. 
    Structural trim: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign structure. 
    Zoning ordinance: The zoning ordinance of the City of Fulton and/or chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fulton, and the current district map related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 1245-09, 3-10-09) 
Sec. 92-2. - Effect of zoning regulations. 
    No permit shall be issued for a sign nor shall any sign be erected, installed, maintained or displayed in any zoning district of the City of Fulton except as illustrated below. 
(a)  Signs in residential districts: Subject to the limitations herein set forth, the following signs shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, PUD districts: 
(1)  Church bulletin boards not to exceed 20 square feet; 
(2)  Political signs; 
(3)  Real estate and construction signs; 
(4)  Temporary signs for political purposes, real estate and rummage sales as defined in chapter 90 shall be exempt from fees; 
(5)  Permanent subdivision signs; 
(6)  Institutional or governmental signs; 
(7)  Official government flags; 
(8)  Wall signs in conjunction with legitimate commercial activity not to exceed 32 square feet; 
(9)  Directional/informational signs; and 
(10)  On-site informational signs. 
(b)  Signs in commercial districts: Subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, the following signs shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2 districts: 
(1)  All signs and flags permitted in residential districts; 
(2)  Sign, directory; 
(3)  Sign, ground; 
(4)  Sign, hanging; 
(5)  Sign, canopy, and/or awning; 
(6)  Sign, reader board; 
(7)  Sign, roof; 
(8)  Sign, temporary; 
(9)  Sign, wall; 
(10)  Sign, post; 
(11)  Sign, fluttering; 
(12)  Sign, sandwich type board or "A" frame; 
(13)  Sign, projecting; 
(14)  Sign, advertising, and 
(15)  Sign, movable. 
(c)  Signs, advertising shall be permitted in C-3 districts only. 
(d)  Signs in A-1 district shall be limited to advertisement of agricultural products only and activities related directly to the property. All signs in subsection (b) above shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-3. - Registration of signs required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or have erected a sign of any type defined in this chapter, or to collect or contract for the payment of any rental or charge on account of any such sign placed, to be placed, maintained or to be maintained within the city unless such sign is authorized by permit by the director of administration or his/her designee. 
(b)  Registration shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Fulton and each sign so registered shall receive a number which shall be recorded and kept by the director, or designee for that purpose. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director, or designee to make, at least annually, a thorough inspection of all signs in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-4. - Removal of unlawful signs, notice to be given. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a sign has been erected to cause any unlawful sign to be removed. 
(b)  In cases involving all signs except moveable signs, the property owner shall be given five working days after issuance of notice to remove all unlawful signs. Notice shall be given by leaving a written report of the violation with an individual of lawful age at the owner's place of business or by addressing a certified letter to said owner and mailing same to his last known address. 
(c)  Any property owner allowing an unlawful sign to continue to be displayed for more than five working days after a notice to remove said sign is issued shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 per day for each day that the unlawful sign is displayed, without further notice. 
(d)  In the event that a moveable sign is unlawfully displayed, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which such sign is located to cause the unlawful sign to be removed within two days after issuance of a notice to remove such sign, and the penalty for nonremoval shall be that set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-5. - Signs conflicting with traffic-control devices prohibited. 
    Any sign or device which by color, location or design resembles, conflicts or interferes with traffic-control signs or devices is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Secs. 92-6-92-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Sec. 92-21. - Required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no sign of the types defined in section 92-1 shall be erected, nor the location of any existing sign changed, until a permit therefore shall have been issued by the director or his/her designee. 
(b)  No existing sign shall be enlarged, rebuilt, structurally altered or relocated except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and until a permit therefore has been issued by the director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-22. - Application for permit. 
    No permit shall be granted until after an application has been filed with the director or designee showing the plans and specifications, including dimensions, material and details of construction of the proposed sign structure, nor until all the provisions of this chapter relating to such sign structure have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-23. - Authority for director to vary form or contents of applications. 
    The director may prescribe suitable regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, concerning the form or content of all applications for permits herein required. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-24. - Fees. 
(a)  The application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set out below: 
(1)  The fee for a permit for a sign, as defined herein, at any one location, regardless of size, including temporary signs, shall be as follows: 
$20.00 for the first sign. 
$5.00 for each additional sign or ballast. 
(2)  The permit fee for multifaced or multisided signs shall be based on the total area of all faces or sides. 
(b)  The permit fees herein provided for shall cover the inspection of the location of the proposed signs and inspections during and after construction and erection; and all moneys so collected by the director or his/her designee shall be turned over to the finance officer for deposit in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-25. - Issuance of permit not to relieve owner from duty of maintaining sign safety. 
    The issuance of a permit required by this article shall not relieve the owner or lessee of the premises from the duty of maintaining any of the structures regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Secs. 92-26-92-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 92-41. - Signs in violation of chapter prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, have installed, maintain or display, on or in connection with any premises within the City of Fulton, any sign, poster, letter, picture or advertising device in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any type of sign not specifically allowed and detailed in this article. 
(b)  The use of any sign or advertising device lawfully existing and maintained as of the date of approval of this chapter, and made unlawful by the provisions of this chapter, may be continued and maintained, provided however, that in the event such sign or advertising device is damaged or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent of its replacement value or is altered or moved, or is no longer nonconforming due to a change in use of its associated property such that the new use requires different signs, then such sign or advertising device shall be made to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, or removed. 
(c)  A sign shall cease being legally nonconforming upon the closing or change of ownership of the business with which it is associated. No subsequent use or owner will have any claim to the nonconforming sign and may only erect signs which comply with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fulton. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-42. - Display of advertising on signs restricted; removal of signs no longer applicable to property required. 
(a)  Except for signs advertising or announcing the development of property for residential purposes at another location within the city as provided for in section 92-61, no sign shall display any advertising matter except that which pertains to the business conducted on the premises or in the building upon which such sign is placed. 
(b)  Any sign which is no longer applicable to the property or building upon which such sign is located shall be considered an unlawful sign, and shall be removed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-43. - Unsafe signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to remain upon any premises owned, leased, occupied or used by him with notice thereof, any unsafe or insecure sign liable to injure any person or property, or to maintain or permit to remain on any such premises any sign which because of its deteriorated condition or appearance would have a negative effect upon other property in the city. 
(b)  Any sign found to be unsafe under the provisions of this section shall be deemed an unlawful sign and shall be ordered removed under the provisions of section 92-4. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-44. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Flashing signs except when defined in section 92-1 as reader boards. 
(2)  Marquee signs; 
(3)  Moving signs (operated mechanically, electrically, electronically, or by wind or other forces of nature except as provided in section 92-46); 
(4)  Paper, cloth, cardboard or other similar nonpermanent material signs except as provided in section 92-63; 
(5)  Post signs except as provided for in sections 92-52, 92-55 and 92-57. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-45. - Signs not to obstruct fire escapes. 
    No sign of any description shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-46. - Mechanical contrivances prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, maintain or display on or in connection with any premises owned, occupied or used by him any sign, which shall contain flashers, animators or mechanical movements or contrivances of any kind, excepting clocks and electronic reader boards. Any such sign so erected shall be an unlawful sign within the meaning of this chapter and shall be subject to removal by the director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-47. - Awning and canopy signs. 
    All awning and canopy signs shall be subject to the general restrictions of wall signs and shall: 
(1)  Not exceed two feet in height; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance of at least ten feet above the ground or pavement in any place where there will be pedestrian or vehicular traffic beneath it; and 
(3)  Be painted or similarly affixed and may be constructed of the same material as the awning or canopy when such signs are applied to cloth or similar material. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-48. - Church bulletin boards. 
    Church bulletin boards shall be subject to the general restrictions of ground signs or wall signs, whichever is applicable, and not exceed 20 square feet in sign area. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-48.1 - Commercial neighborhood business sign. 
All commercial neighborhood business signs shall: 
(1)  Be a ground sign located in the commercial neighborhood business (C-NB) zoning district which is allowed only along Business Highway 54. 
(2)  Be limited to a height of no more than six feet including the supporting structure. 
(3)  Be limited to 24 square feet per face and may be internally lit. 
(4)  Be limited to only one sign of any type per residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 1245-09, 3-10-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1245-09, adopted Mar. 10, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as § 92-49. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been codified as § 92-48.1. 
Sec. 92-49. - Construction signs. 
    All construction signs shall be subject to the general restrictions of ground signs, if applicable, and shall: 
(1)  Be limited to one such sign per subdivision, or development; 
(2)  Not to exceed 32 square feet in area; and 
(3)  Be removed within ten days of the final inspection of the last structure of the subdivision or development. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-50. - Directional and information signs. 
    All directional and informational signs shall: 
(1)  Not exceed three feet in height and six square feet in area; 
(2)  Contain only directional text; 
(3)  Use no advertising verbiage except logo and name; 
(4)  Be limited to six signs per parcel or development; and 
(5)  Not be counted toward total allowable signage. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-51. - Directory signs. 
    All directory signs and properties displaying directory signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only office buildings and shopping centers are allowed to display a directory sign. 
(2)  Where a single parcel of land contains multiple office buildings, shopping centers, or combinations thereof, each may have a directory sign provided there is a minimum of 500 linear feet of roadway frontage between each sign. 
(3)  Shopping centers and office buildings containing less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area may have a directory sign containing a total of 200 square feet. 
Shopping centers and office buildings containing 30,000-50,000 square feet of gross floor area may have a directory sign containing a total of 300 square feet. 
Shopping centers and office buildings containing 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area may have a directory sign containing a total of 400 square feet. 
The distribution of space on any such sign will be as follows: 
a.  A maximum of 50 percent of such sign may contain the name of the shopping center or the office building. The remaining sign area shall be divided equally between the units of the center or the building. 
b.  In the event of subsequent division or combination of units within a shopping center or other building, each unit shall be allowed a maximum sign area proportional to that unit's percentage of the gross square footage of the shopping center or other building. 
(4)  A directory sign not meeting the provisions for wall signs may be erected on one or more posts, provided such sign: 
a.  Has a maximum height of 25 feet above the ground level below the sign; 
b.  Has a minimum height of ten feet above the mean ground level below the sign; 
c.  Is not within ten feet of any property line; 
d.  Is constructed in a front yard as defined in the zoning ordinance; 
e.  Is built of noncombustible materials; 
f.  Is illuminated only internally. 
(5)  No shopping center or office building shall have any ground or post sign other than a directory sign. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-52. - Fluttering signs. 
(a)  Nongovernment flags no greater than five by eight feet. 
(b)  Pennants, streamers or other flexible material which moves with the wind or by some artificial means. 
(c)  Shall be located at least ten feet from property lines. 
(d)  Shall not exceed thirty five feet in height from ground to top of pole. 
(e)  No fluttering sign shall be erected within 25 feet of street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-53. - Ground signs. 
    Ground signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  They shall be located no closer than six feet to adjacent right-of-way lines or structures; 
(2)  They shall not obstruct vision at any intersection or vehicular access point; 
(3)  They may not exceed six feet in height above the mean ground level under the sign; 
(4)  The height of any planter, pedestal or support structure shall be included in the calculation of sign height; 
(5)  No associated support structure shall exceed a height of six feet; 
(6)  No ground sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area except as provided in this chapter; 
(7)  Not more than one ground sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, except that one sign for each 300 feet of frontage may be erected provided that such signs are located 300 feet apart on such lot or tract of land. No ground sign when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets shall be erected within 25 feet of the intersection of the streets; 
(8)  They shall not be erected on any parcel or premises which has an existing ground or directory sign except as provided herein; and 
(9)  On corner lots a ground sign will be allowed on each street side of such building. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-54. - Hanging signs. 
    All hanging signs shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted under permanent structures such as canopies and covered walkways; 
(2)  Be firmly attached to their mounting and may not move in the wind; 
(3)  Provide a minimum of seven feet of clearance to ground level; and 
(4)  Not exceed six inches high by 18 inches wide in area. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-55. - Informational post signs. 
    Post signs indicating the direction to any noncommercial institution or place may be erected and maintained on the parkway or side of a public street, alley or place under the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign serves a public purpose and a public necessity for such directional sign exists; 
(2)  The noncommercial institution or place is within the City of Fulton; and 
(3)  Such sign shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size, and shall be installed under the supervision of the director or designee in a manner and at a height so as not to interfere with the ordinary and lawful use of the street. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-56. - Institutional and governmental signs. 
(a)  Institutional and governmental signs shall: 
(1)  Be either ground or wall signs; 
(2)  Not be over 32 square feet in area or exceed ten feet in height above the mean grade at its base in any residential zone district; 
(3)  Be located only on the property at a governmental agency or not-for-profit institutional property; 
(4)  Not be nearer than ten feet to any property line, and 
(5)  Be subject to the general restrictions of ground or wall signs except as provided herein. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed so as to prohibit a governmental agency or institution from having signs otherwise allowed in any commercial district. 
(c)  The director of administration shall approve all banners erected across or along the public right-of-way for noncommercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-57. - Post signs. 
(a)  Post signs shall not be over 85 square feet in area per face and 170 square feet total. Except that an additional one-half square foot of sign area may be allowed for every lineal foot of street frontage over 175 feet up to a total of not more than 250 square feet per side or 500 square feet total. 
(b)  Shall be located at least ten feet from property line. 
(c)  Shall not exceed 35 feet from ground to top of sign. Except signs with frontage along By-Pass U.S. Highway 54 may be 50 feet in height. 
(d)  Not more than one post sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, except that one sign for each 300 feet of frontage may be erected provided that such signs are located 300 feet apart on such lot or tract of land. No post sign when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets shall be erected within 25 feet of the intersection of the streets. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-58. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  Must be 15 feet above the pavement. 
(b)  Cannot be over four feet tall or 42 inches wide in area. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-59. - Roof signs. 
    Not withstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, roof signs are allowed only when the unique architectural design of the structure does not provide a location for a wall sign. When allowed, roof signs shall: 
(1)  Be limited in size to a sign area not greater that ten percent of the area of the front wall of the building or portion of the building occupied, or 100 square feet, whichever is less; 
(2)  Be allowed only to advertise the business conducted in the building upon which the sign is mounted; 
(3)  Not extend beyond the exterior walls of the building upon which the sign is mounted; and 
(4)  Be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-60. - Seasonal signs and display. 
    Property owners and tenants shall be permitted to put up and display decorations and displays celebrating or denoting religious holidays or events, the seasons of the year, state and national holidays and similar occasions, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No such display shall be in place for a period exceeding 75 days; 
(2)  No such display may convey a commercial advertising message or bear the name of a business or product; and 
(3)  Should any such display fail to meet the criteria outlined herein, it shall be deemed to be in violation of section 92-4. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-61. - Signs for sale or lease of real estate and commercial properties. 
(a)  Signs which advertise the sale or lease of real estate of less than one acre and which are located upon the property or premises to which such signs refer shall not exceed six square feet in area, shall not be erected with ten feet of any line of the property on which it is erected and shall not exceed two in number for any lot or tract of ground advertised; but shall be otherwise exempt from the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Signs which advertise the sale, lease or coming development of real estate of one acre or more shall be located upon the property or premises to which such signs refer, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall be limited to one in number for any tract or parcel. 
(c)  One sign announcing the development of property for residential purposes at another location within the city may be permitted and maintained, provided however, that no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet total display area nor be displayed or maintained longer than is allowed by this chapter, and provided that no more than one such sign is erected, displayed or maintained at any one time for any individual development. 
(d)  Any signs allowed under this section shall not be included in any total signage allocation for said parcel or development and shall be removed within ten days of the sale or lease of the property being advertised. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-62. - Subdivision signs. 
    Subdivision signs shall: 
(1)  Not be located within any dedicated right-of-way; 
(2)  Conform to the general provisions of ground signs except as provided herein; 
(3)  Be limited in location to subdivision entrances; and 
(4)  Have a maximum sign area of 100 square feet of total sign area although this may be split between each side of an entrance road. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-63. - Temporary signs. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, temporary signs advertising or announcing a special event or sale of merchandise may be permitted and maintained subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Temporary signs shall be either ground signs or wall signs and shall be governed by the appropriate general regulations except as contained herein; 
(2)  Temporary signs shall: 
a.  Not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. 
b.  Have no more than two sides. 
c.  Not be displayed for longer than 15 consecutive days. 
d.  Be limited to one sign for any particular business at any time. 
e.  Only be displayed on the building or premises of the business advertised. 
f.  Be displayed no more than four times in any 12-month period. 
g.  Not be displayed for two consecutive 15-day periods. 
h.  Obtain and pay for a temporary permit for each occasion of display. 
Exemption: Temporary signs for political purposes, real estate and rummage sales as defined in chapter 90 shall be exempt from fees. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-64. - Wall signs. 
    Wall signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Except as provided herein, no wall sign or signs shall be allowed to exceed 100 square feet for any single building, store or occupied unit. 
(2)  Any commercial building or occupied unit shall be permitted a wall sign having an area equal to 20 percent of the area of the front wall of the building or portion of the building occupied. 
(3)  A sign not to exceed 300 square feet may be placed on a building the front wall of which is not less than 300 feet to the right-of-way line of a public street or to the limits of any other street or roadway. 
(4)  Any building occupied by a single tenant and having a front wall area of over 2,000 square feet adjoining a public street may have a wall sign with a sign area not in excess of ten percent of the area of the front wall of such building, provided however, that the area of a wall sign shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
(5)  A building on a corner lot may have signs on each street side of such building, and the area of each wall adjoining a public street shall be computed separately to determine the size of the sign which may be erected on each wall. 
(6)  All wall signs shall be made of noncombustible materials. Moldings and cappings may be made of wood. 
(7)  All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to a building. 
(8)  No wall sign shall project beyond or above the face of the surface to which it is attached. 
(9)  No wall sign shall be erected so as to cover the doors or windows of any building, or otherwise prevent free ingress and egress to or from any window, door or fire escape of any building. 
(10)  No wall sign shall extend more than 12 inches from the surface to which it is attached. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 92-65. - Maximum total sign area. 
    The maximum total sign area that may be exhibited or maintained by, for or on behalf of any one person or business establishment occupying any tract of land or premises shall be 200 square feet; except as set out in sections 92-57 and 92-64. 
(Ord. No. 1128-06, 2-14-06) 
Chapter 93 - SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The election of Nov. 2, 2010, enacted the provisions of Ord. No. 1288-10 which became effective December 1, 2010. 

Sec. 93-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Fulton Clean Indoor Air Act of 2010. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-2. - Findings and intent. 
    The Fulton City Council does hereby find that: 
2006 United States Surgeon General's Report 
 Secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and adults who do not smoke. 
 Exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has immediate adverse effects on the cardiovascular system and causes coronary heart disease and lung cancer.  There is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke. 
 Establishing smoke-free workplaces is the only effective way to ensure that secondhand smoke exposure does not occur in the workplace, because ventilation and other air cleaning technologies cannot completely control for exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke. 
2009 Institute of Medicine Report 
 Exposure to secondhand smoke increases the risk of coronary heart disease by 25 to 30 percent. 
 It was shown that there was a decrease in the rate of heart attacks after a smoking policy was implemented. 
 It was concluded that secondhand smoke exposure increases the risk of coronary heart disease and heart attacks and that smoking policies reduce heart attacks. 
CARDIO2000 case-control study 
 A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25-50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. 
California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA) 
 Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. 
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
 The CDC has warned that all patients at increased risk of coronary heart disease or with known coronary artery disease should avoid all indoor environments that permit smoking. 
The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE) position document 
 ASHRAE has determined that there is currently no air filtration or other ventilation technology that can completely eliminate all the carcinogenic components in secondhand smoke and the health risks caused by secondhand smoke exposure, and recommends that indoor environments be smokefree in their entirety. 
The Society of Actuaries 
 The Society of Actuaries has determined that secondhand smoke costs the U.S. economy roughly 10 billion dollars a year, 5 billion dollars in estimated medical costs associated with secondhand smoke exposure and 4.6 billion dollars in lost productivity. 
    Accordingly the City of Fulton finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to protect public and employee health by prohibiting smoking in places of employment. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be constructed as defined in this section: 
    Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
    Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods and services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for an entity. 
    Employer means a person, business, association, municipal corporation, or trust, with one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is bounded on all sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. 
    Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers the sale of food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared in the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-4. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed places of employment within the City of Fulton, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(a)  Areas available to the general public in businesses patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail establishments. 
(b)  Bars. 
(c)  Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(d)  Convention facilities. 
(e)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(f)  Libraries, museums. 
(g)  Polling places. 
(h)  Restaurants. 
(i)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, stairways, break rooms, and other common-use areas. 
(j)  Retail stores. 
(k)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(l)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage, dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-5. - Notification to employees of prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
    This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this chapter and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-6. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places within a distance of 15 feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-7. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 93-8(a) of this chapter is posted. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-8. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays intended for use on premises shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-9. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding section 93-10 of this chapter, violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-10. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 93-9(a), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year of the previous violation. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city administrator by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-11. - Enforcement. 
    An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this chapter shall direct a person who is smoking to extinguish the product being smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the city administrator as he/she sees fit in accordance with the violation penalties describes in the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-12. - Other applicable laws. 
    This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-13. - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 93-14. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be effective 30 days from and after the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1288-10, 11-2-10) 
Chapter 94 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 82; secondhand goods, ch. 90; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; sewers and sewage disposal, § 114-171 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Battery or lead-acid battery means a battery designed to contain lead and sulfuric acid with a nominal voltage of at least six volts and of the type intended to use in motor, recreational, agricultural, construction, lawn and watercraft vehicles, etc. 
    Bulky rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units; commercial, industrial, institutional, professional offices; or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors with the equipment available therefor. 
    Collection means removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the transportation vehicles. 
    Compost site means an area used for the accumulation and reduction of yard waste into a decomposed state. 
    Composting means a controlled biological reduction of organic wastes to humus. 
    Curbside means a location adjacent to and not more than five feet from any street. 
    Demolition and construction waste means waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial structures. 
    Disposable solid waste container means disposable plastic or paper sacks with a capacity of not more than 35 gallons specifically designed for storage of solid waste. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food. 
    Hazardous wastes include but are not limited to pathological wastes, explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive materials. 
    Landfill means a refuse depository for the processing or final disposal of solid waste, which depository is licensed, permitted or approved by governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction. 
    Litter means solid wastes or unwanted material deposited in an improper place or manner. 
    Major appliance means clothes washers and dryers, water heaters, trash compactors, dishwashers, microwave ovens, conventional ovens, ranges, stoves, wood stoves, air conditioners, refrigerators and freezers. 
    Manager means the manager of the solid waste management program and department of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Multiple-housing facility means a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit under one roof with a master water meter. 
    Nuisance means any act done or committed or suffered to be done or committed by any person or any substance or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place which is injurious or dangerous to the public health. 
    Occupant means any person who, along or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision or organization of any kind or the legal representative, agent or assign. 
    Processing means incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste quantity is reduced. 
    Recyclable item or recyclables means newsprint, cardboard, steel, aluminum cans, glass, plastic and any other item designated by the solid waste manager. 
    Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including but not limited to garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes and special wastes, but not including hazardous waste. 
Commercial solid waste means solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional, professional office or agricultural establishment, except two or more commercial establishments in a single building requiring, in the opinion of the manager, only one solid waste pick up per week shall be considered a single commercial establishment. 
Residential building solid waste means solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units, excluding individual sleeping rooms in motels, hotels, dormitories, boardinghouses, condominiums and like facilities. 
    Solid waste container means a receptacle used by any person to store solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections. 
    Solid waste disposal means the process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted material; in particular, the final disposition of solid waste by man. 
    Solid waste disposal area means any area used for the disposal of solid waste from more than one residential premises or one or more commercial, industrial, manufacturing, recreational or governmental operations. 
    Solid waste management means the entire solid waste system of storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal. 
    Storage means keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection. 
    Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle or trailer as defined in RSMo ch. 301. 
    Transportation means the transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal area. 
    Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass, clippings, yard and garden vegetation to include shrubs, vegetable and flower garden waste and brush and trees produced as the result of lawn and garden care and maintenance. Christmas trees are included in this definition. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Code 1980, § 12-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 94-2-94-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; parks and recreation board, § 82-51 et seq. 

Sec. 94-26. - Established. 
    There is established a solid waste department, the purpose of which is to provide for the solid waste management of the city. The department shall be organized and maintained as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 12-2) 
Sec. 94-27. - Appointment of manager. 
    The director of administration with the consent of the mayor shall appoint a manager for the solid waste department. 
(Code 1980, § 12-3) 
Sec. 94-28. - Responsibilities of manager. 
(a)  The solid waste manager shall be responsible for all matters relating to the operation of the city landfill, trash pickup and solid waste management. 
(b)  The manager shall have supervisory responsibility for all activities and personnel of the solid waste department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the manager to make all necessary inspections and investigations of any and all premises to see that this chapter is complied with, and it shall further be the duty of the manager to administer and enforce all sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, §§ 12-4, 32-15) 
Sec. 94-29. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the personnel of the solid waste department, established pursuant to section 94-26, shall be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 12-5) 
Secs. 94-30-94-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses against property, § 78-51 et seq. 

Sec. 94-51. - Throwing upon streets, sidewalks or public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumpsters. 
(Code 1980, § 12-15) 
Sec. 94-52. - Placing in receptacles to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 12-16) 
Sec. 94-53. - Sweeping into gutters, streets or public places. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(Code 1980, § 12-17) 
Sec. 94-54. - Cleanliness of sidewalks generally. 
    Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1980, § 12-18) 
Sec. 94-55. - Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1980, § 12-19) 
Sec. 94-56. - Throwing from vehicle. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit any litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 12-20) 
Sec. 94-57. - Throwing in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 12-21) 
Sec. 94-58. - Throwing in fountains, lakes or other water bodies. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 12-22) 
Sec. 94-59. - Dropping from aircraft. 
    No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter. 
(Code 1980, § 12-23) 
Sec. 94-60. - Depositing on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not; provided, however, the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1980, § 12-24) 
Sec. 94-61. - Depositing on vacant private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 1980, § 12-25) 
Sec. 94-62. - Blowing from loaded trucks. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1980, § 12-26) 
Sec. 94-63. - Maintenance of private premises. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1980, § 12-27) 
Secs. 94-64-94-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-86. - Authority for rules and regulations. 
(a)  Manager's authority. The manager shall make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules and regulations under this chapter, governing but not limited to: 
(1)  Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid waste containers. 
(2)  Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type, composition, equipment, size and shape thereof. 
(3)  Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any. 
(4)  Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste containers and the contents thereof and weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste containers. 
(5)  Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers. 
(6)  Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers. 
(7)  Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste. 
(8)  Collection points of solid waste containers. 
(9)  Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste. 
(10)  Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof. 
(11)  Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof. 
(12)  Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing and disposal facilities. 
(13)  Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludges, ashes, agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils, greases, batteries, etc. 
(14)  Issuance of permits for hauling solid waste by other than city vehicles. 
(b)  Chief financial officer and other officials' authority. The chief financial officer or such other city official who is responsible for preparing utility and other service charge billings for the city is authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection and disposal service charges, as provided in division 3 of this article. 
(c)  Copy. A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated under this section shall be approved by the director of administration and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 12-44) 
Sec. 94-87. - Containers required. 
    The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial or business, industrial, professional office or agricultural establishment producing solid waste shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid wastes, except bulky rubbish and demolition and construction waste, to serve each such dwelling unit and establishment and shall maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair. 
(Code 1980, § 12-36) 
Sec. 94-88. - Placement in containers required; maintenance of containers and surrounding area. 
    The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers, except as otherwise provided in this article, and shall maintain such solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 12-37) 
Sec. 94-89. - Container specifications. 
(a)  Residential waste. Residential solid waste shall be stored in containers which are leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a flytight lid and which shall be properly covered at all times, except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. The containers shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type originally manufactured for residential solid waste, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. Galvanized metal containers or rubber, fiberglass or plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposable solid waste containers with suitable frames or containers as approved by the director may be also used for storage of residential solid waste. 
(b)  Commercial waste. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers as approved by the manager. The containers shall be waterproof, leakproof and shall be covered at all times, except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof, and shall meet all requirements as set forth by section 94-86. 
(Code 1980, § 12-38) 
Sec. 94-90. - Tree limbs. 
    Tree limbs less than four inches in diameter and brush shall be securely tied in bundles not larger than 48 inches long and 18 inches in diameter when not placed in storage containers. The weight of any individual bundle shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(Code 1980, § 12-39) 
Sec. 94-91. - Yard wastes, recyclables. 
    Yard wastes and recyclables shall be stored in transparent bags or so contained as to have their contents visible and prevent the dispersal of wastes placed therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or upon adjacent public rights-of-way. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(Code 1980, § 12-40) 
Sec. 94-92. - Removal of unapproved containers. 
    Solid waste containers which are not approved will be collected, together with their contents, and disposed of. 
(Code 1980, § 12-41) 
Sec. 94-93. - Transportation. 
(a)  All solid waste transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste, or, as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed, with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers. 
(b)  Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities or transportation and disposal of demolition and construction or inert industrial wastes; however, all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 12-42) 
Sec. 94-94. - Disposal. 
(a)  Solid wastes shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area approved by the city, complying with all requirements of the state department of natural resources and RSMo 260.200-260.276. 
(b)  The manager may classify certain wastes as hazardous wastes which will require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner acceptable to the manager and which will meet all local, state and federal regulations. 
(c)  The dumping of solid waste at any place within the city limits, except at the designated city disposal ground or at such other places as may be directed by the manager, is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 12-43) 
Sec. 94-95. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own, without the written consent of the owner of such container, or with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge provided in division 3 of this article for solid waste collection and disposal. 
(2)  Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether or not such equipment and collectors are those of the city. 
(3)  Burn solid waste, unless an approved incinerator is provided or unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air quality control agency. 
(4)  Dispose of any refuse by depositing the refuse in any public alley, street, roadway, vacant lot or property of any kind or character within the city or belonging to the city or in any stream or body of water within the city or by burning garbage. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the disposition of refuse by means of burning the refuse in an incinerator enclosed within a building and complying with applicable state law. Information obtained from waste disposed or deposited in violation of this subsection shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the person so identified committed the violation. 
(5)  Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the city or operate under an expired permit or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked. This permit is contingent upon the terms of this subsection and the specified type of solid waste and may be issued by the manager after the applicant obtains a city license. 
(6)  Scavenge or scatter any solid waste, including recyclables deposited by residents for pickup by solid waste collectors. 
(b)  The city shall not collect for disposal at its sanitary landfill nor shall it accept for disposal at its sanitary landfill any items prohibited by its license or by governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
(2)  Infectious waste. 
(3)  Biomedical waste. 
(4)  Lead-acid batteries. 
(5)  Tires of any kind. 
(6)  Major appliances. 
(7)  Waste oil or oil of any kind, including oil filters or oily towels. 
(8)  Bulk liquids. 
(9)  Semisolids. 
(10)  Sludge. 
(11)  Highly flammable or volatile substances. 
(12)  Unexpended pesticide containers. 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(14)  Raw animal manure. 
(15)  Septic tank pumpings. 
(16)  Industrial process sludge. 
(17)  Radioactive waste. 
(18)  Explosives. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from establishing special pickup points or days to assist the residents of the city in disposing of the items mentioned in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 12-46; Ord. No. 602-92, § 1, 4-28-92) 
Secs. 94-96-94-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 94-106. - Use of city vehicles; permit for use of other than city vehicles. 
(a)  All solid waste within the city shall be collected and disposed of by city vehicles only in accordance with and subject to this chapter. 
(b)  The manager may issue permits for the collection of solid wastes by other than city vehicles should the health and environment of the city so demand. All permits shall be issued only upon compliance with the rules and regulations established under section 94-86. 
(Code 1980, § 12-54) 
Sec. 94-107. - Hazardous or harmful substances; bulky rubbish. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall require the city to accept, collect or dispose of any material, the collection or disposal of which is prohibited or regulated by the state or federal government as a hazardous substance, nor to require the city to collect or dispose of any material or object which, in the sole discretion of the manager, poses any undue threat of harm to the citizens or employees of the city or to any public property or improvement. 
(b)  All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided by the city shall be collected, except bulky rubbish; provided, however, that bulky rubbish will be collected if tied securely in bundles not exceeding reasonable limitations of weight and bulk to be fixed by regulations to be made and promulgated by the manager. 
(c)  Any waste prohibited from landfills by the state or the federal government shall not be collected by the city. 
(d)  Any bulky waste shall not be collected by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 12-55) 
Sec. 94-108. - On-premises collection. 
(a)  Persons desiring on-premises collection may make application to the manager for such collection on forms approved by the manager. Such applications may be made in the following cases: 
(1)  For those persons who are permanently or temporarily physically unable to place their residential solid waste at the curb due to illness, accident, age or other physical incapacity. In such case and where the physical incapacity is temporary, the manager shall so determine in writing, and on-premises collection shall continue only for the time permitted by the manager. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a person from making subsequent applications for temporary on-premises collection. For those persons whom the manager determines to be permanently incapacitated, on-premises collection shall continue until terminated by the manager. 
(2)  Any person desiring on-premises collection, whether physically incapacitated or not, may apply to the manager for such collection on forms approved by the manager. The manager shall have discretion to approve or disapprove such application. 
(b)  Any application made under subsection (a) of this section and approved by the manager shall be personal in nature and nontransferable and shall terminate upon the conditions established by the manager in approving the application. 
(Code 1980, § 12-56) 
Sec. 94-109. - Bulky rubbish collection procedures. 
    Bulky rubbish shall be collected by request to the manager. The manager shall establish the procedure for collecting bulky rubbish. 
(Code 1980, § 12-58) 
Sec. 94-110. - Collectors' right of entry. 
    Solid waste collectors are authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter. Solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste. Commercial solid waste may be removed from within commercial establishments upon written request of the owner and approval by the manager. 
(Code 1980, § 12-59) 
Sec. 94-111. - Frequencies. 
    The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of solid waste within the city: 
(1)  Residential. All residential solid waste, except yard waste, recyclables and bulky trash, shall be collected weekly. Should a city-designated holiday fall on the day of solid waste pickup, the solid waste manager shall give ten days' prior public notice as to the designated collection day. 
(2)  Commercial. All commercial solid waste shall be collected at least once a week and shall be collected at more frequent intervals as may be fixed by the manager or requested by the commercial establishment upon a determination that more frequent intervals are necessary for the preservation of the health and safety of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 12-60) 
Sec. 94-112. - Storage and placement of waste and waste containers. 
(a)  Residential. Residential solid waste, yard waste and recyclable containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. All containers for collection, tree limbs, yard wastes and recyclables shall be placed as near as practicable to the curb or edge of the nearest public or private street or alley abutting the property upon which the residence is located, except for those persons arranging with the manager for on-premises collection as permitted by section 94-108. No container shall be placed adjacent to any alley that is not accessible by a tandem truck driving through from street to street. Containers shall not be placed for collection more than 24 hours before the regular scheduled collection day. 
(b)  Commercial. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have written permission from the city to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well-drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. 
(Code 1980, § 12-61) 
Secs. 94-113-94-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, adopted March 26, 2019, repealed the former division 3, §§ 94-126-94-133, and enacted a new division 3 as set out herein. The former division 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1328-12, adopted September 11, 2012. 

Sec. 94-126. - Imposed. 
    There is imposed, as provided in this division, for the collection and disposal of solid waste and the improvement of the general public health and environment, a service charge payable monthly in advance for each dwelling unit and each commercial establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-127. - Disposition of receipts. 
    All funds collected under this division shall be deposited to the account of the solid waste fund. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-128. - Amounts. 
(a)  Residential cart. Charges for once a week curbside residential solid waste collection shall be $17.00 a month per cart. Includes waste, recycling and yard waste. 
(b)  Residential recycling cart. Residents of the city who have curbside solid waste collection may notify the city and receive a cart for recycling. The city will place a cart at the resident's house and tip it once a week for $1.00 per month; the charge is independent of the size of the recycling cart. 
(c)  Commercial cart. Charges for once a week curbside commercial solid waste collection shall be $23.00 a month per cart. Includes waste. 
(d)  Dumpsters. Charges for emptying of dumpsters shall be as follows: 
Premium fee. Businesses with front loader accessibility who prefer to be collected by a rear loader truck will be charged an additional premium fee of $1.00 per tip. This fee is calculated into the "premium fees" established below. 
Size 2.0 Yard 
$20.00/tip for card system customers 
Size Tips per Week Monthly Charge (Front Load) Monthly Charge (Premium Fee) 2-Yard 1 $55.00 $59.50 2 $99.00 $108.00 3 $148.50 $162.00 4 $198.00 $216.00 5 $247.50 $270.00 6 $297.00 $324.00  
Size 4.0 Yard 
$30.00/tip for card system customers 
Size Tips per Week Monthly Charge (Front Load) Monthly Charge (Premium Fee) 4-Yard 1 $90.00 $94.50 2 $153.00 $162.00 3 $229.50 $243.00 4 $306.00 $324.00 5 $382.50 $405.00 6 $459.00 $486.00  
Size 6.0 Yard 
$40.00/tip for card system customers 
Size Tips per Week Monthly Charge (Front Load) Monthly Charge (Premium Fee) 6-Yard 1 $120.00 $124.50 2 $207.00 $216.00 3 $310.50 $324.00 4 $414.00 $432.00 5 $517.50 $540.00 6 $621.00 $648.00  
Size 8.0 Yard 
No card system 
Size Tips per Week Monthly Charge (Front Load) Monthly Charge (Premium Fee) 8-Yard 1 $145.00 $149.50 2 $261.00 $270.00 3 $391.50 $405.00 4 $522.00 $540.00 5 $652.50 $675.00 6 $783.00 $810.00  
(e)  Forty-yard roll off compactor. Rental fee will vary according to age of the compactor unit. Tonnage rates are the same as open-ton containers. Tipping fees: Flat fee of $300.00 (up to three tons) and an additional $52.00/ton (in excess of three tons) 
(f)  Demolition and temporary dumpsters. All demo dumpsters are subject to an additional fee of $5.00/day after the fifth day. Tipping charges and rental fees will be added to the upcoming utility bill. 
Size Price/Tip 2-Yard $85.00 4-Yard $150.00 6-Yard $200.00  
(g)  Roll offs. All roll off dumpsters are subject to an additional fee of $5.00/day after the fifth day. 
20-yard pull fee ..... $300.00 (up to three tons) plus 52.00/ton (in excess of three tons) 
30-yard pull fee ..... $300.00 (up to three tons) plus 52.00/ton (in excess of three tons) 
(h)  Other charges. The service charge for all other solid waste collection and disposal shall be set out on an individual basis by the manager and approved by the council, such charge to be computed on an hourly rate of $100.00 per hour, and in no instance shall be less than $40.00 per calendar month. 
    A $1.00 per tip charge will be applied if the customer has a lock placed on the container by the city. The city will furnish a locking system. 
    A $1.00 per tip charge will placed on containers if a city employee has to leave the truck to open a gate. 
    Extra tipping fees for permanently set dumpsters shall be as follows: 
2-Yard ..... $20.00 
4-Yard ..... $30.00 
6-Yard ..... $40.00 
8-Yard ..... $50.00 
(i)  Special pickups. The service charge for special pickups of solid waste shall be $17.00 for the first five minutes, and thereafter shall be computed on a per minute rate of $2.00/minute. 
(j)  Contaminated soil (gasoline and diesel tainted) or special waste. 
(1)  Flat fee of $300.00 (up to first three tons). 
(2)  Additional fee of $60.00/ton (in excess of three tons). 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-129. - Termination upon proof that unit or establishment is unoccupied; resumption. 
    The service and service charge shall be terminated only when the water service has been shut off at the meter by city personnel and the trash cart has been removed from the property by city personnel. 
    Services shall be commenced upon resumption of the aforementioned water service connection by city personnel and placement of the city trash cart by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-130. - Billing. 
(a)  The service charge provided for in this division is levied upon the occupant or tenant of each occupied dwelling unit, commercial business unit and industrial unit, unless the occupant is part of a rental complex for which solid waste service is being contracted for or provided by the owner of the complex, or in the absence of information as to the person who is either the owner or the tenant, billing therefor shall be made to the owner. Service charges shall be payable to the department empowered to collect service charges levied by the city. 
(b)  All service charges shall be rendered monthly as an additional billing on the utility bill and payable as such utility bill is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-131. - Persons outside city. 
    The manager shall have the authority to render solid waste collection and disposal service to any party who resides within a distance of one statute mile beyond the city boundaries and to assess service charges in an amount to be determined by the manager with approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 94-132. - Authority to enforce collection. 
    The system of services established by this division is designated as an integral part of the city's program of health and sanitation, to be operated as an adjunct to the city's system for providing potable water and the city's system for providing sewage disposal. The city may enforce collection of the charges imposed by this division by bringing proper legal action against the occupant of any dwelling unit or owner of any commercial establishment to recover any sums due for such service, plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court, plus the cost of such action. 
(Ord. No. 1488-19, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Chapter 98 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 30; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; historic preservation, ch. 62; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; signs, ch. 92; solid waste, ch. 94; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Hoisting or suspending merchandise. 
(a)  Any person who shall hoist on the outside of any building and over any street, sidewalk or thoroughfare of the city any merchandise or other article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. However, nothing in this subsection shall be so construed as to include persons engaged in the construction or repair of any building or the employees of such persons. 
(b)  No person shall suspend any merchandise or other article in front of any store or house more than two feet from the wall thereof and at any height less than 61/2 feet above the pavement. 
(Code 1980, § 24-1) 
Sec. 98-2. - Display or sale of merchandise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person through any officer or employee thereof to place or stand for sale or advertising purposes any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind, directly or indirectly, upon the surface of the improved portion of any street, alley or roadway within the city, within the area commonly known as "parking" which lies between the curb of any street and the edge of the sidewalk lying closest to the curb within the city and upon any public sidewalk within the city. However, one-fourth of the width of the sidewalk or two feet of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less, lying nearest to the abutting property may be used by the abutting property owner for the display of goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Code 1980, § 24-2) 
Sec. 98-3. - Permission for use during construction. 
    Any person may use the squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks in the construction of any new building or in the removal, repair or alteration of any building or for the purpose of piling thereon building materials and tools. However, such person shall first obtain the written permission of the planning and code enforcement officer or person acting for the planning and code enforcement officer to use such parts of the squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks for such purposes and for such time as he may designate. Such person shall maintain at such places so used at night an artificial light, when necessary, sufficient to warn travelers of the location of such places. The use of any portion of any square, street, alley or sidewalk for such purposes not granted and specified in written permission is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 24-3) 
Sec. 98-4. - Taking or depositing turf, loam or gravel. 
    No person shall take from or deposit on any street, alley, thoroughfare, sidewalk or other public place of the city or on property not owned or controlled by him, without having lawful authority, any turf, loam, gravel, rock or other material. 
(Code 1980, § 24-4) 
Sec. 98-5. - Flying kites, throwing snowballs, playing games. 
    Any person who shall, in and upon any street, alley or public place within the city, fly a kite, throw snowballs, play at any game of amusement or engage in any sport or exercise likely to injure the public or obstruct the passage of vehicles shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 24-5) 
Sec. 98-6. - Begging. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit alms or beg, as the term is ordinarily understood, upon a public street or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 24-6) 
Sec. 98-7. - Hedge fences-Cutting and trimming. 
    Every person owning a hedge fence or property enclosed by such fence along or near a public street of the city shall keep such hedge cut and trimmed to a maximum height of three feet and shall not permit such hedge to overhang sidewalks. Property owners shall also keep ornamental shrubbery, trees or any other obstruction that obscures the sight area of traffic on corners cut or trimmed to a maximum height of three feet and shall not permit the shrubbery or trees to overhang or obstruct sidewalks or obstruct the view of traffic at corners. 
(Code 1980, § 24-7) 
Sec. 98-8. - Same-Notice to cut untrimmed hedge. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning and code enforcement officer, as soon as notified that there is situated in the city upon or near a public street a hedge fence which has not been cut as required by section 98-7, to notify the owner or lessor of the property upon which the untrimmed hedges are located. The planning and code enforcement officer shall notify in writing the owner of the fence or property or the agent or person in possession of such land or property so fenced by the hedge to cut the hedge down to the required height within ten days of receipt of notification. 
(Code 1980, § 24-8) 
Sec. 98-9. - Same-Failure to cut after notice. 
    After ten days from the date of the service of the notice pursuant to section 98-8, if the owner of such fence or property or agent or person in possession of such land or property so fenced by such hedge shall fail or refuse to cut the hedge down to the required height, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city may trim such hedge or cause the hedge to be trimmed and charge the costs thereof to the owner; provided, however, that trimming by the city or its designee shall not preclude the imposition of a penalty. 
(Code 1980, § 24-9) 
Sec. 98-10. - Use of coasting devices prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  Persons upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall not be permitted on any sidewalk, street, parking lot or other public place in the central business district. The central business district shall be deemed to be that area set forth in appendix A, section 3(A)C-1. 
(b)  Any person who shall use such coasting device on any street, sidewalk, parking lot or other public way shall do so in a careful and prudent manner and not in a manner as to cause or be likely to cause danger or damage to any person or property. The user of any coasting device or like instrument shall give way to any pedestrian, motor vehicle or any other user of the sidewalk, street, parking lot or other public way and shall not interfere with the proper use of any sidewalk, street, parking lot or any other public way by any other person. 
(c)  Every rider of a coasting device shall ride only on the right side of the street. 
(d)  Coasting devices shall not be used on any street, sidewalk, parking lot or any other public way in the city between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 24-66) 
Sec. 98-11. - Numbering of houses, buildings and mobile homes. 
    Houses, buildings and mobile homes shall be numbered in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The city engineer shall establish the street number of all houses and buildings in the city. It is made the duty of the owner of each house or building fronting on a public street to keep and maintain the number so established on such a house or building, in numerals at least three inches high in a contrasting color to the mounting surface, at a place where it shall be clearly visible from such street. In addition it is made a duty of the owner of each house or building in the central business district which abuts an alley to keep and maintain the number so established on such house or building in numerals at least three inches high in contrasting color to the mounting surface, at a place where it shall be clearly visible from such alley. 
(2)  The owner or manager of a mobile home park shall establish a map of the layout of the mobile home park, showing the location of individual mobile home spaces by number, and shall keep or maintain the number so established on such individual mobile home space lot or on the mobile home at a place where it shall be clearly visible from the street, drive or roadway on which it fronts. 
(3)  Any person violating this subsection shall be prosecuted as provided by section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 31-5(b)) 
Secs. 98-12-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 98-31. - Conformance to specifications; costs. 
(a)  All construction and repair work on streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters in the city shall be performed in accordance with specifications on file in the office of the city engineer, as approved and amended by the council from time to time. 
(b)  The cost of construction and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters in the city may be assessed and collected as provided by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 24-21) 
Sec. 98-32. - Alteration of standards. 
    Under unusual circumstances where the adherence to the specifications referred to in section 98-31 may cause a severe hardship on the parties involved, the city council may, by a two-thirds vote, alter the minimum standards to fit the unusual situation. 
(Code 1980, § 24-22) 
Secs. 98-33-98-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 98-56. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in; encroachment on; lay, locate, erect, remove, maintain or repair any conduit, pole, pole line, wire, main, pipe, conductor, sewer, tramway or drain within, upon, over or across; or move any building or other structure upon, over or across any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement without first having filed an application with and obtained a permit therefor from the city clerk. No permit required under this section shall be issued without the approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 24-35) 
Sec. 98-57. - Review of and recommendation on permit by city engineer. 
    All applications for permits required under this article shall be referred to the city engineer for his review and recommendation. If he finds that the applicant has complied with all the requirements of this article and all other ordinances, laws and regulations of the city, he shall recommend to the city clerk that the permit be issued. 
(Code 1980, § 24-36) 
Sec. 98-58. - Permit fee. 
    The city clerk shall collect for the granting of each permit required under this article a fee as established by the city council from time to time, which fee shall be paid into the city treasury to the credit of the general revenue fund. 
(Code 1980, § 24-41) 
Sec. 98-59. - Restoration deposit. 
    No person shall receive any permit to excavate in or under any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement until such person shall have first deposited with the city a minimum deposit of $100.00, which deposit shall remain with the city until such street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement in or under which the excavation has been made shall have been restored to as good condition as it was prior to such excavation being made and until the city is notified by the city engineer that such restoration has been made. 
(Code 1980, § 24-37) 
Sec. 98-60. - Restoration by city. 
    If the person making an excavation under a permit issued under this article shall delay or refuse, after due notice from the city engineer, to restore such street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement in or under which such excavation has been made to as good condition as it was prior to such excavation, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to make such restoration. The expense of the restoration shall be deducted from the deposit referred to in section 98-61, and the balance thereof, if any, after all lawful charges against it have been made, shall be returned to the person making such deposit. 
(Code 1980, § 24-38) 
Sec. 98-61. - Standing deposit. 
    Any person having occasion to make frequent excavations in or under the streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, highways, sidewalks or public easements in the city may, in lieu of the deposit required in section 98-59, keep a standing minimum deposit with the city in the sum of $1,000.00 to cover the restoration of any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement where such excavation shall not exceed the width of the street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement in which such excavations are made, which deposit shall be subject to all the conditions of sections 98-59 and 98-60, except that such deposit shall at all times be maintained at $1,000.00. 
(Code 1980, § 24-39) 
Sec. 98-62. - Standing bond. 
    Any person having occasion to make frequent excavations may, and any person making excavations exceeding in length the width of the street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement in or under which such excavations are made shall, in lieu of the deposit required by sections 98-59 and 98-60, keep a standing bond, in the sum of $10,000.00 on file with the city clerk, to be approved by the mayor, conditioned to restore such streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, highways, sidewalks and public easements, as required in sections 98-59 through 98-61. 
(Code 1980, § 24-40) 
Sec. 98-63. - Obstruction of traffic. 
    Under this article, no public way shall be obstructed so as to inconvenience traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, without special permission of the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 24-42) 
Sec. 98-64. - Protection of public. 
    Every applicant for a permit under this article who shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or adjoining any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement shall cause the excavation to be barricaded. Such barricade shall be so placed as to prevent persons, animals or vehicles from falling into the excavation. Every applicant making or causing to be made any such excavation shall cause two red lights to be securely and conspicuously posted on or near such excavation, provided such excavation does not exceed ten feet in length. If the excavation is more than ten feet and less than 50 feet, three red lights, one at each end and one in the center, shall be so placed and one additional light shall be placed for each additional 25 feet or part thereof. Such lights shall be kept burning during the entire night. 
(Code 1980, § 24-43) 
Sec. 98-65. - Repair of damage to pavement. 
    The applicant for a permit required under this article shall be required to repair all pavements, edges of pavements and shoulders damaged as a result of a diversion of traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 24-44) 
Sec. 98-66. - Maintenance after completion. 
    Every applicant for a permit under this article will be required to maintain the trench and such pavements as are disturbed through the installation of fixtures for a period of six months from the date of completion, during which period such applicant shall make all necessary repairs within ten days after being notified by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 24-45) 
Sec. 98-67. - Unlawful work. 
    No applicant for a permit under this article shall do or cause to be done any work on or any use of public ways in violation of the law or conditions of his permit or shall fail to properly protect all existing fixtures and installation encountered. 
(Code 1980, § 24-46) 
Sec. 98-68. - Written acceptance of article. 
    Whenever the city engineer shall deem it necessary, written acceptance of any or all applicable conditions of this article may be required of applicants contemplating work under or upon any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, sidewalk, public easement or highway. 
(Code 1980, § 24-47) 
Secs. 98-69-98-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 98-91. - Council authority for construction or repair. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, regulate the building, construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks and may adopt plans and specifications for sidewalks and parkways, which parkways shall include all of the space between curbstone and the building or property line or any space in the center of a street which may be set aside as a parkway, and prescribe and require certain materials to be used and the manner and form of doing such work, including the kind of shade trees to be planted and the manner of their care and preservation. 
(Code 1980, § 24-59) 
Sec. 98-92. - Condemnation. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, condemn any sidewalk which it may deem to be in a dangerous or defective condition or out of repair or any sidewalk which is not located upon the established grade and line of sidewalks, on the street on which it is located, as provided by the city, or any sidewalk which does not conform to the specifications and requirements for sidewalks in the city, as provided by the city, and to provide for the removal of any sidewalk so condemned. 
(Code 1980, § 24-60) 
Sec. 98-93. - Maintenance by owner. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, provide that the owner of any lot or tract shall build and construct or rebuild or reconstruct or repair a sidewalk lying along and adjacent to his property and may require the owner to grade, fill or plant with vegetation that portion of the street lying between the property line and the street curbline, may require the owner to build approaches and may provide for the serving of notice to do such work by delivering a written order to the property owner or his representatives or by publication and may provide, by ordinance, that any person who shall, after having been notified, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such order, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 24-61) 
Sec. 98-94. - Grade. 
    The grades of all sidewalks constructed or reconstructed shall conform to the established grade of the street along which such sidewalk is made, unless otherwise ordered by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 24-62) 
Sec. 98-95. - Uniformity of surfaces. 
    The top surfaces of all sections of sidewalks made by adjoining lot owners must be joined on the same level or grade, without drops or rises, and any sections or portions of any sidewalk constructed so as to be higher or lower than the adjoining section on either side thereof shall be, by order or resolution of the council, reconstructed and made to conform to the established grade of the adjoining street. 
(Code 1980, § 24-63) 
Sec. 98-96. - Snow clearing and emergency winter event. 
    It shall be the duty of any lot owner or occupant of ground abutting on any sidewalk in the city to remove heavy accumulations of snow from such sidewalks as soon as possible after the falling of the snow. No snow or ice may be pushed onto a public street. 
    In the event of 12 inches or more of snow or any thickness of ice on roadways the mayor is authorized to declare an emergency winter event. Upon declaration of the emergency the city will enforce rules associated with the emergency snow route as set out in the snow policy adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1305-11, § 1, 10-25-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1305-11, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2011, repealed the former § 98-96, and enacted a new § 98-96 as set out herein. The former § 98-96 pertained to snow clearing and derived from the Code of 1980, § 24-64. 
Sec. 98-97. - Gates swinging over sidewalk. 
    No owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground abutting on any sidewalk shall permit or suffer any gate, when open, to swing over, across or above any sidewalk. 
(Code 1980, § 24-65) 
Sec. 98-98. - Roller skating-Skating in tandem or pairs. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons to skate upon any public sidewalk in the city in tandem or pairs. 
(Code 1980, § 24-67) 
Sec. 98-99. - Same-Passing pedestrians. 
(a)  Any person roller skating upon any sidewalk paralleling a public street in the city shall, when approaching and passing pedestrians upon such sidewalk, pass on that side of the sidewalk nearest the street which the sidewalk parallels. 
(b)  It shall further be the duty of such person so skating, when approaching a pedestrian upon such sidewalk, to slow down sufficiently to avoid colliding with or injuring such pedestrian. 
(Code 1980, § 24-68) 
Sec. 98-100. - Same-Skating at fast or reckless speed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person skating with roller skates upon any public sidewalk of the city to skate at a fast or reckless rate of speed. 
(Code 1980, § 24-69) 
Sec. 98-101. - Riding animals on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall ride an animal upon any sidewalk. 
Chapter 102 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 62; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; signs, ch. 92; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 114; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Planning generally, RSMo 89.300 et seq.; plats, RSMo 445.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor way, dedicated to public use, when it is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way or parks, etc., or a combination thereof. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
    Improvements means street pavements with curbs, sanitary and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, water mains and other appropriate items. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Plat, final, means a complete and exact subdivision plat, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define property rights and proposed streets and other improvements. 
    Plat, preliminary, means a complete and exact subdivision plat, prepared for review by the city engineer and city council. 
    Right-of-way means the land opened, reserved or dedicated for a street, walk, drainage or other public purposes. 
    Street means a strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, which may also be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, trees and sidewalks. 
    Street, arterial, means a street or road of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as the principal trafficway between separated areas or districts and which is the main means of access to the primary street system or expressways. 
    Street, collector, means a street which, in addition to serving abutting properties, intercepts minor streets, connects with community facilities and carries neighborhood traffic to the major arterial street system. 
    Street, minor, means a street used primarily to provide access to abutting properties only and carries no through traffic. 
    Subdivider means the registered owner or the authorized agent of the owner of a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that where no new streets or easement of access are involved, the following shall not be included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the original lot areas are not decreased. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more. 
(3)  The subdivision or resubdivision of land where public sewers are available and the resultant lots comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
(a)  Any plat made for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the city limits shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots; provided, however, that where no new streets or easements of access or extensions are involved, the following divisions of land shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the original lot areas are not decreased. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more. 
(3)  The subdivision or resubdivision of land where public sewers are available and the resultant lots comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 25-2) 
Sec. 102-3. - Public open spaces. 
    Where a proposed school, neighborhood park or recreation area or public access to water frontage, shown on the comprehensive plan, is located in whole or in part of the applicant's subdivision, the planning and zoning commission may require as a condition of final approval that such space within the subdivision be reserved and not developed for a period not to exceed one year from the date of such final approval so that within such period the appropriate public agency may acquire the land in the manner provided by law and before it is developed for some purpose not within the comprehensive plan. If it is not so acquired and no legal action is filed by the public agency within such period, the reservation shall be of no further effect and the lands then may be used for other purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 25-10.1) 
Sec. 102-4. - Variances. 
(a)  If any mandatory sections of this chapter are shown by the subdivider to be unreasonable and cause undue hardship as they apply to his proposed subdivision, the city council, upon the recommendation of the city engineer, may grant a variance to such subdivider from such mandatory sections so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  In granting variances and modifications, the council may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1980, § 25-16) 
Sec. 102-5. - Right of hearing on adverse findings or recommendations. 
    Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the city engineer or council may request and receive opportunity to appear, present additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the original finding, decision or recommendation. 
(Code 1980, § 25-17) 
Sec. 102-6. - Violations. 
(a)  If any person shall sell or offer for sale any lot within the city before the plat thereof shall be made out, acknowledged and recorded as outlined in this chapter, such person shall forfeit a sum not exceeding $300.00 for every lot which he shall sell or offer to sell. 
(b)  Any person who violates this chapter or neglects or refuses to comply with this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1980, § 25-18) 
Secs. 102-7-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 102-31. - Submission and approval of sketch plat. 
    Each subdivider of a subdivision shall submit for review by the planning and zoning commission subdivision sketch plats as further described in section 102-33. Such sketch plats will be considered as submitted for informal and confidential discussion between the subdivider and the planning and zoning commission. Submission of a subdivision sketch plat shall not constitute formal filing of a plat with the city. As far as may be practical on the basis of a sketch plat, the planning and zoning commission, with the advice of the city engineer, will informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the design standards in this chapter and will discuss possible modifications necessary to secure conformance. 
(Code 1980, § 25-3) 
Sec. 102-32. - Submission, approval of final plat; agreement on required improvements prior to approval. 
(a)  Application. Each subdivider shall submit to the city engineer three inked drawings of the proposed subdivision. A final plat shall have a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet. 
(b)  Required improvements or guarantee prior to final approval. Prior to approval of the final plat by the city engineer, the subdivider shall agree in writing, in a form provided by the city counselor, that he will install the minimum improvements required in section 102-81 and that he understands that no building permits will be issued by the city until the required improvements are available to each lot for which a building permit is requested or until satisfactory surety in the form of a bond, cash or security is furnished by the subdivider or his contractor, guaranteeing the installation of the improvements to any lot for which a building permit is requested. No such surety shall be accepted unless it is enforceable by or payable to the city in a sum at least equal to the cost of constructing the improvements as estimated by the city engineer and in the form with surety and conditions approved by the city counselor. Prior to final approval by the city engineer, the subdivider will furnish three complete drawings showing all easements for underground and overhead facilities to be furnished and for sanitary sewers, all pertinent elevations for each lot lateral. Also, notice will be given to the superintendent of the board of public works before any paving of streets begins so that proper conduits may be provided to properly serve each lot. 
(c)  Street construction. For street construction, the subdivider may contract with the city, guaranteeing the construction of streets according to this chapter, on the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  By written agreement the subdivider may stipulate that he will pay to the city clerk or any other responsible person or corporation acceptable to the city council as escrow agent for each lot in the subdivision sold a sum that will be considered sufficient by the city council to construct the type of street approved for construction in the subdivision. 
(2)  The amount to be paid will be determined by the city engineer upon the basis of the cost per front foot for the construction of a similar street by the city. 
(3)  The funds so deposited shall be held by the escrow agent until the street is built or is under construction. At this time the funds held by the escrow agent will be repaid to the subdivider. During the period the funds are held by the escrow agent, the funds may be invested at the subdivider's discretion. 
(4)  When 55 percent of the lots in any street block in the subdivision are sold or at the end of three years from the date of the initial sale of a lot in that street block, the subdivider shall proceed with the construction of the street in accordance with the specifications submitted and approved for the subdivision. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction of a higher type street than that approved. Final grade on all streets in the subdivision shall be determined before any construction begins. A minimum travel surface of 24 feet of crushed road rock or base rock will be provided before an occupancy permit will be granted. The subdivider shall provide a grade stake at the center point of each lot for the contractor which shall show the finished grade of the street. 
(5)  For the purpose of this chapter a lot shall be considered sold when the subdivider transfers title of any lot for any purpose whatsoever, except that a transfer of an entire subdivision to others shall not be considered a sale, but this chapter shall apply to the successor owner of the subdivision. 
(6)  The construction of the street shall be the sole responsibility of the subdivider. If the subdivider fails to construct the street as agreed, the city may proceed with its construction, using the funds deposited with the escrow agent for payment of the costs of construction. 
(7)  If the cost of construction by the city shall exceed the funds available, the amount still due shall attach to and become a lien upon all unsold lots in the street block under construction. 
(8)  The city council may, upon recommendation of the city engineer, change the amount of deposit required for each lot if the cost of constructing the type of street proposed should change materially during the period of escrow. 
(9)  Until the sum required to be deposited with the escrow agent is on deposit and all other sections of this chapter are fully complied with, no occupancy permit shall be issued by the building inspector. 
(10)  On all arterial street construction the city shall pay the costs of construction which are in excess of the cost of construction of a six-inch concrete street with a 30-foot running surface. 
(d)  Action. Within 45 days of filing of the complete information required for approval of the final plat, the city engineer shall approve the plat and indicate his approval by signing the plat in the space provided on the plat or disapprove the plat in writing to the subdivider stating his reason for disapproval. The city engineer, before acting on any final plat, may arrange for a public hearing thereon after giving such notice as the city council may deem necessary in each case. Upon approval, the city engineer shall submit the final plat to the city council for action. The council may alter any submitted final plat, may specify changes or modifications therein which it deems necessary and may make its approval subject to such alterations. The action of the council shall be by ordinance, which ordinance shall include approval of the final plat for recording. Upon approval by the city council, by ordinance duly passed and approved by the mayor, such approval shall be endorsed on three drawings of the plat under the hand of the city clerk and the seal of the city. 
(e)  Filing. Following the passage of the ordinance, one drawing of the final plat shall be filed by the city clerk within a reasonable time with the recorder of deeds, after the effective date of the ordinance approving the plat. One of these drawings shall be retained by the city clerk, and one shall be transmitted to the city engineer. The subdivider shall bear all expense in connection with the filing of the final plat, and the city clerk shall not be required to file the plat until the subdivider shall provide the expense of filing thereof. Three copies of the agreement in writing required under subsection (c) of this section shall be filed with the city clerk and one copy filed with the recorder of deeds at the time of filing the final plat. One copy of this agreement in writing shall be retained by the city clerk, and one copy of the agreement in writing shall be transmitted to the city engineer. The subdivider shall bear all expense in connection with the filing of the agreement in writing, and the city clerk shall not be required to file the agreement in writing until the subdivider shall provide the expense of filing thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 25-4) 
Sec. 102-33. - Contents of preliminary plat. 
    Data shown on the preliminary subdivision plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  The location of present property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, tree masses and other existing features within the area to be subdivided and similar information regarding existing conditions of land immediately adjacent thereto. 
(2)  The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, buildings and setback lines and easements. 
(3)  Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main and sewer or outlet are to be indicated in a general way upon the plat. 
(4)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and the name of the subdivider platting the tract. 
(5)  The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions and the names of recorded owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(6)  Contours with intervals sufficient to determine the character and topography of the land to be subdivided, but in no case shall the intervals be more than five feet. 
(7)  Northpoint, scale and date. 
(8)  Grades and profiles of streets and plans or written and signed statements regarding the grades of proposed streets and the width and type of pavement; location, size and type of sanitary sewer or other sewage disposal facilities; water mains and other utilities; facilities for stormwater drainage; and other proposed improvements such as sidewalks, planting and parks and any grading of individual lots. 
(Code 1980, § 25-5) 
Sec. 102-34. - Contents of final plat. 
    Data shown in the final subdivision plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate distances and bearings. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths and names. 
(4)  The accurate outline of any portion of the property intended to be dedicated or granted for public use. 
(5)  The line of departure of one street from another. 
(6)  The lines of all adjoining property and the lines of adjoining streets and alleys with their widths and names. 
(7)  All lot lines, together with an identification system for all lots and blocks. 
(8)  The location of all building lines and easements provided for public use, services or utilities. 
(9)  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements and any other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. 
(10)  The radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency and central angles for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners. 
(11)  The location of all survey monuments and benchmarks, together with their descriptions. 
(12)  The name of the subdivision, a small sketch showing its general location and the scale of the plat, points of the compass and name of owner or subdivider. 
(13)  The certificate of the surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all monuments shown. 
(14)  Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence: Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length as to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat. 
(15)  Acknowledgement of the owner to the plat and restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces, shown thereon and the granting of easements required. 
(16)  Certificates of approval for endorsement by the board of public works. 
(Code 1980, § 25-6) 
Secs. 102-35-102-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 102-56. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Generally. The proposed street pattern of a subdivision shall be properly related to the primary street plan and to such state highway plans as have been duly adopted. Except for courts and cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts or shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. 
(b)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited, except as a stub to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as a cul-de-sac. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall provide a turnaround at the end with a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet and an outside curb radius of 40 feet and shall be no longer than 500 feet, except that this length may be increased upon the recommendation of the city engineer where special conditions justify such action. 
(c)  Intersection at right angles. Under normal conditions, streets shall be so laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions justify variations. 
(d)  Number of streets intersecting at same point. No more than two streets shall cross at the same point. 
(e)  Marginal access streets. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or the right-of-way of a limited access freeway, expressway or major thoroughfare, provision shall be made for a marginal access street approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such rights-of-way or for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such street and the right-of-way. 
(f)  Railroad crossings. Where a subdivision abuts a railroad right-of-way, streets crossing the railroad shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located to facilitate grade separation. 
(g)  Alleys in commercial and industrial districts. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that this may be waived where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as offstreet loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Except where justified by special conditions, such as the continuation of an existing alley in the same block, alleys will not be approved in residential districts. 
(h)  Width of alleys. The width of an alley shall be 20 feet. 
(i)  Half streets. Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter, where it is found that it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided or where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so it may be improved in the public interest. 
(j)  Street grades. There shall be a minimum centerline grade of one-half percent. The city engineer may require a greater minimum grade to facilitate drainage according to paving type. Wherever possible grades should not exceed eight percent. 
(k)  Curb radii. Where two minor streets intersect at approximately right angles, the curb at each block corner shall be rounded with a radius of not less than the width of the parkway. At all other intersections or where minor streets intersect at an angle of less than eight degrees, the curb radii shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(l)  Street names. All streets shall be named to eliminate confusions or duplications in the city, and if a street is a continuation of a named street, the new street shall bear the name of the present street, or if the new street is in line with a present street, even if several blocks distant, it shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(m)  Street widths. The minimum width for each type of public street shall be as provided by the street specification ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-7) 
Sec. 102-57. - Blocks. 
(a)  Blocks in a subdivision shall have a maximum length of 900 feet and, as far as practicable, a minimum length of 500 feet. 
(b)  Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except where lots border on an expressway. 
(c)  Pedestrian crosswalks with a right-of-way width of not less than ten feet may be required in long blocks when deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers or other community facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 25-8) 
Sec. 102-58. - Lots. 
(a)  Minimum lot size in a subdivision shall be governed by the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code, except that where onsite sewage disposal is proposed, larger access may be required as determined by the health department on the basis of topographic and soil investigations. 
(b)  All lots shall front upon a publicly dedicated street or a street that has received the legal status as such. 
(Code 1980, § 25-9) 
Sec. 102-59. - Utility easements. 
    Utility easements shall be of sufficient width to have at least a ten-foot interval between water and sewer lines. Where practicable utility lines shall be placed in streets, alleys or easements. 
(Code 1980, § 25-10) 
Secs. 102-60-102-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 102-81. - Generally. 
(a)  Monuments. Sufficient monuments shall be placed at critical points within the subdivision to definitely define the limits and points needed to rerun the survey in the future. 
(b)  Streets. Streets shall be in compliance with standards and specifications adopted by the city council. All grading shall be done and all curbs, gutters and pavement pertaining to the development of any street or alley shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the city council. Streets must be graded to the cross section and profile approved by the city engineer and surfaced to the minimum width provided by the street specification ordinance. The standards and specifications adopted by the city council shall be considered minimum. Plans and specifications are to be as provided by ordinance adopted by the city council. The city council shall determine the type of street for each new street at the time the subdivision is accepted. 
(c)  Sanitary sewers. The subdivider shall construct a sanitary sewer system and provide lateral connections for each lot where a public sanitary sewer main is available at the plat boundary or within a reasonable distance thereto. Where sewer is not yet available but is planned for extension to the subdivision, the subdivider shall install sewer lines, including lateral connections, as may be necessary to provide adequate service to each lot when connection with the sewer system is made. The sewer lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision, and the laterals shall be suitably capped at the easement or street right-of-way line. When capped sewers are provided, onsite disposal facilities shall also be provided. A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given area any time after engineering and related studies have been completed and the construction of facilities to serve the area containing the subdivision has been programmed for completion within a reasonable time. If a public sanitary system is not available under the conditions stated in this subsection, the subdivision or area may be considered as one where it is necessary to construct a community disposal system or individual sanitary lagoon. Any such system shall be approved by the state health department with consideration being given to the lot size as covered in section 102-58. If, in the opinion of the state health department or the city engineer factors exist which would create a public health and sanitation problem if a certain area is platted, the city engineer will not approve the subdivision and platting of such area until such factors are corrected by an adequate sewer system or other method acceptable to the state department of health and city engineer. If sanitary sewers are constructed by anyone other than the city's forces, notice must be given to the city engineer and to the superintendent of the board of public works before any lines are covered so that proper inspection can be arranged before the city can accept such lines for operation. No taps to the city's sewer mains will be made, except by the city's authorized personnel. 
(d)  Storm sewers. Where a storm drainage system is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such storm drainage system and shall do all grading and provide all drainage structures that are necessary to properly carry the water to the storm drainage system. Where a storm drainage system is not accessible, the subdivider shall do all grading and provide all drainage installations and structures that are necessary to properly carry the water to locations which are acceptable to the city engineer. Surface water will not be permitted to cross the pavement at a low spot. Inlets with connection pipe will be required to carry the surface water from one side to the other. 
(e)  Sidewalks. The city encourages sidewalks on all streets. 
(1)  On local residential streets, sidewalks shall be constructed on one side of the street if the density is 2.5 to 4.0 dwelling units per gross acre and on both sides of the street if the density is over 4.0 dwelling units per gross acre, exclusive of streets. Sidewalks are not required on either side of a local residential street if the density is less than 2.5 dwelling units per acre, exclusive of streets. On cul-de-sac streets where sidewalks are required only on one side of the street, the sidewalks need not extend around the bulb of the cul-de-sac. 
(2)  On secondary thoroughfares (collectors) and commercial streets, sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street. 
(3)  On industrial streets no sidewalks are required. 
(4)  On primary thoroughfares (arterial), sidewalks are required on both sides of the street regardless of the type of development, except that where service road facilities on controlled or limited access pavements are involved, no sidewalks are required, unless the property is being developed residentially, in which case the standards of subsection (1) above shall apply. 
(5)  When a sidewalk is required on one side of a local street, the sidewalk should be placed on the same side as the sanitary sewer. 
(6)  Minimum sidewalk widths shall be four feet. Construction standards shall be in accordance with "Minimum Design Standards and Specifications for Construction of Streets." Sidewalks shall be placed one foot away from the property line. 
(7)  All driveways shall conform with the design standards of this chapter. All drives shall be paved from the property line to the street. 
(8)  Sidewalk and driveway improvements shall be made before a final occupancy permit is issued. 
(Code 1980, § 25-11; Ord. No. 725-96, § 1, 9-24-96) 
Sec. 102-82. - Water connections. 
    The subdivider shall connect with the water system of the board of public works in accordance with all state and municipal requirements to provide water service to every lot within the subdivision. 
(Code 1980, § 25-12) 
Sec. 102-83. - Standards for construction. 
    All improvements required under this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and plan requirements of this chapter, the standards and specifications of the city and, where applicable, the requirements and authorization of the appropriate state agency or utility company. 
(Code 1980, § 25-13) 
Sec. 102-84. - Inspection. 
    All of the improvements required in this article, with the exception of water and gas mains and electric systems, shall be subject to inspection and approval of the city engineer, who shall be notified by the subdivider at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. 
(Code 1980, § 25-14) 
Sec. 102-85. - Acceptance by city. 
(a)  The city shall not have any responsibility with respect to any subdivision street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the street or improvement by the public, unless the street or other improvement shall have been accepted by the city. 
(b)  The city shall, within 30 days after the public improvements have been offered for dedication to the city, accept the improvements, provided the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter and the specifications of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-15) 
Chapter 106 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utility service rates and deposits, § 114-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Limitation on local tax rates, Const. art. X, § 11(b); taxation by constitutional charter cities, RSMo 94.400. 

Sec. 106-1. - Purpose of property taxes. 
    For the support of the city government, the payment of the outstanding debt and for the advancement of the public interest and improvement of the city, taxes shall be levied on all property, real and personal, subject to taxation for state, county or city purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 26-1) 
Sec. 106-2. - Contract with county collector. 
(a)  The mayor and city clerk are authorized to enter into a contract with the county collector for the billing and collection of the city personal, real estate and merchants' taxes, as provided by RSMo 70.220 and 70.230. 
(b)  The consideration for doing the complete billing and collection of taxes for the city, as provided by RSMo 70.220 and 70.230, shall be at the rate of one percent of all current taxes collected and two percent of delinquent and back taxes collected as provided by RSMo 52.250 and 52.290. 
(Code 1980, § 26-2) 
Charter reference- Taxing powers generally, § 12.1. 
Sec. 106-3. - Council to make annual levy; maximum rate. 
    The city council shall fix the annual tax levy in accordance with RSMo 94.400, the rate of such levy not to exceed the amount prescribed by such statute. 
(Code 1980, § 26-3) 
Sec. 106-4. - Property liable for taxation. 
    Every person owning or holding property on January 1, including all such property purchased on that day, shall be liable for taxes thereon for the ensuing year. 
(Code 1980, § 26-5) 
Sec. 106-5. - When taxes become delinquent. 
    City taxes shall become delinquent on January 1 for the preceding year. 
(Code 1980, § 26-6) 
Sec. 106-6. - Back taxes to be lien in favor of city. 
    Real property shall in all cases be liable for taxes thereon to the city, and the lien created in favor of the city by virtue of state law for delinquent and back taxes due upon real estate shall be enforced as provided in RSMo 140.010 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 26-7) 
Chapter 108 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1222-08, § 1, adopted June 24, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 108, Art. I, §§ 108-1-108-4, Art. II, §§ 108-9, 108-10, Art. III, §§ 108-14-108-26, Art. IV, §§ 108-30-108-37, Art. V, § 108-42, Art. VI, § 108-48, Art. VII, § 108-53, Art. VIII, § 108-58 and enacted a new Ch. 108 as set out herein. The former Ch. 108 pertained to telecommunication towers and derived from Ord. No. 871-01, § 1, 1-11-01. 

Sec. 108-1. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
    The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Fulton's authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. The city finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the city and its inhabitants. The city also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the city and of significant benefit to the city and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the city's land use policies, the city is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The intent of this chapter is to minimize impact of wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Fulton. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-2. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting Ordinance for the City of Fulton. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-3. - Severability. 
(a)  If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this chapter and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  Any special use permit issued under this chapter shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-4. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
    Accessory facility or structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
    Applicant means any wireless service provider submitting an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Application means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Antenna means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. 
    Co-location means the use of an existing tower or structure to support antennae for the provision of wireless services. A replacement tower that is constructed on the same site as an existing tower will be considered a co-location as long as the new tower is no taller than the old tower and that the old tower is removed in a reasonable short timeframe after the new tower is constructed. 
    Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable". 
    Completed application means an application that contains all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application. 
    Council means the City Council of the City of Fulton. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
    Modification or modify means, the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or changeout of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a telecommunications tower or telecommunications site as a co-location is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding, removing or changing anything. 
    NIER means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
    Personal wireless facility. See definition for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Personal wireless services or PWS or Personal telecommunications service or "PCS" shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
    Repairs and maintenance means the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted. 
    Special use permit means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by the city. 
    Stealth or stealth technology means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
    State means the State of Missouri. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
    Telecommunication site. See definition for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Telecommunications structure means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Temporary means, temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this chapter, something intended to, or that does not exist for more than 90 days. 
    Tower means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities means and includes a "telecommunications site" and "personal wireless facility". It means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures, including, but not limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal Communications Services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-5. - Overall policy and desired goals for special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities protects the city's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter, the city hereby adopts an overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
(1)  Requiring a special use permit for any new, co-location or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility; 
(2)  Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent; 
(4)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers; 
(5)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances; 
(6)  That in granting a special use permit, the city has found that the facility shall be the most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-6. - Special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of, wireless telecommunications facilities as of the effective date of this chapter without having first obtained a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit shall be required for those non-commercial exceptions noted in section 108-7. 
(b)  All legally permitted wireless telecommunications facilities, constructed as permitted, existing on or before the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless telecommunications facility will require the complete facility and any new installation to comply with this chapter. 
(c)  Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility does not require an application for a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-7. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  The city's fire, police, department of transportation or other public service facilities owned and operated by the local government. 
(2)  Any facilities expressly exempt from the city's siting, building and permitting authority. 
(3)  Over-the-air reception devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations (TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless signals that are primarily used for reception. 
(4)  Facilities exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar noncommercial telecommunications. 
(5)  Facilities exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies (such as IEEE 802.11a, b, g (Wi-Fi) and Bluetooth) where the facility does not require a new tower. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-8. - Special use permit application and other requirements. 
(a)  All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. The city council is the officially designated agency or body of the city to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The city may at its discretion delegate or designate other official agencies or officials of the city to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the city council with respect to the granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  The city may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise incomplete. 
(c)  Except for uses that are exempt under this chapter, no wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified until the application is reviewed and approved by the city, and the special use permit has been issued. 
(d)  Any and all representations made by the applicant to the city on the record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the city. 
(e)  An application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. 
(f)  The applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as proposed on the site. This would require an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed letter acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is required. 
(g)  The applicant shall include a statement in writing: 
(1)  That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the city in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable city, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; 
(2)  That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state. 
(h)  Where a certification is called for in this chapter, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
(i)  In addition to all other required information as stated in this chapter, all applications for the construction or installation of new wireless telecommunications facilities or modification of an existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  A descriptive statement of the objective(s) for the new facility or modification including and expanding on a need such as coverage and/or capacity requirements; 
(2)  Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the wireless telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the city. Such documentation shall include propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites that demonstrate a significant gap in coverage and/or if a capacity need, including an analysis of current and projected usage; 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report; 
(4)  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and applicant, and to include the legal name of the applicant. If the site is a tower and the owner is different that the applicant, provide name and address of the tower owner; 
(5)  The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(6)  The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(7)  Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(8)  The location of nearest residential structure and/or nearest residentially zoned property; 
(9)  The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property which is the subject of the application; 
(10)  The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing; 
(11)  The azimuth, size and center-line height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the supporting structure; 
(12)  The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed with a copy of the specification sheet; 
(13)  The make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and design plan stating the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users; 
(14)  A site plan describing the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above preexisting grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(15)  The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment; 
(16)  The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP) in watts; 
(17)  Signed documentation such as the "Checklist to Determine Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" to verify that the wireless telecommunications facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC RF emissions guidelines (NIER). If not categorically excluded, a complete RF emissions study is required to provide verification; 
(18)  A signed statement that the proposed installation will not cause physical or RF interference with other telecommunications devices; 
(19)  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(20)  A copy of the geotechnical subsurface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for a proposed or existing tower site and if existing tower or water tank site, a copy of the installed foundation design. 
(j)  The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the proposed new tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities is in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. This requirement shall also be for any existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines, that an FAA determination is required, then all filings with the FAA, all responses form the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided with the application. 
(k)  Application for new tower. 
(1)  In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other structures within the city. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the city in the application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
(2)  In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on the application, hold a "balloon test". The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a three-foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the city. The applicant shall inform the city, in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary date may be on a weekday. A report with pictures from various locations of the balloon shall be provided with the application. 
(3)  The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing the proposed tower to accommodate future demand for at least four additional commercial applications, for example, future co-locations. The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least four additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon: 
a.  The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area; 
b.  The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed; 
c.  The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless telecommunications facilities spaces/sites; 
d.  Available space on existing and approved towers. 
(4)  The owner of a proposed new tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall: 
a.  Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use applicant; 
b.  Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers; 
c.  Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not limited to, a pro-rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. 
d.  Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the special use permit. 
1.  The applicant shall provide certification with documentation (structural analysis) including calculations that the telecommunication facility tower and foundation and attachments, rooftop support structure, water tank structure, and any other supporting structure as proposed to be utilized are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, city, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. 
(m)  If proposal is for a co-location or modification on an existing tower, the applicant is to provide signed documentation of the tower condition such as an ansi report as per Annex E, tower maintenance and inspection procedures, ANSI/TIA/EIA-222F or most recent version. The inspection report must be performed every three years for a guyed tower and five years for monopoles and self-supporting towers. 
(n)  All proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a demonstration that the facility will be sited so as to minimize visual intrusion as much as possible, given the facts and circumstances involved and will thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character and on the residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(o)  If a proposal for a new tower, a proposal for a new antenna attachment to an existing structure, or a proposal for a modification adding to a visual impact, the applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include: 
(1)  If a new tower or increasing the height of an existing structure is proposed, a computer generated "zone of visibility map" at a minimum of one mile radius from the proposed structure, with and without foliage shall be provided to illustrate locations from which the proposed installation may be seen. 
(2)  Pictorial representations of "before and after" (photo simulations) views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the city as may be appropriate, including but not limited to state highways and other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided, concerning the appropriate key sites at the pre-application meeting. Provide a map showing the locations of where the pictures were taken and distance from the proposed structure. 
(3)  A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility including; and as applicable the tower base, guy wires, fencing and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening. 
(p)  The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. 
(q)  The wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be required by the city. 
(r)  All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be installed underground whenever possible and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(s)  At a telecommunications site, an access road, turn-around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. 
(t)  All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, provided for removal of, modified or restored in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the city, state, or United States, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the more stringent shall apply. 
(u)  A holder of a special use permit granted under this chapter shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the city or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(v)  There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site. 
(w)  An applicant shall submit to the city the number of completed applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. 
(x)  The holder of a special use permit shall notify the city of any intended modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and shall apply to the city to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-9. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and seven being the lowest priority. 
(1)  On existing towers or other structures on city-owned properties. 
(2)  On existing towers or other structures on other property in the city. 
(3)  A new tower on city-owned properties. 
(4)  A new tower on properties in areas zoned for manufacturing use. 
(5)  A new tower on properties in areas zoned for commercial use. 
(6)  A new tower on properties in areas zoned for agricultural use. 
(7)  A new tower on properties in areas zoned for residential use. 
(b)  If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site. 
(c)  An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the city why co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, the city may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the city finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority, demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the application. 
(f)  Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the city may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons. 
(1)  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or historical district, or area of the city; 
(3)  The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
(4)  The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create a risk, deemed unacceptable to the city, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the city, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5)  Conflicts with the provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  The placement, construction, or use of the wireless telecommunications facility is inconsistent with the health, welfare, safety, or best interests of city residents. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-10. - Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities and other structures. 
(a)  The city, as opposed to the construction of a new tower, shall prefer locating on existing towers or others structures without increasing the height. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other suitable structures within two miles of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an exiting tower or other suitable structure cannot be used. 
(b)  An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant. 
(c)  Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-11. - Height of telecommunications tower(s). 
(a)  The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any tower, facility and/or antenna requested and the basis therefore. Documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to perform at requested height and a minimum of ten feet lower height to allow verification of this height need. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(b)  No tower constructed after the effective date of this chapter, including allowing for all attachments, shall exceed that height which allows operation without required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with city, state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law, city ordinance, code, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-12. - Visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required by law. 
(b)  Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint, that is flat-non-reflective of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-13. - Security of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. 
Specifically: 
(1)  All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(2)  Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-14. - Signage. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than two square feet or larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation or to control exposure to RF radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size is also to be installed to contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration site as applicable is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-15. - Lot size and setbacks. 
    All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: 
A distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications facility structure plus ten percent of the height of the tower or structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-16. - Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant. 
(a)  The city may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the city in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site inspections. 
(b)  An applicant shall deposit with the city funds sufficient to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the city in connection with the review of any application including where applicable, the lease negotiation, the preapproval evaluation, and the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500.00. The placement of the $8,500.00 with the city shall precede the pre-application meeting. The city will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The city's consultants/experts shall invoice the city for its services related to the application. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the city is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall, upon request of the applicant, be promptly refunded to the applicant. 
(c)  The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (b) of this section may vary with the scope (lease negotiations and/or review) and complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-17. - Public hearing and notification requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, a public hearing shall be held by the city council, notice of which shall be published in the newspaper general circulation in of the city no less than 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the city may notify nearby landowners, the application shall contain the names and address of all landowners whose property is located within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located. 
(b)  There shall be no public hearing required for an application to co-locate on an existing tower or other structure or a modification at an existing site, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height of the tower or structure, including attachments thereto. 
(c)  The city shall schedule the public hearing referred to in subsection (a) of this section once it finds the application is complete, the city, at any stage prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-18. - Action on an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  The city will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this chapter in a timely fashion, consistent with its responsibilities, and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution. 
(b)  The city may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory, other committee or commission for a non-binding recommendation. 
(c)  After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the granting of the permit shall always be upon the applicant. 
(d)  If the city approves the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten calendar days of the city's action, and the special use permit shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent certificates of compliance, once a special use permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the city, such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the city for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by the special use permit. 
(e)  If the city denies the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten calendar days of the city's action. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-19. - Extent and parameters of special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the city. 
(2)  Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material violation of this chapter after prior written notice to the holder of the special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-20. - Application fee. 
    At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $5,000.00 to the city. If the application is for a special use permit for co-locating on an existing tower or other suitable structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the nonrefundable fee shall be $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-21. - Performance security. 
    The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the city a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the city as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a tower facility and $25,000.00 for a co-location on an existing tower or other structure and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the city to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter and conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that, which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-22. - Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the city may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-23. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth below 
(1)  Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and 
property damage ..... $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/ 
$2,000,000 aggregate 
(2)  Automobile coverage ..... $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/ 
$2,000,000 aggregate 
(3)  Workers compensation and disability ..... Statutory amounts. 
(b)  For a wireless telecommunications facility on city property, the commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the city and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insureds. 
(c)  The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a best's rating of at least A. 
(d)  The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the city with at least 30-days' prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(e)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the city at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(f)  Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the granting of the special use permit, the holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the city a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-24. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Any application for wireless telecommunications facilities that is proposed for city property, pursuant to this chapter, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the city, and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the city, or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (a) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the city itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-25. - Fines. 
(a)  In the event of a violation of this chapter or any special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city may impose and collect, and the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the city, fines or penalties as set forth below. 
(b)  The holder of a special use permits failure to comply with provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the applicant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this Code and the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The city may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter, without limiting other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-26. - Default and/or revocation. 
    If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the special use permit, then the city shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such violation. A permit holder in violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as in section 108-25 and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the city in a reasonable period of time the special use permit is subject to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-27. - Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Under the following circumstances, the city may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the city warrant and require the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e. not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days; 
(2)  Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
(3)  Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required special use permit, or any other necessary authorization and the special permit may be revoked. 
(b)  If the city makes such a determination as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the city shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed, the city may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(c)  The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. However, if the owner of the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the city. 
(d)  If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the city may order officials or representatives of the city to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder. 
(e)  If, the city removes, or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the city may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the city may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or relocation of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the city, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the city. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the city may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-28. - Relief. 
    Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this chapter may request such at the pre-application meeting, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the submitted application for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs of the city in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No applicant shall have any right to relief under this section in any circumstances, but, to the contrary, such relief may be granted by the city in its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-29. - Periodic regulatory review by the city. 
(a)  The city may at any time conduct a review and examination of this entire chapter. 
(b)  If after such a periodic review and examination of this chapter, the city determines that one or more provisions of this chapter should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the city may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable law in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the city, the city may repeal this entire chapter at any time. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city may at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal, state, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-30. - Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
(a)  To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(b)  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-31. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Where this chapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the state or federal government, this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-32. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be effective immediately upon passage. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 108-33. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the state and federal government. 
(Ord. No. 1222-08, 6-24-08) 
Chapter 110 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcholic beverages, ch. 10; cemeteries, ch. 30; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 62; law enforcement, ch. 70; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; planning, ch. 86; signs, ch. 92; subdivisions, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley or alleyway means any street with a roadway less than 20 feet in width. 
    All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use which is 50 inches or less in width, with an unladen dry weight of 600 pounds or less, traveling on three, four or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for steering control. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means a vehicle publicly owned and operated as an ambulance or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the state highway patrol, police or fire department, sheriff or constable or deputy sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an ambulance when responding to emergency calls. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when, within any 600 feet along the highway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Central business district or traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described by ordinance as such. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Congested area means that part or portion of the city inclusively described as the area bound on the south by the north right-of-way line of Third Street, on the north by the south right-of-way line of Seventh Street, on the east by the west right-of-way line of Bluff Street and on the west by the east right-of-way line of Jefferson Street. 
    Controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway, to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb means the lateral boundaries of that portion of a street designated for the use of vehicles. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
    Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motorized bicycle means any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than 50 cubic centimeters, which produces less than three gross brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. 
    Official time standard, whenever certain hours are named, means standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the city police or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School zone means a space in any street lawfully designated by ordinance for the safety of persons going to and returning from public, private or parochial schools. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    State highway means a highway maintained by this state as a part of the state highway system. 
    Stop, when required, means complete cessation from movement. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Through highway means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, § 17-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.010. 
Sec. 110-2. - Obedience to chapter required. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-2) 
Sec. 110-3. - Applicability of chapter to public employees. 
    This chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.095. 
Sec. 110-4. - Applicability of chapter to persons riding bicycles or animals, propelling pushcarts. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the sections of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those sections of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1980, § 17-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.085. 
Sec. 110-5. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1980, § 17-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.080. 
Sec. 110-6. - Use of toy vehicles. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. However, this section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.090. 
Sec. 110-7. - Clinging to vehicle. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach such or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.350. 
Sec. 110-8. - Opening vehicle door. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.340. 
Sec. 110-9. - Identification of funeral procession. 
    A funeral possession composed of a number of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1980, § 17-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.320. 
Secs. 110-10-110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-20; administration, ch. 2; parks and recreation board, § 82-51 et seq. 

Sec. 110-31. - Enforcement of traffic laws. 
    The officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police shall enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 110-32. - Directing of traffic by police and fire department officials. 
(a)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter; provided, however, that during a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the traffic laws. 
(b)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1980, § 17-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 110-33. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
    The chief of police, by and with the approval of the city council, is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1980, § 17-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.065. 
Sec. 110-34. - Authority to designate safety zones, crosswalks and traffic lanes. 
    Safety zones, crosswalks and traffic lanes shall be designated by the appropriate official, as provided from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 17-22) 
Sec. 110-35. - Designation, maintenance of crosswalks. 
    The chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 17-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Sec. 110-36. - Establishment of safety zones. 
    The chief of police is authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1980, § 17-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Sec. 110-37. - Marking of traffic lanes; observance of markings. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1980, § 17-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.200. 
Sec. 110-38. - Permit required for certain funerals, processions and parades. 
    No funeral, procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles, except the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
    If a parade route is selected from the police chief pre-approved list of parade routes, and no more than two police officers are needed, there is no charge. 
    If a parade route chosen is not on a pre-approved route, and more than two police officers are needed, the city will assess a $50.00 charge per officer per event, not to exceed two hours. 
(Code 1980, § 17-29; Ord. No. 1354-13, § 1, 9-10-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.325. 
Sec. 110-39. - Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests. 
(a)  The city shall provide books containing uniform traffic tickets as prescribed by supreme court rule no. 37.46. Such books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed by supreme court rule. 
(b)  Such books shall be issued to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent, a record shall be maintained of every book so issued and a written receipt shall be required for every book. The judge hearing municipal ordinance violation cases may require that a copy of such record and receipts be filed with the court. 
(c)  The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The chief of police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained therein. 
(Code 1980, § 17-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.575. 
Sec. 110-40. - Procedure of police officers upon arrest. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before the municipal judge for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest shall issue to him a uniform traffic ticket which shall be proceeded upon in accordance with supreme court rule no. 37. 
(Code 1980, § 17-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.580. 
Sec. 110-41. - Issuance of uniform traffic ticket when vehicle illegally parked or stopped. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a uniform traffic ticket for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the traffic ticket. 
(Code 1980, § 17-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.585. 
Sec. 110-42. - Warning of arrest for failure to appear. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a uniform traffic ticket affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic ticket was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that if such letter is disregarded for a period of five days a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1980, § 17-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.590. 
Sec. 110-43. - Disposition of abandoned, wrecked, non-operating or unlicensed vehicles. 
(a)  Abandoning vehicle; parking for longer than 72 hours. No person being the owner thereof or having in his care or custody any vehicle shall abandon the vehicle on any street, alley or public place, nor shall he leave the vehicle standing thereon for a longer period of time than 72 hours. 
(b)  Leaving wrecked or non-operating vehicle on street. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, alley or public place within the city for longer than 72 hours. 
(c)  Allowing non-operating vehicle to remain on private property. No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall keep or allow any other person to keep any partially dismantled, non-operating, junked or discarded vehicle on such property longer than 15 days, and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city longer than 15 days, except that this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A vehicle in any enclosed building; 
(2)  A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary in the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(d)  Allowing unlicensed vehicle to remain on private property. No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall keep, part or store, or allow any other person to keep, park or store, on such property, any motor vehicle which is not licensed, except in a garage or similar fully enclosed structure. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle is not licensed unless it is validly registered under the motor vehicle laws of the State of Missouri or the laws of any other jurisdiction, and the motor vehicle displays a valid current license plate in conformance with the laws of the jurisdiction in which the vehicle is registered. 
(2)  No charge shall be filed for a violation of this section unless the person charged has been given at least 15 days' prior written notice of the alleged violation. 
(e)  Illegal parking on off-street facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle upon any privately owned land, parking lot, or driveway, after notice has been posted as provided in this subsection, by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee, prohibiting, restricting or limiting such parking, without the express or implied consent of such owner, occupant, lessee or licensee of such land. A suitable sign not less than 18 inches by 24 inches in dimension and bearing the words "no parking," together with any qualifications or restrictions on such parking, if any, shall be conspicuously displayed on such land, parking lot or driveway by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof, where this subsection is to be effective. Defacing, tampering with or damaging such sign shall constitute a violation of this subsection. Upon a complaint being made in writing by any such owner, occupant, lessee or licensee that any such motor vehicle is parked or has been left standing in violation of this subsection, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or any police officer to remove or cause to be removed such illegally parked vehicle, and to impound the vehicle as provided in subsection (f) of this section. In addition to the assessment of any penalty which may be assessed for the violation of this subsection, no such vehicle shall be removed from the police department impoundment until the owner shall have paid the costs of removing, impounding and storing such vehicle parked in violation of this subsection. 
(f)  Impoundment and disposal of impounded vehicles. The chief of police or any police officer designated by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this section or which is lost, stolen or unclaimed and take the vehicle to a suitable place or to a public garage. Upon the towing of any vehicle under this section, the law enforcement agency that authorized such towing or was properly notified of such towing shall make an inquiry with the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide law enforcement computer system to determine if the vehicle has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer system. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner(s)/lien-holder(s), such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner(s)/lien-holder(s) of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefore and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed and provide instructions for redeeming the abandoned property; and provide the owner(s)/lien-holder(s) a right to request a hearing if they feel the property was improperly towed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in this subsection and if the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department. whose duty it is to register motor vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle; the date, time, and place from which removed; the reasons for such removal; and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. In not less than 30 and in not more than 90 days after such impoundment, the chief of police shall post notices in five places in the city describing the vehicle as accurately and briefly as possible and notifying the public that on a certain day and hour named therein, which shall be at least ten days subsequent to such notice, he will sell the vehicle described at public auction to the highest bidder for cash at a public place. If no bidders appear at such sale, the chief of police may sell the vehicle at private sale, securing the best possible price. From the proceeds of any sale held under this subsection, the chief of police shall first deduct and pay his expenses and pay the balance to the city treasurer, and such sum shall become a part of the general revenue fund. If at any time prior to the sale the owner of such vehicle shall exhibit satisfactory proof of his ownership, he shall be entitled to redeem the vehicle upon the payment of all fees and expenses. If within six months after the sale of the vehicle the owner of any such vehicle so sold shall exhibit to the city council satisfactory proof of his ownership, the proceeds paid to the city treasurer from such sale shall be refunded to him. 
(g)  Violation and penalty. Violations under subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall be punishable by fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than as provided for in section 1-20 of this Code. Violations under subsection (e) shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  First offense, not less than $25.00 and not more than as provided in section 1-20 of this Code. 
(2)  Second offense, not less than $50.00 and not more than as provided in section 1-20 of this Code. 
(3)  Third offense, not less than $75.00 and not more than as provided in section 1-20 of this Code. 
(4)  Fourth offense, not less than $100.00 and not more than as provided in section 1-20 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 17-34; Ord. No. 737-97, § 1, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 924-03, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 1264-09, § 1, 11-24-09) 
State Law reference- Impoundment of vehicles, RSMo 300.595. 
Sec. 110-44. - Penalty for speeding violations. 
(a)  Any person charged with exceeding the speed limits established by ordinance shall have the option of paying such fine, as prescribed in this section, without appearance in court, upon entering a plea of guilty and waiving appearance in court in writing, or the accused may appear in court and be entitled to a trial as in other cases. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, the payment without appearance option provided in this subsection shall not extend to anyone charged with exceeding the speed limit by more than 20 miles per hour to anyone who fails to exercise the option within the time between the date the summons for such offense was served and the return date specified in the summons. 
(b)  The payment under the option provided in subsection (a) of this section may be made at the violations bureau. Such payment shall be deemed a conviction of the alleged offense. Upon payment, the violations bureau shall issue a receipt to the defendant acknowledging payment. 
(c)  The fine for exceeding the established speed limit by up to and including 40+ miles per hour shall be determined as follows: 
SPEED OVER FINE 1-5 $25.00 6 $49.00 7 $53.00 8 $57.00 9 $61.00 10 $65.00 11 $91.00 12 $97.00 13 $103.00 14 $109.00 15 $115.00 16 $153.00 17 $161.00 18 $169.00 19 $177.00 20 $185.00 21 $235.00 22 $245.00 23 $255.00 24 $265.00 25 $275.00 26 $337.00 27 $349.00 28 $361.00 29 $373.00 30 $385.00 31-35 $525.00 36-40 $625.00 40+ $775.00  
(d)  Fines will be doubled when the speeding violation occurs in a school zone as designated in section 110-248 or in a construction zone. 
Costs shall be taxed to and paid by the accused electing to pay speeding fines under this section in addition to the fine. 
(Code 1980, § 17-35; Ord. No. 875-01, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 953-04, § 1, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 1331-12, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 110-45. - Removal and impoundment of vehicle by police. 
(a)  Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from streets, parks or highways to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(2)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, alley or public parking lot and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or an obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left standing or parked: 
a.  In a loading zone. 
b.  Upon or blocking a sidewalk. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk or safety zone. 
e.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
f.  Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway. 
g.  On any railroad tracks. 
h.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
i.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
j.  Within a fire lane or zone. 
k.  Within any area temporarily designated by the city engineer as a tow-away zone. 
l.  At any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or is lost, stolen or unclaimed. 
m.  Within any area between the curb and sidewalk. 
n.  Within any area temporarily designated no parking because of street repair or an overlay program. 
o.  Within any area temporarily designated as a construction zone or detour route. 
p.  Within any area designated as a tow-away zone by the city council. 
(b)  Such vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with subsection 110-43(e). 
(c)  The city engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective this chapter and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. The city engineer may temporarily designate construction zones or no parking zones because of street repair or overlay programs. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 17-36) 
Secs. 110-46-110-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 110-66. - Levied on owners and dealers. 
    There is levied an annual license tax on all owners of and dealers in motor vehicles, as defined by RSMo 301.010, residing in the city as follows: All licensed motor vehicles, including commercial motor vehicles but excluding those used exclusively outside of the city, for each calendar year or any part thereof, $6.00. 
(Code 1980, § 16-76; Ord. No. 613-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 110-67. - Applicability; exceptions. 
(a)  No city motor vehicle license tax shall be collected from the federal or state government or any agency or subdivision thereof or any entity exempt from such tax by law. 
(b)  No city motor vehicle license tax shall be collected from a resident of the city for motor vehicles used exclusively outside of the city, and that fact may be shown by an affidavit of the motor vehicle owner for the purpose of securing a state registration certificate without producing a receipt for a city license tax for that motor vehicle. Any person who shall submit a false affidavit that a motor vehicle is used exclusively outside of the city shall be in violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished for such violation as set out in section 1-20. 
(Code 1980, § 16-77; Ord. No. 613-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 110-68. - Collection. 
(a)  A motor vehicle license tax imposed by section 110-66 shall be included as a charge on bills issued for personal property taxes due from residents of the city and shall be collected with and in the same payment as personal property taxes by the county collector of revenue. The collector of revenue may collect delinquent receipts of such motor vehicle license tax and penalties thereon in the same manner and form as provided by law for the collection of delinquent ad valorem property taxes. The mayor and city clerk are authorized to enter into contracts and amendments thereto with the county collector and county commission from time to time to implement this section. The failure of a resident within the city to pay the tax when due shall be a violation of this Code. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Every automobile dealer shall furnish evidence of the number of dealer plates authorized or issued him during January of each year and shall pay the tax per dealer plate to the city on or before January 31. The failure of the dealer to pay this tax when due shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 16-78; Ord. No. 613-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 110-69. - Due date. 
(a)  The license tax levied by section 110-66 shall be due and payable on or before December 31 of each year for vehicles owned by city residents on January 1 of that year. If an owner acquires a substitute motor vehicle during the taxable year, the city vehicle tax shall transfer to the substitute motor vehicle without further documentation of the owner. 
(b)  The tax levied by section 110-66 is levied on each motor vehicle, whether the vehicle is owned individually or jointly with another. The actual residence of the owner of the vehicle first named on the title shall determine if the vehicle is owned by a resident of the city, regardless of such person's mailing address. Such person first named on the title shall be the person liable for violation of this Code if nonpayment occurs. 
(Code 1980, § 16-80; Ord. No. 613-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 110-70. - Disposition of fees. 
    All license fees and taxes imposed by section 110-66 shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 16-79; Ord. No. 613-92, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Secs. 110-71-110-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 110-91. - Emergency warning equipment-Operation of equipped vehicle generally. 
    Motor vehicles and equipment which are operated by any members of an organized fire department of the city, whether paid or volunteer and whether owned by any city, fire district or by a private person, may be operated on streets and highways in the state while using or sounding a warning siren and while using or displaying thereon fixed, flashing or rotating blue lights; provided, however, that sirens and blue lights shall be used only in bona fide emergencies. 
(Code 1980, § 10-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.175. 
Sec. 110-92. - Same-Permit for operation of equipped vehicle. 
    Permits for the operation of vehicles specified in section 110-91 and equipped with sirens or blue lights shall be in writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the chief of an organized fire department. No person shall use or display a siren or blue light on a motor vehicle or on fire equipment without a valid permit authorizing the use. A permit to use a siren or blue lights does not relieve the operator of the vehicle so equipped from complying with all other traffic laws and regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.175. 
Sec. 110-93. - Same-Furnishing, installation and repair. 
    Each firefighter granted a permit pursuant to section 110-92 shall be furnished the equipment described in section 110-91. However, the installation and repair of this emergency warning equipment shall be at the expense of the firefighter involved. 
(Code 1980, § 10-5) 
Sec. 110-94. - Restriction on use of metal-tired vehicles. 
(a)  No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the streets or avenues of this city, except over streets or avenues constructed of gravel or clay bound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire, unless the street or avenue is protected by putting down solid planks or other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels to prevent such vehicle from damaging the highway. This subsection shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is known as "caterpillar treads," when such caterpillar does not contain any projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface may be operated if the gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does not exceed 800 pounds. 
(b)  No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more than four tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall drive onto, upon or over the edge of any street or avenue without protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the pavement. 
(c)  Any person violating this section, whether operating under a permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway, bridge, culvert or sewer. Any vehicle causing such damage shall be subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien previously attached to such vehicle. The amount of such damage may be recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction, in the name of the state, by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-337) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.250. 
Sec. 110-95. - Projections from vehicles. 
    All vehicles carrying poles or other objects which project more than five feet from the rear of such vehicle shall, during any period when lights are required, carry a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square shall be displayed at the end of such projection. 
(Code 1980, § 17-338) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170(5). 
Sec. 110-96. - Muffler cutouts, noise. 
    Muffler cutouts shall not be used on vehicles, and no vehicle shall be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device or other parts or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it cannot automatically open or be opened or operated while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1980, § 17-339) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170(2). 
Sec. 110-97. - Exhaust whistles. 
    No vehicle shall carry in operation a siren, exhaust whistle or similar instrument that produces unusually loud, annoying or peculiar sounds. This section shall not apply to ambulances and to vehicles belonging to or used by the fire or police department. 
(Code 1980, § 17-340) 
Sec. 110-98. - Brakes. 
    All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all times with two sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order, and motorcycles shall be provided with one set of adequate brakes kept in good working order. 
(Code 1980, § 17-341) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170(3). 
Sec. 110-99. - Mirrors. 
    All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so adjusted as to reveal the road behind and as to be visible from the operator's seat. 
(Code 1980, § 17-342) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170(4). 
Sec. 110-100. - Use of lighted lamps; dimming headlights; number of rear lights. 
(a)  Every vehicle upon a highway within this city, at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, because of insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall display lighted lamps, subject to exceptions for properly parked vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within 500 feet or is within 300 feet to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver. 
(c)  All motor vehicles are required to have two rear lights. 
(Code 1980, § 17-343) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.020(9), 307.040, 307.070, 307.075. 
Secs. 110-101-110-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices, RSMo 300.130 et seq. 

Sec. 110-121. - Standards and specifications. 
(a)  All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway commission or by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  All signs or signals required by this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. 
(c)  All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1980, § 17-300) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.135. 
Sec. 110-122. - Placement, maintenance. 
    The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective this chapter, and he may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-301) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.130. 
Sec. 110-123. - Obedience by drivers. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-302) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 110-124. - Placement for enforcement of chapter. 
    No section of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1980, § 17-303) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.145. 
Sec. 110-125. - Presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1980, § 17-304) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.150. 
Sec. 110-126. - Signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. However, vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in this article, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in this article, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown. 
b.  The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection, except that the state highway commission with reference to an intersection involving a state highway and the city with reference to an intersection involving other highways under its jurisdiction may prohibit any such right turn against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions so require, which prohibition shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in this article, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
d.  If an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, this subsection shall be applicable, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1980, § 17-305) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.155. 
Sec. 110-127. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "don't walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1980, § 17-306) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.160. 
Sec. 110-128. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if none, before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by section 110-282. 
(Code 1980, § 17-307) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.165. 
Sec. 110-129. - Lane direction control signals. 
    When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
(Code 1980, § 17-308) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.170. 
Sec. 110-130. - Display of unauthorized devices. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1980, § 17-309) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.175. 
Sec. 110-131. - Interference with devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 17-310) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.180. 
Secs. 110-132-110-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-151. - State operator's license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in the city unless such person shall have a driver's license or chauffeur's license as required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 17-66) 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicle without proper license prohibited, RSMo 302.020. 
Sec. 110-152. - Age of operator. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years, except as otherwise permitted by state law, to operate a motor vehicle on the streets of the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle to permit any person under the age of 16 years to operate such motor vehicle on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.060; temporary instruction permits, RSMo 302.130. 
Secs. 110-153-110-155. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 110-153-110-155, relative to city license sticker, have been deleted at the direction of the city in compliance with a resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 110-156. - State registration plate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on the streets of this city unless a state registration number plate, which has been issued for that particular motor vehicle and for the proper year, is attached to such motor vehicle. Such plate must be entirely unobstructed and all parts thereof plainly visible and securely fastened. 
(Code 1980, § 17-71) 
Sec. 110-157. - Operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits, so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)  This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons nor shall this section protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1980, § 17-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.100. 
Sec. 110-158. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles in motion. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1980, § 17-73) 
Sec. 110-159. - Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1980, § 17-74) 
Sec. 110-160. - Vehicles obstructing intersections, crosswalks. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1980, § 17-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.290. 
Sec. 110-161. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to operate the vehicle when such vehicle is so loaded or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such position as to interfere with the operator's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-76) 
Sec. 110-162. - Driving, tampering with motor vehicle without permission of owner. 
    No person shall drive, operate, use, tamper with or trespass upon any motor vehicle or trailer without the permission of the owner. 
(Code 1980, § 17-77) 
Sec. 110-163. - Driving on right side of road. 
(a)  Every vehicle not in motion shall be placed with its right side as near the righthand side of the highway as practicable, except on streets where vehicles are obliged to move in one direction only or where parking of motor vehicles is regulated by ordinance. 
(b)  Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement. 
(2)  When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is lawfully making a left turn in compliance with RSMo 304.014-304.026 or traffic regulations thereunder or of the city. 
(3)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair. 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated by ordinance as a one-way street and marked or signed for one-way traffic. 
(c)  It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has been divided into two or more roadways by means of a physical barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or dividing section, or to make any left turn or semicircular turn or U-turn on any such divided highway, except in a crossover or intersection. 
(d)  When authorized signs have been erected designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs. 
(e)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent with this subsection, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Upon all highways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the righthand lane for traffic or as close as practicable to the righthand edge or curb, except as otherwise provided in RSMo 304.014-304.026. 
(4)  Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and except when a roadway has been divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway whenever possible. 
(f)  All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two or more lanes of traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by traffic markings, signs or signals. 
(Code 1980, § 17-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.015. 
Sec. 110-164. - Distance at which vehicle must follow. 
    The driver of a vehicle, other than those designated in RSMo 304.044, shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles and to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles in safety. This section shall in no manner affect RSMo 304.044 relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.017. 
Sec. 110-165. - Driving on streets closed to public use; disturbing signs and barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle on, along or across any public street, alley or highway barred or placarded as closed or to willfully throw down, remove or otherwise disturb any such barrier or sign placed thereat. 
(Code 1980, § 17-80) 
Sec. 110-166. - Driving while intoxicated or drugged. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(Code 1980, § 17-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.010. 
Sec. 110-167. - Driving with excessive blood alcohol content. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this city when the person has 0.01 percent or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. As used in this section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with RSMo 577.020-577.041. 
(Code 1980, § 17-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.012. 
Sec. 110-168. - Leaving scene of accident. 
    No person operating or driving a vehicle on the streets or on any publicly or privately owned parking lot or parking facility generally open for use by the public, knowing that an injury has been caused to a person or damage has been caused to property due to culpability of such operator or to accident, shall leave the place of such injury, damage or accident without stopping and giving his name, residence, including city and street number and chauffeur's or registered operator's number, if any, to the injured party or to a police officer or, if no police officer is in the vicinity, to the nearest police station or judicial officer. 
(Code 1980, § 17-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.060. 
Sec. 110-169. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    No person operating or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended, without first parking it in an appropriate place and stopping the motor. 
(Code 1980, § 17-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.150. 
Sec. 110-170. - Rounding curves. 
    Any driver in rounding curves shall reduce speed and shall keep his vehicle as far to the right on the highway as is reasonably possible. 
(Code 1980, § 17-85) 
Sec. 110-171. - State weight limits applicable in the city. 
    Vehicles complying with the weight and axle requirements established by state law for state highways are permitted to use the streets of the city, and those vehicles which do not so comply are prohibited from using the streets of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-86) 
Sec. 110-172. - Weight limits on certain bridges. 
(a)  The weight limit on the bridge across Stinson Creek at Nichols Street shall be limited to five tons, gross weight. 
(b)  The weight limit on the bridge across Stinson Creek at West Seventh Street shall be limited to 15 tons, gross weight. 
(Code 1980, § 17-87; Ord. No. 880-01, § 1, 6-12-01; Ord. No. 1104-05, § 1, 8-9-05) 
Sec. 110-173. - Driving through safety zone. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1980, § 17-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.365. 
Sec. 110-174. - Driving onto or from controlled access roadways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1980, § 17-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.355. 
Sec. 110-175. - Vehicles in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1980, § 17-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.315. 
Sec. 110-176. - Driving through processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by this chapter. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.310. 
Sec. 110-177. - Driving on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.330. 
Sec. 110-178. - Riding on motorcycles and motorized bicycles. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle, unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more than one person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one person. Any motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one person must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger. 
(Code 1980, § 17-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.345. 
Sec. 110-179. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle, unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.335. 
Sec. 110-180. - Following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle other than one on official business to follow any fire apparatus closer than 500 feet when such fire apparatus is traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive into or stop any vehicle within the block where any fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1980, § 17-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.300. 
Sec. 110-181. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1980, § 17-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.305. 
Sec. 110-182. - Play streets. 
(a)  Authority to establish. The chief of police shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the street. 
(b)  Operation restricted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except a driver of a vehicle having business or whose residence is within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 17-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.185, 300.190. 
Sec. 110-183. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
    If an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided, an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof that no person shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts of streets so described, except those commercial vehicles making deliveries thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 17-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.550. 
Sec. 110-184. - Use of seat belts required. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "passenger car" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten persons or fewer and used for the transportation of persons, except that the term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motor tricycles and trucks. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, each driver and front seat passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968, operated on a street or highway in this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets the requirements of the Federal National Highway Transportation Act, except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected as required in section 110-185. 
(c)  Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more, but less than 16 years of age, in the front seat of the motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. 
(d)  No person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine compliance with subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not be applicable to any person who has a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about his body or to any person employed by the United States Postal Service while performing duties for that federal agency which requires the operator to service postal boxes from his vehicle or which requires frequent entry into and exit from his vehicle. 
(f)  Each person who violates subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $10.00. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed on any person because a violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-99) 
Sec. 110-185. - Child restraint devices. 
(a)  Every person transporting a child under the age of four years and residing in this state shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle operated by that person on the streets or highways of this city, for providing for the protection of such child. When traveling in the front seat of a motor vehicle, the child shall be protected by a child passenger restraint system approved by the state department of public safety. When traveling in the rear seat of a motor vehicle, the child shall be protected by either a child passenger restraint system approved by the state department of public safety or the vehicle's seat belt. When the number of child passengers exceeds the number of available passenger positions and all passenger positions are in use, remaining children shall be transported in the rear seat of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles registered in another state or to a temporary substitute vehicle. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25.00 and court costs. 
(Code 1980, § 17-100) 
Sec. 110-186. - School bus stops, passing school bus while stopped. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to stop, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its driver to proceed. 
(b)  Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height. Each bus shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following: "State law: Stop while bus is loading and unloading." Each school bus subject to RSMo 304.050-304.070 shall be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device, which will display a signal plainly visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop. 
(c)  No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers at any location upon a highway consisting of four or more lanes of traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as to require the passengers to cross more than two lanes of traffic nor shall he take on or discharge passengers while the vehicle is upon the road or highway proper, unless the vehicle so stopped is plainly visible for at least 300 feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon the highway, and then only for such time as is actually necessary to take on and discharge passengers. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different roadway and which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway containing four or more lanes of traffic or which is stopped in a loading zone constituting a part of or adjacent to a limited or controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(e)  The driver of any school bus driving upon the highways of this state, after loading or unloading school children, should remain stopped if the bus is followed by three or more vehicles until such vehicles have been permitted to pass the school bus, if the conditions prevailing make it safe to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 17-194) 
Sec. 110-187. - Riding or leading animals in certain areas prohibited. 
    No horses, mules or burros may be ridden or led in the central business district or any unpaved portion of a city-owned park or recreation area except in accordance with a parade permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 652-93, § 1, 9-21-93) 
Secs. 110-188-110-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OVERTAKING AND PASSING 

Sec. 110-196. - Rules generally. 
(a)  The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and exceptions stated in this section: 
(1)  An operator or driver overtaking and desiring to pass a vehicle shall sound his horn before starting to pass, except where prohibited by ordinance. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(3)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a city street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right under the conditions stated in subsection (b) of this section only when such movement may be made in safety. No such movement shall be made by driving off the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(d)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand edge of the roadway. 
(e)  Except when a roadway has been divided into three traffic lanes, no vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. 
(f)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard if another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching within 100 feet of or at any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(Code 1980, § 17-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 110-197. - Passing vehicle at crosswalk. 
    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375(4). 
Secs. 110-198-110-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 110-211. - Yielding at intersections. 
(a)  Where there is no form of traffic control, the operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection at the same time, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield to the operator on the right. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from opposite directions when the driver of one of such vehicles is attempting to or is making a left turn. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, which is within the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1980, § 17-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.351. 
Sec. 110-212. - Duty of driver upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the righthand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-124) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.105. 
Sec. 110-213. - Vehicles emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid a collision. Upon entering the roadway, the driver of such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.285. 
Secs. 110-214-110-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 110-226. - Procedure for turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. For right turns, both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1980, § 17-137) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.215. 
Sec. 110-227. - Placement of signs prohibiting or restricting turns. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the times shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 17-138) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.225. 
Sec. 110-228. - Placement of turning markers. 
    The chief of police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 17-139) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220(1). 
Sec. 110-229. - Obedience to turning markers. 
    When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1980, § 17-140) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220(2). 
Sec. 110-230. - Obedience to no turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1980, § 17-141) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.230. 
Sec. 110-231. - Hand and mechanical signals. 
(a)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an appropriate signal in the manner as follows: 
(1)  An operator or driver when stopping or when checking the speed of his vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend his arm at an angle below horizontal so that the arm may be seen from the rear of his vehicle. 
(2)  An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the right shall extend his arm at an angle above horizontal so that the arm may be seen from front of and from the rear of his vehicle and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(3)  An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the left shall extend his arm in a horizontal position so that the arm may be seen from the rear of his vehicle and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of his vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(b)  The signals required in this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of a type approved by the state highway patrol. However, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, such signals shall be given by the light or device. A vehicle shall be considered so constructed or loaded that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load exceeds 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to rear limit of the body or load thereon exceeds 14 feet, which limit of 14 feet shall apply to a single vehicle or combinations of vehicles. This subsection shall not apply to any trailer which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the operator or of the signalling device upon the vehicle pulling the trailer. This section, as far as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, shall only be applicable to vehicles registered within this state after January 1, 1954. 
(Code 1980, § 17-142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.019. 
Sec. 110-232. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle, unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.235. 
Sec. 110-223. - Driving across corners prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle into, across or over private property, private driveways, public property or public driveways located at the corner of any intersection protected by a traffic light or other traffic signal or sign, for the purpose of evading the regulations governing motor vehicles at intersections. 
(Ord. No. 955-04, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Secs. 110-234-110-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPEED 

Sec. 110-246. - State speed laws applicable. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except that the city may by ordinance declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no city ordinance shall regulate the speed of vehicles upon controlled access highways of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 17-155) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.205. 
Sec. 110-247. - Restrictions on speed; degree of care. 
    Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets of this city shall operate or drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and in the exercise of the highest degree of care and at a rate of speed so as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person, taking into consideration the time of day, the amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the condition of the street or highway, the atmospheric conditions and the location with reference to intersecting streets or highways, curves, residences or schools. 
(Code 1980, § 17-156) 
Sec. 110-248. - Speed limits. 
    No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle, except an emergency vehicle on an emergency run, on a street, boulevard or thoroughfare in the city at any time at a rate of speed in excess of the following: 
(1)  In the area designated as congested, 20 miles per hour. 
(2)  In the area designated as a school zone, 20 miles per hour, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. The following areas shall be designated as school zones: 
Bartlety Lane, from Wood Street east to Mohawk Drive. 
Ewing Avenue, from West Tenth Street north to West 13th Street. 
Grand Street, from East Ninth Street, north to East 13th Street. 
Hickman Avenue, north from West Seventh Street to Stinson Creek. 
Hillcrest Street, from East Sixth Street north to East Eighth Street. 
Nichols Street, from West Seventh Street north to St. Louis Avenue, then east to Court Street, then south to West Seventh Street, then west to Nichols Street to the point of beginning. 
Nichols Street, from West Tenth Street north to West 12th Street. 
Old Jefferson City Road, from Cote Sans Dessein Road to 750 feet southwest of the First Assembly of God (605 Old Jefferson City Road), Monday through Friday. 
St. Francis Street, from West Chestnut Street south to Bartley School property line. 
State Street, from East Fifth Street north to East Eighth Street. 
Vine Street, from East Fifth Street north to East Seventh Street. 
Vine Street, from East Ninth Street north to 300 feet north of Smith Branch bridge. 
West Chestnut Street, from Callaway Drive east to Business Route 54. 
Westminster Avenue, from West Chestnut Street south to Business Route 54. 
Westminster Avenue, from West Fourth Street north to Woodland Avenue. 
Wood Street, from East Eighth Street north to Route Z, Monday through Friday. 
East Fifth Street, from Vine Street east to State Street. 
West Fifth Street, from Park Avenue west to Westminster Avenue. 
East Sixth Street, from State Street east to Hillcrest Street. 
East Seventh Street, from State Street west to Vine Street. 
West Seventh Street, from Westminster Avenue west to Hickman Avenue. 
East Eighth Street, from Hillcrest Street west to State Street. 
East Tenth Street, from Bluff Street east to Wood Street. 
West 12th Street, from Westminster Avenue to Railroad Bridge. 
(3)  In all other areas within the city limits, 30 miles per hour, except as follows: 
All street, roads, thoroughfares or lanes that are solely within the confines of any park or recreational area within the city, 15 miles per hour. 
Addison Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Anthony Street, from East Eighth Street north to High Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Business Route 54 (South), from Chestnut Street south to Westminster/Reed Street 25 miles per hour when yellow signals are flashing; 30 miles per hour when the yellow signals are not flashing. 
Canterbury Drive , 25 miles per hour. 
Centre Drive, from Route H, north to end, 35 miles per hour. 
Christopher Lane, 20 miles per hour. 
Crestwood Drive, from Westminster Avenue west to end of street, 20 miles per hour. 
Dixie Avenue, from Cote Sans Dessein Street west to end of street, 20 miles per hour. 
East Eight Street , from State Street west to Vine Street, 20 miles per hour. 
East First Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Erik Place, 25 miles per hour. 
Essex Street , 25 miles per hour. 
Gayleen Drive, 25 miles per hour. 
Glenstone Drive, from Business Route 54 northwest to Dixie Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
Grand Street, from Northeast Eighth Street to East Eighth Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Grand Street, from North East Eighth Street, north to East Ninth Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Gregory Lane, 25 miles per hour. 
Hawk Lake Drive, from Route F, south to end, 20 miles per hour. 
Helen Stephens Drive, as designated by the board of parks and recreation in Veteran's Park from Eighth Street on the south to Tenth Street on the north. 
Hickman Avenue, from Martin Luther King Drive (Route F) north to West Seventh. 
Hillcrest Street, south from East Sixth Street to Route O, 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. 
Jay Drive, 25 miles per hour. 
Jessica Lane, 25 miles per hour. 
Kenneth Lane, 25 miles per hour. 
Knollwood Road, from Crestwood Drive north and west to end of street, 20 miles per hour. 
Leroy Court, 25 miles per hour. 
Matthew Street, 25 miles per hour. 
McNeal Lane , 25 miles per hour. 
Merklin Drive, east and north from Mokane Road to Steidemann Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Miller Street , 25 miles per hour. 
Natalie Court, 25 miles per hour. 
Nicklaus Court, 25 miles per hour. 
Palmer Court, 25 miles per hour. 
Penn Avenue, from Westminster Avenue west to the west end of Penn Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
Pioneer Drive, from West Fourth Street south and east to Jefferson Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Randall Lane, from Glenstone Drive north to Penny Lane, 20 miles per hour. 
Richard Ault Drive, as designated by the board of parks and recreation in Veteran's Park from its starting point at Helen Stephens Drive on the south to Tenth Street on the north. 
Route C (Mokane Road), from south city limits to a point 0.75 mile north, 50 miles per hour; from 0.75 mile north to Lynn Avenue, 40 miles per hour. 
Route F (Fourth Street), 50 miles per hour from the west city limits to a point 1,000 feet west of Westminster Avenue; thence 40 miles per hour to a point 300 feet west of Westminster Avenue; 20 miles per hour from Jefferson Street to Business 54 (Old Route 54). 
Route H, from junction of U.S. Highway 54 to west city limits, 50 miles per hour. 
Route HH, from the west city limits to the 45 mph zone on William Woods Drive, 50 mph. 
Route O (Bellama Springs Road), from east city limits to a point 0.50 mile west, 40 miles per hour. 
Route UU, from the city limits to the junction of Route O, 40 miles per hour. 
Route Z, from the east city limits to a point 0.2 mile west, 50 miles per hour; from 0.2 mile west of east city limits to a point 1,400 feet east of Wood Street, 40 miles per hour; from a point 1,400 feet east of Wood Street to Wood Street, 35 miles per hour. 
Business 54 (North), from a point 1030 feet south of the Route Z junction north to the centerline of the St. Eunice Road junction 35 miles per hour; thence 45 miles per hour north to a point 1850 feet north of the centerline of the St. Eunice Road junction; thence 50 miles per hour north to U.S. Highway 54. 
Business Route 54 (South), from the junction of U.S. Highway 54 and Route H north to a point 50 feet south of the centerline of Park Ridge Drive, 50 miles per hour; thence 40 miles per hour to a point 100 feet north of the centerline of Commercial Street. 
Southwind Drive, 25 miles per hour. 
St. Louis Avenue, from Bluff Street to Grand Street, 20 miles per hour. 
St. Louis Avenue, from Market Street east to Bluff Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Sheri Lane, 25 miles per hour. 
Steidemann Street, east from Mokane Road on Steidemann Street to end, 20 miles per hour. 
Sycamore Street, southwest from Westminster Avenue to dead end, 15 miles per hour. 
Tanglewood Way, 25 miles per hour. 
Tucker Lane, from Nichols Street to 12th Street, 20 miles per hour. 
West Morningside Drive, from Anthony Street north to Kay Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
U.S. Highway 54, inside city limits, 70 miles per hour, or as posted by the Missouri Highway and Transportation Department. 
Fifth Street, from State Street west to Westminster Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
East Eighth Street, from St. Louis Avenue to Vine Street, 20 miles per hour. 
(Code 1980, § 17-157; Ord. No. 688-95, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 714-96, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 715-96, § 1, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 750-97, § 1, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 770-98, § 1, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 790-98, § 1, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 887-01, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 978-05, § 1, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 1108-05, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1109-05, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1258-09, § 1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1262-09, § 1, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 1300-11, § 1, 8-23-11; Ord. No. 1314-12, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 1339-13, § 2, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1384-15, § 1, 3-10-15; Ord. No. 1429-17, § 1, 1-24-17; Ord. No. 1448-17, § 1, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 1473-18, § 1, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 110-249-110-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ONE-WAY STREETS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish one-way streets and to regulate the use of vehicles thereon, RSMo 304.120(2). 

Sec. 110-261. - Established. 
    Motor vehicles shall be driven only in the indicated directions on the following streets or portions thereof in the city: 
Court Street, southerly, between Second Street and Tenth Street. 
Nichols Street, northerly, between West Second Street and Tenth Street. 
Northwest Street, easterly, between Westminster Avenue and Jefferson Street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-170; Ord. No. 1115-05, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 1182-07, § 1, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 110-262. - Placement, maintenance of signs. 
    Whenever in this chapter or any other city ordinance any one-way street or alley is designated, the chief of police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 17-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.240. 
Sec. 110-263. - Movement of traffic. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 17-172) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.245. 
Sec. 110-264. - Restriction of direction of traffic during certain periods. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes on streets upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The chief of police may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-173) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.250. 
Secs. 110-265-110-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 110-276. - Through streets designated. 
    Those streets and parts of streets described by this division or other ordinances of the city are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 17-185) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.255. 
Sec. 110-277. - Placement, maintenance of signs. 
    Whenever any through street is established, the chief of police shall place and maintain a stop sign or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. However, at the intersection of two through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the chief of police upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1980, § 17-186) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.260. 
Sec. 110-278. - Other intersections where stop or yield required. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall: 
(1)  Stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or 
(2)  Yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in section 110-281, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(Code 1980, § 17-187) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.265. 
Sec. 110-279. - Position for stopping at stop intersections. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of such intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering such intersection. 
(Code 1980, § 17-188) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.270(2). 
Sec. 110-280. - Driver to yield right-of-way at stop intersections. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop and, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1980, § 17-189) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.275. 
Sec. 110-281. - Vehicle entering yield intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. However, if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 17-190) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.280. 
Sec. 110-282. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. This subsection shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1980, § 17-191) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.295. 
Sec. 110-283. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
    Every vehicle shall come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersections named in this section, except at those intersections labeled "yield," where the driver shall yield the right-of-way; however, signs labeled "electric" shall be operated in accordance with RSMo 300.155. The chief of police is granted the power and authority to vary the operation of electric signs where seasonal changes, special events or weather conditions seem in his reasonable discretion to necessitate such variation from the standard operation. 
Stop on Addison Street at East First Street (yield) 
at East Second Street Airway Drive at West Seventh Street (yield) 
at Route F Aldergate Drive at Winston Drive (yield) Allen Street at Ann Street (yield) 
at East Chestnut Street (yield) Amherst Street at Circle Drive (yield) 
at East 12th Street (yield) Ann Street at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Washington Street (yield) Apache Drive at Bradley Lane (yield) Arrow Street at Cote Sans Dessein (yield) Ashton Circle West at Collier Lane (yield) Atkinson Road at William Woods Avenue 
at Bypass U.S. 54 Bartley Lane at Wood Street Blackburn Street at Lyle Street (yield) Bluff Street at East Second Street 
at East Fifth Street 
at Sixth Street 
at St. Louis Avenue 
at East Tenth Street (electric) Bradley Lane at St. Louis Road (yield) Brown Street at West Ninth Street (yield) Business 54 North at High School Drive (electric) Callaway Drive at West Chestnut Street (yield) Campus Drive at Business 54 Carver Drive at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue Castlewood Avenue at Bartley Lane (yield) CC 200 at U.S. Highway 54 
at Westminster Avenue CC 306 at U.S. Highway 54 Cedar Wood Drive at Evergreen Drive (yield) 
at Route Z Center Street at St. Louis Avenue 
at East Ninth Street (yield) Cherokee Lane at Sioux Drive (yield) Chestnut Street West Chestnut Street at Business Route 54 
at Old Jefferson City Road (yield) 
at Washington Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue East Chestnut Street at Washington Street (yield) Chippewa Drive at Bartley Lane (yield) 
at Bradley Lane (yield) Cooperative Drive (South entrance) at Centre Drive (yield) Cooperative Drive (North entrance) at Centre Drive (yield) Crestwood Avenue Westminster Avenue Christopher Lane at Business 54 (stop) Church Street at Forrest Avenue (yield) Churchill Drive at Business Route 54 Churchill Road at West Chestnut (yield) Claymine Drive at Old Jefferson City Road (yield) 
at West Chestnut Street (yield) Cleveland Street at Chestnut Street 
at Business Route 54 Collier Lane at Cote Sans Dessein Road (stop) 
at Business Route 54 
at Randall Lane (yield) Colonial Drive at Herring Drive (yield) Cote San Dessein Road at old Jefferson City Road 
at Collier Lane (stop) 
at Business 54 Country Club Drive at Highway Z Court Street at Second Street 
at Fourth Street 
at Fifth Street 
at Sixth Street Crestwood Drive at Westminster Avenue (yield) Dale Street at Churchill Road (yield) Dawson Place at Meadowlark Lane (yield) 
at Douglas Boulevard (yield) Dawson Street at Business Route 54 Devona Street at Ravine Street (yield) Dixie Avenue at Cote Sans Dessein Road (yield) 
at Randall Place (yield) Donna Lane at Chippewa Drive (yield) Douglas Boulevard at North School Drive (yield) 
at Business 54 Dudley Court at Hilltop Drive (yield) Dunham Drive at William Woods Avenue (yield) East Avenue at East Ninth Street (yield) 
at East Tenth Street (yield) Elm Street at Hickman Avenue (yield) Essex Avenue at St. Eunice Road 
at Cantebury Drive (yield) Evergreen Drive at Wood Street Ewing Street at West 12th Street Ferdinand Drive at Business Route 54 Forrest Avenue at Highway Z 
at East Vine Street (yield) 
at Kleewood Street (yield) Gary Street at Cote Sans Dessein Road (yield) Gates Boulevard at St. Eunice Road Gaylord Drive at West Fourth Street (Route F) 
at West Seventh Street (yield) Glenstone Drive at Business Route 54 
at Dixie Avenue (yield) Glover Street at Business Route 54 Golf Drive at Fairway Drive Grand Avenue at East Fifth Street (yield) 
at East Eighth Street (yield) Grand Street at East Eighth Street 
at East Ninth Street 
at East Tenth Street Green Street at Carver Drive (yield) 
at West Ninth Street (yield) Gross Place at Bradley Lane (yield) Hackberry Street at Elm Street (yield) Haddley Lee Lane at Highway Z Halley Court at Old St. Louis Road (yield) Hawthorn Street at Ravine Street (yield) Heather Street at Ravine Street (yield) Helen Stephens Drive at East Eighth Street (yield) 
at East Tenth Street (yield) Helm Street at Castlewood (yield) Heritage Lane at Business 54 Herring Drive at Business Route 54 Hickman Drive at West Seventh Street, southbound (yield) High Street at Wood Street Highland Avenue at Highway Z Highway Z at Business Route 54 High School Drive at Business 54 (electric) Hillcrest Avenue at Route O Hilltop Drive at Business 54 (stop) Hockaday Avenue at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Schultz Street (yield) Hollyhock Drive at West Seventh Street (yield) 
at Parkview Drive (yield) Hospital Drive at Route F Industrial Drive at Westminster 
at Business 54 Ingle Road at West Chestnut (yield) Ivy Lane at Vine Street (yield) Jack Marshall Avenue at West Fifth Street (yield) 
at West Sixth Street (yield) James Street at Kathy Street (yield) Jefferson City Road at Cote Sans Dessein Road (stop) 
at Westminster Avenue 
at Signpainter Road 
at CC 165 (yield) Jefferson Street at West Second Street 
at West Fourth Street 
at West Fifth Street 
at West Seventh Street 
at West Ninth Street 
at West Tenth Street Julian Lane at Randall Place (yield) 
at Singer Lane (yield) Kathy Street at Old St. Louis Road (yield) Kay Drive at West Morningside Road (yield) Kenwood Drive at Herring Drive (yield) King Street at Highway C Kingswood Drive at Herring Drive (yield) at Parkridge Drive (yield) Kleewood Drive at Wood Street (yield) Knollwood Road at Crestwood Drive (yield) LaClerc Street at Bradley Lane (yield) Lake Drive at Highway Z 
at Haddley Lee Drive (yield) Lakeview Drive at Highway Z 
at Lake Drive (yield) Lane Street at Old St. Louis Road (yield) Laura Avenue at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Mokane Road Laurel Place at Ravine Street (yield) Lee Street at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Mokane Road Locust Avenue at Washington Street (yield) Lyle Street at Collier Lane (yield) 
at West Reed (yield) Lynn Avenue at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Mokane Road 
at Washington Street (yield) Lynn Street at St. Louis Road (yield) Manor Drive at Business 54 Marbrook Drive at Herring Drive (yield) 
at Kenwood Drive (yield) Market Street at Fourth Street (electric) 
at Fifth Street (electric) McIntire Street at West Seventh Street (yield) McNeal Lane at Wood Street Meadowlark Lane at Business Route 54 Merklin Drive at Highway C Middle Street at Wood Street 
at Anthony Avenue (yield) Miller Street at St. Eunice Road Mohawk Drive at Bartley Lane (yield) 
at Bradley Lane (yield) Mokane Road at East Second Street Monroe Street at West 12th Street (yield) 
at West 14th Street (yield) Morningside Drive East Morningside Drive 
West Morningside Drive at Bartley Lane (yield) 
at Bartley Lane (yield) Nichols Street at West Second Street 
at West Fourth Street 
at West Fifth Street 
at West Ninth Street 
at West Tenth Street Northwest Street at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue North School Boulevard at Meadowlark Lane (yield) 
at Kleewood Drive (yield) Oak Avenue at State Street (yield) 
at East Second Street Oak Street at East Second Street 
at East Fifth Street (yield) Old Herring Mill Road at Highway Z Oliver Street East Oliver Street 
West Oliver Street at Washington Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 
at St. Francis Street (yield) Osage Lane at Sioux Drive (yield) Palmer Street at West Chestnut Street (yield) 
at West Oliver Street (yield) Panda Drive at Bartley Lane (yield) Park Drive at Highway Z Parkridge Drive at Business 54 Parkview Avenue at West Seventh Street (yield) Paschall Avenue at Westminster Avenue Penn Avenue at Westminster Avenue Penny Lane at Randall Place (yield) 
at Cote Sans Dessein Road (yield) Perry Lane at Lane Street (yield) Pine Street at Carver Drive (yield) 
at West Ninth Street (yield) Pioneer Drive at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at West Fourth Street Plaza Drive at Meadowlark Lane (yield) 
at Douglas Boulevard (yield) 
at Kleewood Drive Poston Avenue at Carver Drive (yield) 
at West Ninth Street (yield) Power Lane at Industrial Drive (yield) Randall Lane at Glenstone Drive (yield) Ravine Street at East Sixth Street (yield) 
at East Fifth Street (yield) 
at East Second Street Raye Street at West Morningside Drive (yield) Reed Street East Reed Street 
West Reed Street at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 Rice Road at Business 54 Richard Ault Drive at East Tenth Street (yield) 
at Helen Stephens Drive (yield) Rosedale Street at Glenstone (yield) St. Eunice Road at Bypass 54 
at Business Route 54 
at Old Herring Mill Road (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue 
at William Woods Avenue (yield) St. Francis Street at West Chestnut Street (yield) St. Louis Avenue at Nichols Street (yield) 
at Court Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 
at Bluff Street St. Louis Road at Wood Street (yield) 
at Highway Z St. Michael Street at Highway Z Schultz Street at Business Route 54 
at Ravine Street Signpainter Road at Hospital Drive (yield) Singer Lane at Julian Lane (yield) 
at Penny Lane (yield) Sioux Drive at Bartley Lane (yield) 
at Bradley Lane (yield) Smith Street at Highway O Spruce Drive at Jefferson City Road (yield) Stack Road at West Seventh Street (yield) State Street at East Second Street 
at East Fifth Street (yield) 
at East Eighth Street (yield) 
at East Tenth Street (yield) Stiedeman Street at Route C Sycamore Street at Westminster Avenue 
at West Second Street Sunset Drive at Walnut Street (yield) Tennyson Road at Route C Thatcher Street at West Seventh Street (yield) Thrush Street at Castlewood Street (yield) Tucker Lane at Nichols Street (yield) 
at West Avenue (yield) Tyler Street at St. Francis Street (yield) 
at Palmer Street (yield) Vernon Avenue at Brookside Drive (yield) Vine Street at East Fifth Street (yield) 
at West Seventh Street (southbound) (yield) 
at Highway Z 
at East Eighth Street 
at East Ninth Street 
at East Tenth Street Viola Paschal Drive  North at Westminster Avenue (yield) Viola Paschal Drive  South at Westminster Avenue (yield) Walker Lane at West Seventh Street (yield) Walnut Street at Carver Drive (yield) 
at West Seventh Street (yield) 
at West Eighth Street (yield) 
at West Ninth Street (yield) 
at West Tenth Street (yield) East Walnut at West Ninth Street (yield) 
at West Tenth Street (yield) West Walnut Street at West Ninth Street (yield) Warehouse Drive at Westminster Avenue (yield) 
at West Eleventh Street (yield) Washington Street at Business Route 54 
at Reed Street (yield) West Avenue at East Ninth Street (yield) 
at East Tenth Street (yield) Westminster Avenue at Business 54 
at Chestnut Street 
at West Fourth Street 
at West Seventh Street 
at William Woods Avenue, southbound (yield) 
at St. Eunice Road Westover Avenue at Parkview Avenue (yield) Westview Drive at Airway Drive (yield) Whitlow Drive East Whitlow 
West Whitlow at Ravine Street (yield) 
at Ravine Street (yield) William Woods Avenue at Bypass 54 
at Westminster Avenue (yield) Winston Drive at Christopher Drive (yield) Wood Street at East Tenth Street 
at St. Eunice Road 
at Highway Z 
at Route O Woodhill Avenue at Parkview Avenue (yield) Woodlawn Avenue at Westminster Avenue First Street East First Street at Bluff Street 
at Ravine Street 
at Business Route 54 Second Street East Second Street at Bluff Street 
at Business Route 54 West Second Street at Westminster Avenue Third Street East Third Street at Court Street (yield) 
at Bluff Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 West Third Street at Nichols Street (yield) 
at Jefferson Street (yield) Fourth Street East Fourth Street at Market Street (electric) 
at Ravine Street (yield) West Fourth Street at Westminster Avenue (electric) Fifth Street East Fifth Street at Bluff Street 
at Court Street 
at Business Route 54 (electric) West Fifth Street at Court Street 
at Jefferson Street 
at Westminster Avenue Sixth Street East Sixth Street at Court Street 
at Business Route 54 
at Bluff Street 
at Grand Street (yield) 
at Vine Street (yield) 
at State Street (yield) 
at Hillcrest Avenue (yield) West Sixth Street at Bluff Street 
at Court Street 
at Nichols Street 
at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue Seventh Street East Seventh Street at Court Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 
at Bluff Street (yield) 
at Grand Street (yield) 
at Vine Street (yield) West Seventh Street at Court Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue 
at Nichols Street 
at Jefferson Street Eighth Avenue at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at Walnut Street (yield) Eighth Street East Eighth Street at Court Street (yield) 
at Center Street (yield) 
at Wood Street east and westbound Northeast Eighth Street at Center Street (yield) 
at Business Route 54 
at Grand Street (yield) 
at Vine Street (yield) West Eighth Street at Court Street (yield) 
at Nichols Street (yield) 
at Jefferson Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue (yield) Ninth Street East Ninth Street at Court Street 
at Business Route 54 
at Vine Street West Ninth Street at State Street 
at Court Street 
at Jefferson Street 
at Westminster Avenue Tenth Street East Tenth Street at Business Route 54 (electric) 
at Grand Street 
at Vine Street 
at Wood Street West Tenth Street at Nichols Street 11th Place at Business Route 54 11th Street West 11th Street at Ewing Avenue (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue 12th Street East 12th Street at Circle Drive (yield) 
at Business Route 54 West 12th Street at Westminster Avenue West 12th Street at Ewing Street 13th Street East 13th Street at Business Route 54 
at Circle Drive (yield) West 13th Street at Westminster Avenue 14th Street East 14th Street at Business 54 West 14th Street at Ewing Avenue (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue 15th Street West 15th Street at Ewing Avenue (yield) 
at Monroe Street (yield) 
at Westminster Avenue State Highway NN at State Highway H State Highway UU at State Highway O State Highway Z at Business 54 U.S. Highway 54 Exit at State Highway F U.S. Highway 54 Exit at State Highway H  
(Code 1980, § 17-193; Ord. No. 682-95, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 841-00, § 1, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 852-00, § 2, 8-8-00; Ord. No. 951-04, § 2, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 955-04, § 2, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 974-04, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1117-05, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 1147-06, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 1251-09, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 1258-09, § 2, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1303-11, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 1313-12, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 1316-12, § 1, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 1336-12, § 1, 11-27-12; Ord. No. 1338-13, § 1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1389-15, § 2, 6-9-15; Ord. No. 1438-17, § 1, 7-11-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.351. 
Secs. 110-284-110-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-306. - Applicability of article. 
    The sections of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this article or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1980, § 17-229) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.520. 
Sec. 110-307. - Article not exclusive. 
    The sections of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive sections prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1980, § 17-230) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.525. 
Sec. 110-308. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, the chief of police shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1980, § 17-231) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.545. 
Sec. 110-309. - Parking tickets. 
(a)  Generally. Consecutively numbered parking tickets shall be in duplicate in the form prescribed by the chief of police and shall be ordered and issued by the police chief to such police officers and meter readers in such numbers as he shall direct. The police officers or meter readers shall place the original of the ticket, properly filled out, upon every vehicle violating any section of this chapter or other ordinance of the city relating to parking and shall appropriately fill out the duplicate and deliver it to the police department. The police chief shall cause records to be made of tickets issued which shall reflect the number of the ticket, the date of issuance, the state license number of the violator, the amount paid and the issuing officer's name. 
(b)  Courtesy tickets. The mayor is authorized to issue or have issued courtesy tickets to persons attending a convention or gathering within the city when the mayor determines that it will be to the best interest of the city as a whole to issue such courtesy tickets. The courtesy tickets shall specify the name, nature of convention or gathering, the date and hours that it is good for. The mayor shall determine the manner of distributing such courtesy tickets from time to time in the number he deems necessary. No summons or warrant shall be issued for overtime parking of a motor vehicle, but this shall not include zones marked in yellow or fire hydrant zones, to which the courtesy ticket is attached during the time for which the courtesy ticket is valid. 
(Code 1980, § 17-265) 
Sec. 110-310. - Evidence of illegal parking. 
    The establishment of the fact that a motor vehicle was parked in violation of any section of this chapter or other ordinances of the city and the establishment of the fact that the motor vehicle is licensed either by the city or by the state in the name of the defendant shall create the presumption that the defendant was the person who parked the motor vehicle in violation of such section and that the defendant is guilty of such violation. The presumption may be rebutted only by evidence establishing some other named person as the operator of the motor vehicle at the time and place of the alleged violation. 
(Code 1980, § 17-266) 
Sec. 110-311. - Liability for towing and storage charges. 
    The violator of any parking regulation of the city shall be responsible for the towing and storage fee when the illegally parked vehicle is towed in, pursuant to RSMo 300.595. 
(Code 1980, § 17-267) 
Sec. 110-312. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violators of subsection 110-318(a)(2)b, pertaining to prohibited parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, shall appear before the traffic violations bureau and upon establishment of guilt shall be fined no less than $40.00 plus costs of no more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for no more than 90 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. 
(b)  The fine upon admission of guilt for double parking or parking in a no parking zone, but not including parking in a no parking zone adjacent to a fire hydrant, shall be $20.00. 
(c)  The fine for overtime parking shall be $20.00 if paid within 72 hours. For payments sent through the U.S. mail, the date of the official postmark shall be deemed the date paid. 
(d)  If after 72 hours the fine provided for by subsection (c) of this section has not been paid to the traffic violations bureau, the fine for overtime parking shall be $40.00. If after five days the fine provided by subsection (b) of this section has not been paid to the traffic violations bureau, the fine for double parking and parking in a no parking zone shall be $40.00. The traffic violations bureau clerk shall send a written notice to the violator at his last known address by ordinary mail, which notice shall specify the nature of the offense and give the violator five days in which to pay the increased fine. If the violator does not pay such increased fine or otherwise appear in answer to the charge within the time allowed, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and upon conviction he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and liable as such as if the options granted by subsection (b) or (c) of this section had not been given. The form of the written notice required in this subsection shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the offense; 
(2)  The date of the offense; 
(3)  The fact that the violator has five days in which to either plead guilty and pay the prescribed penalty or plead guilty and appear before the judge; 
(4)  The amount of the fine if paid within the time prescribed; and 
(5)  The fact that, if the violator does not appear and pay the fine within the time allowed, a warrant may be issued for his arrest and he will be subject to prosecution as in any other case. 
(Code 1980, § 17-268; Ord. No. 1322-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
State Law reference- Warning of arrest sent upon failure to answer ticket, RSMo 300.590. 
Sec. 110-313. - Prohibited parking zones. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described by this chapter or other ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 17-232) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.530. 
Sec. 110-314. - Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of the streets described by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 17-233) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.535. 
Sec. 110-315. - Restricted stopping, standing and parking zones. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of the streets described by this chapter or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 17-234) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.540. 
Sec. 110-316. - Manner of parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle on a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic and with the right-side wheels placed parallel to the right curb of the roadway and within 18 inches of the edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-235) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.415. 
Sec. 110-317. - Parking to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-236) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.445. 
Sec. 110-318. - Prohibited stopping, standing and parking areas enumerated. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
b.  On a sidewalk. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
h.  On any railroad tracks. 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance, when properly signposted. 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1980, § 17-237) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.440. 
Sec. 110-319. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1980, § 17-238) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.460. 
Sec. 110-320. - Manner of parking within alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-239) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.450. 
Sec. 110-321. - Standing, parking along divided highways. 
    If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The chief of police is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 17-240) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.475. 
Sec. 110-322. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The chief of police is authorized to erect signs upon the lefthand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such lefthand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1980, § 17-241) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.470. 
Sec. 110-323. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1980, § 17-242) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.465. 
Sec. 110-324. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1980, § 17-243) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.480. 
Sec. 110-325. - Parking for commercial purposes. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon any highway or street for the purpose of demonstrating, exhibiting or advertising any such vehicle or similar vehicle for sale or for the purpose of demonstrating, exhibiting or advertising any article for sale, and no vehicle shall be parked on the streets for the purpose of selling merchandise or farm produce therefrom. 
(b)  The chief of police may issue a permit designating the place and duration of standing or parking for advertising purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 17-244) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.455. 
Sec. 110-326. - Designation, marking of angle parking streets. 
    The chief of police shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets. 
(Code 1980, § 17-245) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.420(1). 
Sec. 110-327. - Unsuitable places for angle parking. 
    Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-246) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.420(2). 
Sec. 110-328. - Obedience to angle parking signs. 
    On those streets which have been signed or marked by the chief of police for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1980, § 17-247) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.425. 
Sec. 110-329. - Permits for loading or unloading vehicles with rear to curb. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee under this section or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-248) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.430. 
Sec. 110-330. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which this section is applicable. 
(Code 1980, § 17-249) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.485. 
Sec. 110-331. - Permits for curb loading zones. 
    The chief of police shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person, unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The chief of police, upon granting a permit and issuing such signs, shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee per year or fraction thereof, as established by the city council from time to time and may by general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof if loss or damage occurs and for their return if misuse occurs or the permit expires. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. 
(Code 1980, § 17-250) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.490. 
Sec. 110-332. - Use of curb loading zones. 
(a)  Passenger. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(b)  Freight. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials and then only for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(Code 1980, § 17-251) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.495, 300.500. 
Sec. 110-333. - Establishment, designation of bus stops or stands, taxicab stands or passenger carrier stands. 
    The chief of police is authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1980, § 17-252) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.505. 
Sec. 110-334. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this article. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this article, except in an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-253) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.510(1)-(3). 
Sec. 110-335. - Stopping, standing and parking of taxicabs. 
    The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided in this article. This section shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-254) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.510(4). 
Sec. 110-336. - Use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1980, § 17-255) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.515. 
Sec. 110-337. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and if there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle; 
(2)  The same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle; and 
(3)  The location of such lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic. 
This subsection shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle. 
(c)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1980, § 17-256) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.435. 
Sec. 110-338. - Working on motor vehicles on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to work upon any motor vehicle or to repair the vehicle while on the street in the city, unless such work or repairing shall be necessary in order to remove such vehicle from the street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-257) 
Sec. 110-339. - Parking in spaces marked with yellow lines or posted with appropriate signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stop or cause to be parked or stopped a motor vehicle or any other kind of vehicle within places marked with yellow lines or posted with appropriate signs at any time, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, adopted June 26, 2012, deleted § 110-339 which pertained to parking in lot F, Nichols Street Plaza Lot and derived from the Code of 1980, § 17-258. In addition, Ord. No. 1323-12 renumbered §§ 110-340-110-347 as §§ 110-339-110-346. 
Sec. 110-340. - Parking on certain streets prohibited or limited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle at any time, unless otherwise indicated, on the following streets: 
Addison Street East Third Street south to East Second Street on west side. Bartley Lane Wood Street east to city limits on both sides. Bluff Street East Second Street south a distance of 130 feet on both sides. East Second Street north to East Fifth Street on both sides. St. Louis Avenue north to State Maintenance (near Ovid Bell Press) both sides. Business 54 No Stopping, Standing, or Parking allowed on either side from Chestnut to Westminster Avenue. Carver Drive Westminster Avenue west to dead end on south side. Westminster Avenue east to Poston on both sides. Westminster Avenue west a distance of 70 feet on north side. Church parking allowed Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and Sunday and Wednesday evening 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Center Street Twenty-five feet to the north of the entrance between Presbyterian Manor and the Presbyterian Church. Three hundred feet north from the intersection of St. Louis Avenue. Chestnut Street, West Business 54 west to Palmer Street (on Sunday only) on north side. North side from Palmer Street west 25 feet. North side from Palmer Street east 25 feet. Christopher Lane Business 54 east a distance of 644 feet on north side. Churchill Road West Chestnut Street south to Truman Road on west side. Court Street West Second Street north a distance of 127 feet on west side. West Seventh Street south a distance of 112 feet; from that point a distance of 19 feet on west side. Ewing Street West 11th Street south a distance of 160 feet on east side. West 11th Street north to dead end on east side. West side between West 13th Street and West 14th Street. West side between 11th and 12th Streets. Glover Street South side, between Business 54 and railroad tracks. Grand Street East Ninth Street north to East Tenth Street on west side. East Tenth Street north a distance of 371 feet, business and emergency parking only on east side. Dead end south a distance of 48 feet on east side. East 13th Street east to east edge of Grand Street on north side. Hickman Avenue West Side from West Seventh Street and 380 feet north. East Side from West Seventh Street north to the Water Crossing. Hillcrest Street East Sixth Street north a distance of 287 feet on east side. Industrial Drive Wood Street west to Westminster Avenue on both sides. Jack Marshall Avenue West Fifth Street north to West Sixth Street on both sides Jefferson Street West Fourth Street north to West Fifth Street on east side. East side of Jefferson from West Eighth Street to West Tenth Street. Market Street East Second Street north to St. Louis Avenue both sides (with exception of law enforcement and handicapped parking on east side 102 feet to 207 feet north of East Fifth Street). Exception: five additional parking spaces in front of the former police station, 510 Market Street, from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. Monroe Street West 14th Street north to dead end on east side. Nichols Street West Second Street south a distance of 73 feet on east side. East side between Fourth Street and Third Street. West Sixth Street north to West Seventh Street on west side. Tenth Street south a distance of 58 feet on west side. Tenth Street south a distance of 851/2 feet on east side. West 12th Street south a distance of 128 feet on west side. Northwest Street Westminster Avenue west to dead end on south side. Westminster Avenue east to Walnut Street on south side. Westminster Avenue east a distance of 80 feet on north side. Westminster Avenue west 75 feet on north side. Oak Street From a point 238 feet north of East Second Street, thence north 243 feet on east side. Pioneer Drive West Fourth Street south a distance of 30 feet on both sides. Ravine Street East Fifth Street south to East Fourth Street on both sides. East Fourth Street south to East Third Street on west side. East Second Street south to Schultze Street on west side. Schultze Street south to Lynn Avenue on east side. Richard Ault Drive Helen Stephens Drive northeast a distance of 500 feet on east side. St. Francis Street West Chestnut Street south a distance of 30 feet on both sides. St. Louis Avenue Court Street east to Market Street on both sides. Market Street east to Bluff Street both sides. State Street Staff Circle south a distance of 140 feet on east side. East Second Street south a distance of 700 feet on west side. East Third Street north a distance of 21 feet on west side. East Eighth Street north a distance of 199 feet on east side. East side from Second Street to Fifth Street. Vine Street East Fifth Street north to East Seventh Street on east side. Northeast Eighth Street north to East Tenth Street on east side. East Seventh Street north a distance of 70 feet on east side. East Seventh Street north a distance of 70 feet on west side. Tenth Street north a distance of 240 feet on west side 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Walnut Street Ninth Street north to East Tenth Street on the west side. East Second Street north to dead end on east side. West Seventh Street north a distance of 20 feet on east side. West Eighth Street north to Carver Drive on east side. Westminster Avenue West Fourth Street south a distance of 91 feet on east side. West Fourth Street north to West Fifth Street on east side. West Fourth Street north a distance of 75 feet on west side. West Eighth Street to West Ninth Street on east and west sides of Westminster. Westminster Avenue West Eleventh Street south to Gulf Central Railroad on west side. Westminster Avenue West Thirteenth Street south to West Twelfth Street on west side. Carver Drive north to West Ninth Street on both sides, except Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and Sunday and Wednesday evenings 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Carver Drive south to Northwest Street on west side. Carver Drive south to Northwest Street on east side. Northwest Street south a distance of 89 feet on west side, except Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and Sunday and Wednesday evenings 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Northwest Street south a distance of 110 feet on east side, except Sunday and Wednesday evenings 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Fifteenth Street south 50 feet, from that point 120 feet south on east and west sides of Westminster. Wood Street Route O north to Saint Eunice Road east and west sides. Woodlawn Avenue Westminster Avenue west to dead end on south side. Westminster Avenue west 75 feet on north side. East First Street Bluff Street west to Business Route 54, both sides. East Second Street Court Street east to Market Street on south side. Bluff Street east to Stinson Creek Bridge, except on Sunday, a distance of 642 feet on both sides. Bluff Street west a distance of 101 feet on both sides. West Second Street Jefferson Street west a distance of 250 feet on south side. Jefferson Street east to Court Street on south side. Court Street west a distance of 118 feet on north side. East Third Street Bluff Street east to Addison Street on south side. Market Street west to Court Street on south side. West Fourth Street Court Street west a distance of 73 feet on north side. Jefferson Street west to Westminster Avenue on both sides. Court Street to a point 60 feet west of Nichols Street. South side between Court and Nichols. East Fifth Street Bluff Street east a distance of 140 feet on both sides. Bluff Street west a distance of 100 feet on both sides. Market Street east to Ravine Street on south side. West Fifth Street Nichols Street west a distance of 14.6 feet on south side. East Sixth Street Market Street west a distance of 66 feet on north side. Ravine Street east a distance of 110 feet on south side. West Sixth Street Nichols Street west to Westminster Avenue on south side. West Seventh Street Jefferson Street west 90 feet on the north side. East Seventh Street Vine Street east a distance of 325 feet on south side. Vine Street east a distance of 70 feet on north side. West Seventh Street Court Street to a point west of Nichols Street. Court Street west to Stinson Creek on south side. Westminster Avenue west to Hickman Avenue on north side. Eighth Avenue Walnut Street east to Jefferson Street on north side. Jefferson Street west 170 feet on south side. East Eighth Street Vine Street east, one hour parking 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except on Sunday, both sides. State Street east a distance of 144 feet on north side. West Eighth Street Court Street west to Nichols Street on both sides. Nichols Street west to Jefferson Street on north side. Jefferson Street west to dead end on south side. Westminster Avenue west 75 feet on north side. Westminster Avenue east 75 feet on north side. Church parking allowed Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and Sunday and Wednesday evening 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Northeast Eighth Street Center Street east to Bluff Street on south side. West Ninth Street Nichols Street west to Jefferson Street on north side. Westminster Avenue west 75 feet on both sides. Westminster Avenue east 75 feet on both sides. East Tenth Street Grand Street east to Vine Street, 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on north side. Bluff Street east a distance of 138 feet on both sides. Bluff Street west a distance of 207 feet on south side. Bluff Street west to West Avenue on north side. 12th Street South side from the RDC Building to the railroad bridge on the campus of William Woods University. West 12th Street Nichols Street west a distance of 388 feet on north side. Nichols Street west a distance of 73 feet on south side. Ewing Avenue West to Westminster Avenue on North side.  
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park dual-wheeled or heavy duty trucks on the following streets, although pickups are permissible: 
Market Street. 
(c)  Four parking places on the east side and five parking places on the west side of Westminster Avenue adjacent to the Winston Churchill Memorial and Library and the Callaway County Historical Society Museum shall be designated as visitor parking during visitor hours at either location. 
(Code 1980, § 17-260; Ord. No. 652-93, § 2, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 683-95, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 714-96, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 750-97, § 2, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 763-98, § 1, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 788-98, § 1, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 810-99, § 1, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 852-00, § 1, 8-8-00; Ord. No. 951-04, § 1, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 1142-06, § 1, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 1161-07, § 1, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 1170-07, § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 1229-08, § 1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 1274-10, § 1, 3-23-10; Ord. No. 1284-10, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 1304-11, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 1312-12, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 1336-12, § 1, 11-27-12; Ord. No. 1421-16, § 2, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 1423-16, § 1, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 1445-17, § 1, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 1461-18, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-341. - One hour parking zones. 
(a)  Parking shall be limited to a maximum of one hour on the following streets or indicated portions thereof during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Sundays: 
State Street, on the west side from East Eighth Street to East Seventh Street. 
East Eighth Street, both sides, between Vine Street and State Street. 
(b)  Parking shall be limited to a maximum of one hour on the following streets or indicated portions thereof during the time between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays: 
State Street, on the west side, between East Eighth Street and East Ninth Street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-261; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-342. - School bus parking zone near intersection of Tenth Street and Grand Street. 
    No vehicles except public school buses shall be parked at the junction of Tenth Street and Grand Street as follows: On the north side of East Tenth Street from Grand Street east to Vine Street, 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. This section shall be effective on days when school is in session. Reference section 110-341, Parking on certain streets prohibited or limited. 
(Code 1980, § 17-262; Ord. No. 726-96, § 1, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-343. - Parking on municipal lot near city hall. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park dual-wheeled or heavy duty trucks on the municipally owned parking lot which is located between Court Street and Market Street and south of city hall. Private passenger vehicles, pickups and vans may park on the municipal lot. 
(b)  Other vehicles may be parked on such lot at the direction of the police department when emergencies require such parking. 
(Code 1980, § 17-263; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-344. - Angle parking streets. 
    All motor vehicles shall be parked parallel with the curb of the street, except on the following streets or portions thereof all vehicles must be parked at an angle of 45 degrees with the curb: 
Court Street, from Fourth Street to Fifth Street. 
East Fifth Street, on the south side, from Market Street to Court Street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-264; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-345. - Parking in city parks. 
    Parking shall be prohibited in all parks of the city, except in areas designated as parking areas by signs on shoulders parallel to the roadways in the parks where such shoulders are provided. Parking on the grass or in recreational areas is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 17-269; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Sec. 110-346. - Parking of commercial vehicles and school buses in residential districts. 
    No operator of a commercial motor vehicle licensed for a gross weight in excess of 24,000 pounds or of any school, church or other bus, regardless of size, shall park such vehicle on any street or public right-of-way in a residential area of this city, zoned for single-family or multi-family residential use. 
(Ord. No. 684-95, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 1323-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Note- See editor's note at § 110-339. 
Secs. 110-347-110-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 110-356. - Installation, maintenance and enforcement. 
    The police department shall install, maintain and enforce parking meters on certain streets and parking lots of the city, as designated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 17-280) 
Sec. 110-357. - Time of operation. 
    Parking zones and parking meters shall be enforced by the police department between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 noon on Saturday, except holidays. 
(Code 1980, § 17-281) 
Sec. 110-358. - Zones; fees. 
(a)  Parking in the following designated areas shall be for a period of time not to exceed three hours. Parking for successive periods of time within the same parking zone is prohibited. For the purpose of this subsection, a zone shall constitute both sides of the street of a city block: 
Court Street, east side, from Third Street to Fourth Street, except for driveways. 
Court Street, west side, 114 feet south of the south curb of Fourth Street, thence south 216 feet, except for driveways. 
Court Street, from Fourth Street to West Seventh Street. 
Jefferson Street, between West Fifth Street north to West Sixth Street, six spaces on the west side. 
Nichols Street, from West Fifth Street to West Sixth Street. 
Nichols Street, east side, from West Sixth Street to West Seventh Street. 
Ravine Street, west side, from East Fourth Street to East Fifth Street. 
Ravine Street, from East Fifth Street to East Sixth Street. 
St. Louis Avenue, south side, from Court Street to Market Street. 
East Fourth Street, from Market Street to Court Street. 
West Fourth Street, north side, from Court Street to Nichols Street. 
East Fifth Street, north side, from Market Street to 200 feet east of Ravine Street. 
East Fifth Street, from Ravine Street east 200 feet on the south side. 
East Fifth Street, from Market Street to Court Street. 
East Fifth Street, north side, between Ravine Street and Market Street. 
West Fifth Street, from Court Street to Jefferson Street. 
East Sixth Street, from Ravine Street to Market Street. 
East Sixth Street, from Market Street to Court Street. 
West Sixth Street, from Court Street to Nichols Street. 
West Sixth Street, north side, between Nichols Street and Jefferson Street. 
East Seventh Street, from Market Street to Court Street. 
(b)  A vehicle shall be unlawfully parked if it remains in the zone beyond the legal parking limit. Violators shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 110-312(c) and (e). 
(Code 1980, § 17-282; Ord. No. 789-98, § 1, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 1321-12, § 1, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 110-359. - Off street parking lots. 
(a)  The fees for parking in city parking lots shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot A, city hall lot. Parking spaces in this lot shall be primarily for city employees, city vehicles and visitors to city hall. 
(2)  Lot B, Market Street lot. 
a.  Spaces 47-69 three hour free parking. This area shall be enforced as a parking zone prohibiting parking for successive periods of time. 
b.  Spaces 1-46 lease spaces at $20.00 per month, enforced from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday with year ahead applied financing. 
(3)  Lot C, sky-go lot. Lease spaces at $20.00 per month. 
(4)  Lot D, Northeast Market Street lot. Free parking with no time limit. 
(5)  Lot E, South Nichols Street lot. Lease spaces at $20.00 per month. 
(6)  Lot F, Nichols Street Plaza lot. 
a.  Spaces 18-29 one-hour parking, $0.25 with a five-hour maximum. 
b.  Spaces 1-17 lease spaces at $20.00 per month, enforced from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday with year ahead applied financing. 
(7)  Lot G-l and G-2, Jefferson Street lots. Lease spaces at $20.00 per month. 
(b)  In all lots designated for leased spaces, where such spaces are not leased or used by the city for official business, parking meters shall be installed which shall be metered at $0.25 per hour with a maximum of five-hour parking. 
(Code 1980, § 17-283; Ord. No. 630-92, § 1, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 637-93, § 1, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 652-93, § 3, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 789-98, § 2, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 838-00, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 1110-05, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1131-06, § 1, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 1324-12, § 1, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 1349-13, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 110-360. - Deposit of coin when vehicle is parked. 
    The driver of every vehicle which shall be parked, during the time limit parking regulations are in effect, in a parking space alongside of, next to or in front of which a parking meter is installed shall immediately upon parking such vehicle deposit a coin in the meter according to the length of time desired to be parked in such space and shall set the signal on the meter indicating the time limit for parking in such space. 
(Code 1980, § 17-284) 
Sec. 110-361. - Overtime and unlawful parking. 
(a)  No person shall allow a vehicle under his control to remain parked in any parking space for which a parking meter is installed and maintained when such parking meter indicates by proper signal that the time limit for such a space has expired. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be parked in a parking space for which a parking meter is installed and maintained for a longer period of time than the time limit indicated by a signal on such meter upon the insertion of a coin therein. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be parked in designated areas as described in section 110-359(a), (b) or (c) for a period of time longer than allowed by such section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-285) 
Sec. 110-362. - Use of slugs. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 17-286) 
Sec. 110-363. - Injuring or tampering with meters. 
    No person shall willfully mar, deface, injure, tamper with, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed and maintained. 
(Code 1980, § 17-287) 
Sec. 110-364. - Use of funds. 
    The fee required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division is levied to cover the cost of inspection, installation, operation, control and use of the parking spaces and parking meters described in this division and to cover the cost of checking and regulating the parking of vehicles in parking spaces and for the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment to control traffic and for use in the alleviation of traffic conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 17-288) 
Secs. 110-365-110-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS 

Sec. 110-376. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking space designated for use only by the physically disabled means any parking space that meets the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, and any rules or regulations established pursuant thereto including RSMo 301.143. 
    Physically disabled shall have the same meaning as RSMo 301.142. 
(Code 1980, § 17-290; Ord. No. 765-98, § 1, 2-10-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-377. - Reserved parking areas established. 
(a)  Authority of city engineer or owner of private property. The city engineer or any owner of private property who provides public parking spaces is authorized to designate and establish parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or card issued to physically disabled persons and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating such spaces. 
(1)  Whenever the city engineer or owner of private property so designates a parking space, the space shall be indicated by a sign upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of accessibility and shall also include any other appropriate wording or markings as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, and any rules or regulations established pursuant thereto. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs or spaces otherwise required pursuant to this section which are in use prior to August 28, 1997, shall not be in violation of this section during the useful life of such signs or spaces. Under no circumstances shall the useful life of the nonconforming signs or spaces be extended by means other than those means used to maintain any sign or space on the owner's property which is not used for vehicles displaying a disabled license plate. 
(b)  Authorized vehicles. Vehicles authorized to be parked in disabled parking spaces shall have one of the following: 
(1)  A disabled license plate or card issued by this state or another state. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle designed and operated solely for the purpose of transporting physically disabled persons. 
(c)  Unauthorized vehicles parking in disabled parking spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle or to own a vehicle which is parked in any disabled parking space on private or public property, unless such person is a physically disabled person or is transporting a physically disabled person and such vehicle is one authorized to be parked in a disabled parking space by displaying the appropriate license plate or card. 
(d)  Police officers authority. Police officers may enter upon private property open to public use to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Penalty for violation. Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall, upon conviction, be fined $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense and $300.00 for the third and each subsequent offense. 
(Code 1980, § 17-289; Ord. No. 765-98, § 1, 2-10-98) 
Sec. 110-378. - State law adopted. 
    RSMo 301.142 and 301.143 are made a part of this division by reference. 
(Code 1980, § 17-291; Ord. No. 765-98, § 1, 2-10-98) 
Secs. 110-379-110-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 110-401. - Obedience to traffic regulations. 
    Bicycles shall stop at all stop signs and obey all traffic regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 17-47) 
Sec. 110-402. - Number of passengers. 
    Bicycles shall not carry more than one person, except a bicycle which is constructed for more than one. 
(Code 1980, § 17-48) 
Sec. 110-403. - Riding on right side of street. 
    Every operator of a bicycle shall ride only on the right side of the street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-49) 
Sec. 110-404. - Lights. 
    No operator of a bicycle shall ride at night without a light on the front and a reflector or light on the rear of the bicycle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-50) 
Sec. 110-405. - Riding abreast. 
    No operator of a bicycle shall ride abreast of another bicycle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-51) 
Sec. 110-406. - Riding out of an alley or driveway or from behind parked car. 
    No operator of a bicycle shall ride out of an alley or driveway or from behind parked cars without first stopping and looking to see that the sidewalk and streets are clear of traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-52) 
Sec. 110-407. - Trick riding; reckless riding. 
(a)  No operator of a bicycle shall engage in any trick riding or weaving or without having at least one hand on the handle bars of the bicycle. 
(b)  No operator of a bicycle shall at any time ride a bicycle in a reckless manner. 
(Code 1980, § 17-53) 
Sec. 110-408. - Riding on sidewalk. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1980, § 17-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.347. 
Secs. 110-409-110-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 110-431. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as prescribed in sections 110-126 and 110-127, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-206) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.370. 
Sec. 110-432. - Right-of-way at crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in subsection 110-436(b). 
(Code 1980, § 17-207) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375(1), (3). 
Sec. 110-433. - Leaving curb suddenly or entering path of vehicle. 
    No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield the right-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 17-208) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375(2). 
Sec. 110-434. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1980, § 17-209) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.380. 
Sec. 110-435. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1980, § 17-210) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.385. 
Sec. 110-436. - Yielding right-of-way. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  This section shall have no application under the conditions stated in section 10-437 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
(Code 1980, § 17-211) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.390. 
Sec. 110-437. - Prohibited crossing places. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. 
(c)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any street designated by this chapter. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally, unless authorized by official traffic control devices. When authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1980, § 17-212) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.395. 
Sec. 110-438. - Manner of walking along roadway. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon any adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1980, § 17-213) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.405. 
Sec. 110-439. - Obedience to bridge signals. 
    No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(Code 1980, § 17-214) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.400(1). 
Sec. 110-440. - Duty of drivers. 
    Notwithstanding the sections of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-215) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.410. 
Sec. 110-441. - Persons carrying white canes. 
    For the purpose of guarding against accidents, it is declared unlawful for any person not wholly or partially blind to carry or use upon the streets, highways or public places of this city any cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped in red. The term "white in color" as used in this section means painted or enameled, and not an unpainted or natural wood color. Such white canes or walking sticks may be used on the streets or in other public places of the city by persons wholly or partially blind as a means of identifying them to drivers or operators of vehicles and for the purpose of protecting them from injury by such vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 17-216) 
Sec. 110-442. - Duty of driver approaching handicapped with white cane or guide dog. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a blind or visually handicapped, deaf or partially deaf person or physically disabled person who is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip, or using a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog shall yield to such person, and any driver who fails to take such precautions shall be liable in damages for any injury caused such pedestrian. A blind or visually handicapped, deaf or partially deaf person or physically disabled person not carrying such a cane or using a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog in any of the places, accommodations or conveyances listed in RSMo 209.150, shall have all of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon other persons. 
(Code 1980, § 17-217) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.080. 
Secs. 110-443-110-465. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 110-466. - Notice to police. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more to one person shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police if such accident occurred within the city. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Code 1980, § 17-322) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.110, 300.120(1). 
Sec. 110-467. - Report to police. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall, within five days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police. However, this subsection shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(b)  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in subsection (a) of this section and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, within five days after the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
(Code 1980, § 17-323) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.115, 300.120(2). 
Sec. 110-468. - Confidential nature of reports. 
(a)  All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the person so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police or other governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police or other governmental agencies may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(b)  No written reports forwarded under this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police shall furnish upon demand of any party to such trial or upon demand of any court a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police in compliance with law and, if such report has been made, the date, time and location of the accident and the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, and the investigating officers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-324) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.125. 
Sec. 110-469. - Investigations. 
    All police officers shall investigate traffic accidents, arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1980, § 17-325) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.030. 
Chapter 114 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 62; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Billing period means a utility service usage period. 
    Board means the board of public utilities as established by the Charter. 
    Commercial service means service for business use. 
    Customer or consumer means a purchaser of utility service. 
    Delinquent account means a utility bill unpaid after its due date. 
    Discontinuance of service means an intentional cessation of utility service by the city and not requested by a customer. 
    Economic hardship means an inability to make timely payment for utility service due to fiscal restraints. The level of economic hardship shall be determined by using the most current state guidelines for the utility assistance program. 
    Estimated billing means a billing for utility service which is not based on an actual meter reading. 
    Fuel adjustment clause means the adjustment procedure approved by the city council to recognize variations in the cost of fuel for the generation of electric power. 
    Good faith attempt to pay means the requirement whereby a customer makes some payment each month as agreed to by the city. 
    Industrial service means service for manufacturing purposes. 
    Mains means city-owned piping for the purpose of distributing gas or water to a customer or for the collection of sewage. 
    Rate means the amount charged for usage of a specified unit of electricity, gas, water or sewer service. 
    Registered elderly or handicapped customer means a person who is above the age of 62 or is handicapped and has registered with the city by submitting a statement attesting to the condition. 
    Residential service means service for household purposes. 
    Service means the same as utility service. 
    Service line means piping connecting a customer to a city main. 
    Sewer means piping designed for the collection and transportation of sewage. 
    Suspension of service means a temporary cessation of utility service initiated by the utility department. 
    Termination of service means a cessation of utility service requested by the customer. 
    Utility charges means the charges for utility service. 
    Utility service means the provision of electricity, gas, water or sewer and activities related to that provision. 
(Code 1980, § 28-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 114-2-114-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 114-26-114-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Board of public utilities, § 114-51 et seq. 

Sec. 114-36. - Established. 
    There is established, in accordance with article VI, section 6.1(c) of the city Charter, a utility department, the purpose of which is to operate and maintain all public utilities of the city. The department shall be organized and maintained as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 28-2) 
Sec. 114-37. - Composition. 
    The utility department shall consist of four divisions: the gas division, the electric division, the water division and the sewer division. 
(Code 1980, § 28-3) 
Sec. 114-38. - Appointment of superintendent. 
    The director of administration, with the consent of the mayor, shall appoint a superintendent for the utility department. 
(Code 1980, § 28-4) 
Sec. 114-39. - Responsibilities of superintendent. 
    The superintendent of the utility department shall have supervisory responsibility for all activities and personnel of the utility department. Further, the superintendent shall have the responsibility to enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the utility department. The superintendent may promulgate administrative rules and regulations consistent with the letter and intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 28-5; Ord. No. 622-92, § 1, 8-25-92) 
Sec. 114-40. - Division supervisors. 
    A supervisor for each division or combination thereof of the utility department shall be appointed by the superintendent of utilities with the consent of the director of administration. 
(Code 1980, § 28-6) 
Sec. 114-41. - Compensation. 
    The salary scale for personnel of the utility department shall be established by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 28-7) 
Secs. 114-42-114-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation board, § 82-51 et seq.; utility department, § 114-36 et seq. 

Sec. 114-51. - Established; duties. 
(a)  There is established, in accordance with article VI section 6.1(i) of the Charter, a board of public utilities. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  The board shall have authority as provided in RSMo 91.540 with regard to rate setting. Recommendations for utility rate structures, increases or decreases in rates shall be made by the board to the city council when the board shall deem it appropriate. Before the city council shall finally pass any change in any rate or rate structure, it shall receive a recommendation from the board. The board shall review the rates annually of each utility operated by the city as a part of the budget process. A rate-setting policy shall be established by the council after receiving a recommendation from the board. 
(2)  The utility board shall review capital improvement requests, preliminary budget and salary structures as they may pertain to the utility department prior to submission to the city council and shall make such recommendations to the city council as it deems appropriate. 
(3)  The board shall sit in advisement with the mayor and director of administration in the selection of the superintendent of utilities. The board shall participate in: 
a.  The development of the job description for the superintendent of utilities. 
b.  The interview of candidates for the position. 
c.  Such other decision making process as may be necessary in filling the position of superintendent of utilities. 
(4)  The board shall act to set all technical policy and review technical operational activity not inconsistent with the Charter or ordinances of the city. At a minimum it shall: 
a.  Develop long range plans for the utility departments. 
b.  Develop plans for system enhancement. 
c.  Participate in the development of policies unique to the utility department before they are adopted or implemented. 
d.  Provide recommendations for all utility system extension policies. 
(5)  The board shall also have such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the mayor, city council or the director of administration. 
(Code 1980, § 28-8) 
Sec. 114-52. - Appointment of members, terms, removal from office. 
(a)  The board of public utilities shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the city council and shall consist of five members selected from residents of the city. 
(b)  Members of the board shall hold office for four years from July 1 following their appointment. Annually, the mayor shall before July 1 of each year appoint one member who shall hold office for four years. 
(c)  Upon recommendation of the mayor, a member of the board may be removed by a vote of five members of the city council. A member may also be removed by six votes of the city council independently of the mayor. 
(d)  Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the board without being formally excused by the board shall forfeit membership. 
(Code 1980, § 28-9; Ord. No. 942-03, § 1, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 114-53. - Meetings, officers, quorum, compensation. 
(a)  Within 15 days after their appointment, the board of public utilities shall meet to establish a regular quarterly meeting date and thereafter shall meet at least quarterly. The board shall elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice-chairman. The chairman of the board shall preside at its meetings. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All members of the board shall serve without compensation but the actual and necessary expenses of their office shall be paid by the city. 
(b)  The city clerk or a person designated by the director of administration shall be the recording secretary for the board and shall keep a record of all actions taken at its meetings. 
(Code 1980, § 28-10) 
Secs. 114-54-114-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-76. - Monthly payment in lieu of taxes. 
    In lieu of taxes, the finance department shall bill, collect and pay into the general fund of the city each month five percent of the revenue collections for electricity, gas and water supplied by the city's utility department. Each utility bill shall reflect the amount to be transferred to the general fund. 
(Code 1980, § 28-13) 
Sec. 114-77. - Extension policies established. 
    Certain policies regarding the extension of all public utilities, both within and beyond the city limits, shall be as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 28-14) 
Sec. 114-78. - Sale of public utilities. 
    The public utilities shall not be sold, disposed of in any way, abandoned or cease to operate, except by a majority of the votes cast at any city election or a special election held for that purpose pursuant to ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 28-15) 
Sec. 114-79. - Written application for utility service; normal business hours. 
(a)  Any person desiring utility service or termination of utility service shall make written application on a form furnished by the city. Such application shall be made as far in advance of the effective date as possible. 
(b)  A customer may order utility service between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except on regularly scheduled city holidays. Customers requesting normal utility connections during hours or days other than those established in this subsection shall be required to pay a service charge of $25.00. 
(c)  The city shall not be obligated to provide utility connections or disconnections until reasonable time has been allowed for proper planning. 
(Code 1980, § 28-16) 
Sec. 114-80. - Notice when terminating utility service. 
    A customer who intends to vacate any premises, discontinue the use of utility services or terminate in any manner his liability to pay for utility services delivered to such premises shall give at least 24 hours' written notice on a form furnished by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 28-17) 
Sec. 114-81. - Special utility services. 
    Customers requesting special utility services, such as meter relocation or special disconnections and connections, shall be charged on a labor-and-material basis. 
(Code 1980, § 28-18) 
Sec. 114-82. - Denial of utility service. 
    No customer having an unpaid bill for utility service may be permitted new or additional utility service without approval by the city's chief financial officer. 
(Code 1980, § 28-19) 
Sec. 114-83. - Access to premises, discontinuance of service for cause other than nonpayment. 
    The city shall have, at all reasonable hours, access to the premises of a customer of any utility for the purpose of reading, inspecting, adjusting, repairing or otherwise caring for its service, connections and meters. The city shall have the right to discontinue any utility service without notice to prevent fraud or theft or for the protection of its property or to prevent disaster. The city shall also have the right to discontinue any utility service if the city's planning and code enforcement officer determines that a structure or condition upon the premises is in violation of national, state or city building, structural or utility code and that the continuance of service presents a hazard to health, safety or property. 
(Code 1980, § 28-20; Ord. No. 622-92, § 1, 8-25-92) 
Sec. 114-84. - Injuring, misusing utility system. 
    No person shall connect with or use any city utility service without the knowledge or consent of the city or after the utility service has been discontinued by the city nor shall he in any manner defraud the city in the use of any utility service or tamper with any utility meter or shunt around any meter nor shall he willfully or maliciously injure or destroy any property whatsoever of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 28-21) 
Sec. 114-85. - Area of service. 
(a)  The area of utility service shall be within the corporate city limits and within the area outside such corporate city limits served by any city utility. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from purchasing, leasing, erecting, installing or otherwise acquiring real and personal property necessary, useful or desirable in the conduct of its operations at any place, whether within or without the corporate limits of the city, subject to approval by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 28-22) 
Secs. 114-86-114-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATIONS, RATES AND DEPOSITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 106. 

Sec. 114-96. - Classifications. 
(a)  Generally. The amounts and procedures for computation of the various rates, charges, deposits and classifications referred to in this section shall be as recommended by the utility board and approved by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Electricity. The classification of electric users shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential. 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to any residential customer at points on the city utilities existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by city utilities. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt single phase. 
c.  Application. To single-phase service for all domestic users in private residences and individual family apartments supplied through one meter, where the city utilities are the sole source of supply. Not applicable for service to recognized roominghouses or boardinghouses or establishments of a nonresidential nature, i.e., apartment buildings served by a master meter. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
(2)  Residential electric heating (single meter). 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to any residential customer at points on the city utilities existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by city utilities, for the seven regular monthly meter readings taken after October 1 and until May 1. This schedule is made available to residential customers whose residences are heated wholly by permanently installed electric heaters. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt single phase. 
c.  Application. To single-phase service for all domestic users in private residences or in individual family apartments supplied through one meter, where city utilities are the sole source of supply. Not applicable for service to recognized roominghouses or boardinghouses or establishments of a nonresidential nature, i.e., apartment buildings served by a master meter. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
(3)  Residential electric heating (separate meter). 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to any residential customer at points on the city utilities existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by city utilities. This schedule is made available to residential customers whose residences are heated wholly by permanently installed electric heat for the seven regular monthly meter readings taken after October 1 and until May 1. Lighting and other power uses, except air conditioning, will not be allowed on this schedule. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt single phase. 
c.  Application. For heating and air conditioning service only through a separate meter, provided all other service is rendered through the regular meter. Not applicable for service to recognized roominghouses or boardinghouses or establishments of a nonresidential nature, i.e., apartment buildings served by a master meter. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
(4)  General service. 
a.  Availability. This rate is available to any customer at points on city utilities existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by city utilities. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt single phase or, where available and at the option of city utilities, 120/240 volt three phase, four wire delta or 120/208 volt three phase, four wire wye. 
c.  Application. To single-phase or three-phase service, if available, for all establishments, including churches, hospitals and apartment buildings served by a master meter, where city utilities are the sole source of supply. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
(5)  General service electric heating. 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to general service customers, at points on the city utilities existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by city utilities, for the seven regular monthly meter readings taken after October 1 and until May 1. This schedule is made available to general service customers whose heating is obtained through permanently installed electric heaters, for the seven regular monthly meter readings taken after October 1 and until May 1. Lighting and other power uses, except air conditioning, will not be allowed on this schedule. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt, single phase or, where available and at the option of city utilities, 120/240 volt three phase, four wire wye or 120/208 volt three phase, four wire wye. 
c.  Application. For heating service only through a separate meter, provided all other service is rendered through the regular meter. For space heating and air conditioning service only through a separate meter, provided all other service is rendered through the regular meter. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
(6)  Medium power service. 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to any nonresidential customer using standard electric service for power or combined power, lighting, heating and special equipment at points on city utilities existing distribution lines within the area served by city utilities. Customers under this schedule must use an average of 30,000 kwh of electricity per billing period annually. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 240 volt, 480 volt or 2400 volt, three phase or power loads, and 120/240 volts, single phase for lighting and incidental loads, or 120/208 volt three phase, four wire wye. 
c.  Application. To single-phase or three-phase services for all nonresidential power uses in commercial or manufacturing and processing establishments where city utilities are the sole source of supply. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
d.  General. As far as practical, all energy should pass through one point of delivery and the city utilities, at its option, may meter at primary voltage. The overall power factor of the load must not drop below 85 percent. If it is determined that the power factor has dropped below 85 percent, service under this schedule may be discontinued until such time as the customer installs suitable devices to bring the power factor up to 85 percent or higher. 
(7)  Large power service. 
a.  Availability. This schedule is available to large power customers using standard electric service for power or combined power, lighting, heating and special equipment at points on city utilities existing distribution lines within the area served by city utilities. Customers under this schedule will be billed for a minimum demand of 500 kilowatts in each billing period. All nonresidential customers having 500 kw demand or more in one month must use this large power rate schedule. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles, 240 volt, 480 volt or 2400 volt, three phase or power loads, and 120/240 volts, single phase for lighting and incidental loads or 120/208 volt three phase, four wire wye. 
c.  Application. To single-phase or three-phase services for all nonresidential power uses in commercial or manufacturing and processing establishments where city utilities are the sole source of supply. Service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold. 
d.  General. As far as practical, all energy should pass through one point of delivery and the city utilities, at its option, may meter at primary voltage. The city utilities will install a suitable demand meter for determining the monthly maximum indicated demand. The overall power factor of the load must not drop below 85 percent. If it is determined that the power factor has dropped below 85 percent, service under this schedule may be discontinued until such time as the customer installs suitable devices to bring the power factor up to 85 percent or higher. 
(8)  Economic development rider. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this economic development rider (EDR) is to encourage industrial development in the city. 
b.  Restrictions. Electric rates computed using the formula contained in this EDR are not permitted for service provided pursuant to any other special electric rate structure. Retail customers are not eligible for this EDR. 
c.  Applicability. This EDR may be applied to new customers or additional separately metered facilities of existing customers. Charges qualifying for a reduction under this EDR for separately metered service to existing customers will be calculated independently of any other service rendered. Electric rates computed using the formula contained in this EDR apply only in conjunction with local governmental economic development activities and when the customer meets any one of the following criteria: 
1.  Customers peak demand is a minimum of 50 kw. 
2.  Customers electric energy consumption is a minimum of 25,000 kwh per month. 
3.  A minimum of 25 new full-time equivalent (FTE) jobs are created by the customer. The EDR becomes effective when the 25 FTE positions are filled. (One FTE=2,080 hours/year) 
4.  Recommended by the director of administration with the approval of the mayor. 
Final approval of each customer to receive the EDR, meeting the criteria above, will be granted by the city council. The director of administration will give written approval to the chief financial officer prior to implementation of the EDR. 
d.  Incentive billing calculation. Pretax charges computed using the standard rate schedule shall be reduced as follows: 
1.  By 25 percent during the first contract year. 
2.  By 20 percent during the second contract year. 
3.  By 15 percent during the third and fourth contract years. 
4.  By ten percent during the fifth contract year. 
This incentive calculation schedule shall cease at the conclusion of the fifth contract year. All other billing, operational and related provisions of the standard rate schedule shall remain in effect. 
e.  Additional consideration. The city will not require customer payment for construction of standard service equipment if the projected revenue from the new load is determined to be sufficient to justify the required investment by the city. The request for rate computation as provided in this EDR shall be accompanied by sufficiently detailed information to enable the city to determine whether the request will meet the required criteria. New or expanded facilities, under construction or otherwise committed to operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection (b)(8) derives, are not eligible for rate calculation under this EDR. Electric service provided under the conditions of this EDR shall be evidenced by a contract between the customer and the city. 
f.  Cessation or termination of EDR. The city may cease to offer the EDR with respect to new electric loads at any time following the first anniversary of the initial offering of the EDR. However, customers receiving service under this rider on the date it is withdrawn may continue to receive the benefits of this rider. Notwithstanding the above, this rider shall immediately become void and the city shall have no further obligations or liabilities hereunder if any provision of this rider is determined to be unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction. If the customer receiving the EDR fails to meet the qualifying criteria for any six consecutive months, the EDR for that customer will be terminated. 
(Code 1980, § 28-23; Ord. No. 761-97, § 1, 12-16-97) 
Sec. 114-97. - Rates. 
(a)  Various rates for utility service shall be as established by ordinance. 
(b)  Established rates shall be reviewed annually by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 28-11) 
Sec. 114-98. - Special rates for retired employees. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "retirement" refers to those full-time employees who retire using the guidelines for retirement as outlined in the personnel manual. 
(b)  All employees of the city who were working for the city as full-time employees on January 5, 1976, and who have maintained continuous city employment to retirement eligibility shall be charged for electric, gas, water and sewer services one-half of the regular rates charged by the city for such services. 
(c)  The intent of this section is to restore to those persons employed by the city on January 5, 1976, the benefits which were eliminated by the repeal of Code 1961, section 2-90.1. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any individuals employed after January 5, 1976. 
(e)  To receive utility rates at one-half of the regular rates charged, the employee must be receiving utility services from the city. This would entitle the retired employee to receive the benefits even though the retired employee was not entitled to the benefits at the time of initial retirement because of not using municipal utilities. This policy shall apply only to the personal residence of the retired employee while he resides in that residence as a member of the household. 
(Code 1980, § 28-12) 
Sec. 114-99. - Utility deposits. 
(a)  Deposits shall be required of all utility customers prior to connection to city utilities, except as provided in sections 114-100 and 114-101. 
(b)  Utility deposits shall be placed in the deposit fund of the utility for which the deposit was collected. 
(c)  Following the final readout of a customer's utility meter, the customer's deposit shall be applied to the unpaid bill, and the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the customer. 
(Code 1980, § 28-24; Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 114-100. - Deposit schedule established. 
(a)  The schedule for residential utility deposits shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  New commercial/industrial customers. The city will require security equal to one month's average bill for all new commercial customers. The average bill would be based on past consumption history at the service address. If this is unavailable or inappropriate due to a change in the type of business to be located at that address, then the city will look at similar types of businesses either among its own customers or in other cities. In any case, the security will be required before utility service is activated. 
(c)  Existing commercial/industrial customers whose accounts are not secured as of the date this policy is adopted will not be required to furnish security for their accounts as long as they maintain a good payment history. If an existing customer's account is delinquent two or more times during the last 12 months, the city retains the right to require security equal to as much as three month's average bills. The customer is to provide this security within 30 days of notification. Service may be terminated if the required security is not in place within 30 days of notification. 
(Code 1980, § 28-25; Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 114-101. - Deposits refunded for timely payment. 
(a)  Residential customers. Any person having been a city residential utility customer for a period of time exceeding two years and who at that time has consistently paid all utility bills by their due date shall be deemed to have established a payment record entitling him to have all his utility deposits refunded or credited to an appropriate utility bill upon request. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial customers. Deposits on commercial and/or industrial customers are nonrefundable as long as the account is active. 
(Code 1980, § 28-26; Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 114-102. - Exceptions to payment of deposits. 
(a)  Residential customers. Any person requesting residential utility service who furnishes a letter from an immediate past utility supplier, indicating a satisfactory payment record for a period of 12 continuous months within the past two years, shall not be required to make utility deposits. However, if consistent payment by the due date is not maintained, utility deposits may be required. 
(b)  Any person having made deposits for residential utility service who subsequently furnishes a letter as provided in subsection (a) of this section may obtain a refund of or credit for such deposits. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial customers. If an existing customer with a good payment history: 
(1)  Relocates within the city or expands an existing location - additional security will not be required unless there will be a significant increase in consumption; 
(2)  Opens a second or new location (either directly related to the existing business or a new business) - security will be required in the amount of one month's average bill for that location. 
(d)  If the city is holding security on an existing account due to poor payment history, security will also be required for any new accounts the customer may wish to open due to relocation, expansion or opening of new business. 
(Code 1980, § 28-27; Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 114-103. - Additional deposit. 
(a)  Residential customers. If a residential customer is delinquent two or more times in any 12-month period for non-payment of any utility bill, the city may require an increase in deposit up to three months average bill. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial customers: 
(1)  Adjustment for poor payment history. Accounts will be reviewed monthly for adequacy of security based on payment history. If an account has a poor payment history, the city may require an increase in security up to three months average bill; 
(2)  Adjustment for change in consumption/rates. Accounts will be reviewed annually for adequacy of security based on billing history. If there is a significant change in the average monthly bill on a secured account, the city may adjust the required security in an amount that will maintain the security at its' current level. 
(c)  Customers will be notified in writing of the required change. Any additional required security is to be in place within 30 days of notification. Service may be terminated if the required additional security is not in place within 30 days of notification. 
(Code 1980, § 28-28; Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 114-104. - Definitions. 
    Delinquent payments. Any payment made after the due date, as defined in city ordinance. 
    Existing commercial/industrial customers. Those customers with active accounts as of the date this policy is adopted. 
    Good payment history. Less than two delinquent payments during the last 12 months. 
    New customers. Those commercial/industrial customers who do not have an active commercial account as of the date this policy is adopted. 
    Poor payment history. Two or more delinquent payments during the last 12 months. 
    Security. Cash, check, letters of credit, surety bonds or certificates of deposit. CD's must be held in the name of the customer and the city. CD's will be held by the city for safekeeping. The customer will earn interest on pledged certificates. 
    Significant change in consumption. A change in a customer's average monthly bill of at least $100.00 or 25 percent, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1185-07, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Secs. 114-105-114-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTION 

Sec. 114-116. - Utility meters; monthly readings. 
(a)  All connections for electricity gas and water shall be metered by meters furnished by the city without charge. All meters shall remain the property of the city. 
(b)  An attempt shall be made to read all utility meters monthly. 
(Code 1980, § 28-37) 
Sec. 114-117. - Customer service lines; location of meters; variance. 
(a)  Water. Service lines shall be connected to the city water main at a customer's curb or property line when the main exists. The city shall install and maintain that section between the main and this point of connection. 
(b)  Sewer. Building sewers shall be connected at a customer curb or property line when the main exists. The building sewer between the main and the property line shall be installed and maintained at the customer's expense. 
(c)  Gas. The city shall install and maintain gas service and yard lines as required by the state public service commission's gas safety regulation 40 CSR 240-40. New installations shall be at the customer's cost while the city shall bear the cost of maintenance and replacements. As a condition of service, the city shall have the right to enter upon the customer's property to provide such work. 
(d)  Costs. The cost for customer service lines and their installation and maintenance shall be borne by the customer. In addition, any such installation or maintenance shall be approved by the city prior to its being obscured from view. 
(e)  Location of meters. Meters for gas and water shall be located in a place convenient for the city. 
(f)  Variances. Variance from the general policy of this section may be taken only after written permission has been granted by the planning and code enforcement officer or the superintendent of utilities. The customer shall bear any costs incurred, as a result of the requested variance, less the cost of conventional installation. 
(Code 1980, § 28-38; Ord. No. 622-92, § 1, 8-25-92) 
Sec. 114-118. - Electric service and meter location; variance. 
(a)  The city shall install electric service cable from the nearest power pole or pad mounted transformer to the nearest corner of a structure, plus ten feet either side of the corner, more or less, the installation to be at the expense of the city. Electric meters shall be mounted on the outside of structures and within that same ten feet, more or less, from the same corner, the electric meter location to be no higher than seven feet above ground and accessible at all times. 
(b)  Variance from this section may be taken only after written permission has been granted by the planning and code enforcement officer or the superintendent of utilities. The customer shall bear any installation or maintenance costs incurred, as a result of the requested variance, less the cost of conventional installation or maintenance. 
(Code 1980, § 28-39) 
Secs. 114-119-114-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BILLING 

Sec. 114-131. - Issuance; estimated bills; due date. 
(a)  The city shall issue each utility customer a monthly bill for services provided. 
(b)  If for whatever the reason a meter cannot be read, an estimated bill will be issued. 
(c)  All utility bills shall be payable on or before the due date indicated and if not paid by that date shall be subject to a penalty. 
(Code 1980, § 28-33) 
Sec. 114-132. - Penalty for delinquent payment. 
    The penalty for payment of a utility bill after the due date shall be ten percent of the unpaid amount. 
(Code 1980, § 28-34) 
Sec. 114-133. - Special payment arrangements. 
    Payments of less than the full amount currently due on a utility bill will only be accepted upon special arrangements, in accordance with section 114-146, which shall require a good faith attempt by the customer to pay. Good faith attempt to pay requires a customer to make some payment each month and is further defined as the action of a customer who: 
(1)  Contacts the city's chief financial officer when a utility bill will not be paid in full by the due date of the bill. 
(2)  States an inability to pay in full. 
(3)  Provides the chief financial officer with sufficient information regarding his income for determination of terms for a payment agreement. 
(4)  Enters into a payment agreement which includes any amount in arrears, current amounts and all ensuing bills. 
(5)  Applies for financial assistance from any federal, state, local or other heating payment fund program, in which case proof of eligibility for such assistance should be received by the chief financial officer within 30 days from the date of the application. 
(Code 1980, § 28-35) 
Sec. 114-134. - Failure to make scheduled payment. 
    With regard to authorized utility payment agreements, failure to make a scheduled payment will be cause for immediate discontinuance of service without further notice. 
(Code 1980, § 28-36) 
Secs. 114-135-114-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE 

Sec. 114-146. - Nonpayment of bill. 
    If a utility bill remains unpaid ten days after its due date, utility service may be discontinued, except when such discontinuance is prohibited by law or special arrangements have been made with the city's chief financial officer. 
(Code 1980, § 28-29) 
Sec. 114-147. - Notice. 
    Before discontinuance of utility service, the city shall issue a notice to the customer stating that utility service may be discontinued seven days after the date of the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 28-30) 
Sec. 114-148. - Discontinuance after notification, exception for disputed bill. 
    Should a utility bill remain unpaid after the expiration of the grace period indicated on the notice of discontinuance, utility service shall be discontinued without further notice, unless the city has been provided with a written statement from the customer stating that the utility bill in question is in dispute. Further, the statement from the customer shall indicate the reason for the dispute. 
(Code 1980, § 28-31) 
Sec. 114-149. - Resumption of service after discontinuance prohibited under certain conditions. 
    Service that has been discontinued to a particular household for default in payment of utility charges shall not be resumed in the name of any relative, friend or member of the family while that person resides in the household. 
(Code 1980, § 28-32) 
Sec. 114-150. - Reconnection fee schedule. 
    The schedule for reconnection fees for delinquent customers shall be established by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 28-32.1) 
Secs. 114-151-114-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2015, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 114-171-114-182, 114-196-114-205, 114-216-114-222, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1980, §§ 28-40-28-66, 28-70; Ord. No. 1191-07, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2007. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 94. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at five degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff water and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid waste from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means liquid wastes resulting from an industrial manufacturing process, trade or business. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle being greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer controlled by public authority to which all owners of abutting property have equal rights of access. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer carrying sewage into which stormwater, surface water or groundwater is not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes, together with such groundwater, surface water or stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water, drainage and unpolluted cooling water, but not sewage or waste. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-172. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  If, upon conviction of a violation of this article, it appears that the violation continues to exist, the court having jurisdiction may permit the city to make the requested corrections or cause them to be made and report the cost thereof to the judge who shall make such expense a part of the judgment in addition to any other fine or costs taxed in the action. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(e)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 114-172, (d), shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(f)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 114-172, (e), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each 24-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-173. - Objectionable waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner on any property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-174. - Unauthorized sewage disposal. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or operate any facility intended for or used for the disposal of sewage or to discharge into any natural outlet under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or polluted water, until treatment has been provided in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-175. - Connection required. 
    The owner of any structure that produces sewage is required to connect such structure directly to a proper city sewer, provided a public sewer is within 100 feet of any property line of the structure. The connection shall be completed within 90 days after official notice. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-176. - Expense and liability incident to installation. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the city's system shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-177. - Separate building sewer required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining property, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-178. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only after approval by the planning and code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-179. - Construction methods and materials. 
    Construction methods and materials used in the construction of sanitary sewers shall conform to this article or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-180. - Lifts. 
    In all buildings in which any drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means to facilitate discharge to the public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-181. - Connection to public sewer. 
(a)  Any connection of a building sewer to a city sewer shall conform to this article or other ordinances of the city. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the planning and code enforcement officer. 
(b)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.E.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(c)  An applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the planning and code enforcement officer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the city sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-182. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Secs. 114-183-114-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 114-196. - Prohibited sanitary sewer discharges; storm sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-197. - Waters and wastes specifically prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanide in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-198. - Waters and wastes subject to review by city. 
(a)  Any waters or wastes having the following are subject to review by the city: 
(1)  A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the city. 
(b)  Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
    Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval by the city, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-199. - Substances city may prohibit. 
    No person may discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city, that such might harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability or wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
(a)  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride or sodium sulfate. 
(b)  Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(c)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(d)  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-200. - Actions city may take with reference to certain wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 114-199 and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under section 114-205. 
(b)  If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to review and approval by the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws of the city and state. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-201. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(c)  A grease interceptor or trap shall be installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains or other fixtures in all restaurants, hotel kitchens, bars where food is served, factory cafeterias, clubs, fraternal organizations or other commercial establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-202. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-203. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the city the owner of property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install in the building sewer a control manhole, together with necessary meters and appurtenances, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and installation shall be in compliance with city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-204. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with an EPA approved edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
(b)  The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH analyses are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-205. - Special agreements. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent any agreement or arrangement between the city and an industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Secs. 114-206-114-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SYSTEMS 

Sec. 114-216. - Connection authorized under certain conditions. 
    When a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, a building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the provisions of the department of natural resources and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-217. - Permits. 
(a)  There shall be two classes of private sewer connection permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial, other than industrial waste. 
(2)  For establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(b)  Before beginning construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a permit. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement with plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the planning and code enforcement officer. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time of application. 
(c)  Fees for the sewer tapping and reconnection permit shall be established and amended by the council from time to time, and shall be provided, in writing, in the permit document and packet of information. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 1451-17, § 1, 11-28-17) 
Sec. 114-218. - Approval of system; inspections. 
    A permit for the construction of a private sewage disposal system shall not be construed to be a permit to operate the system, and operation shall not commence until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the planning and code enforcement officer. The planning and code enforcement officer may inspect construction at any stage, and the applicant for the permit shall notify the planning and code enforcement officer when the construction is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 114-221, (a) above, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 114-203. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-219. - Specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall, at the minimum, comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Natural Resources and the ordinances of the city. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 130,680 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-220. - Connection when public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article. Within 90 days after such connection, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with such suitable material as may be required by the planning and code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-221. - Additional requirements. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city. 
(a)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(b)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 114-222. - Impact fees for northwest sanitary sewer improvement project. 
(a)  A new sewer main beginning just west of the intersection of Stinson Creek and Hwy. 54 has been constructed by the city. This main extends north toward State Route HH to accommodate existing and possible future citizens of the city. 
    In order to offset the cost of the construction of this sewer main, the city is charging those residing in the improvement area an impact fee which exceeds the current $50.00 inspection fee for connecting to the main. The improvement area encompasses all of the properties inside the city limits which have or would potentially have sewer that will drain to this sewer main or one of its future branches. Citizens will be required to connect to this new main when it is within 100 feet of any property line of their structure (see section 114-175). This would include existing and proposed structures (see section 114-220). Those not currently inside the city limits who wish to connect to this sewer main must first be annexed by the city before they would be allowed to connect (see section 114-231). 
(b)  The impact fee assessed to those lying within the improvement area shall be according to the following: 
New residential single family dwellings: 
Acreage of lot multiplied by $3,000.00 per unit. 
Minimum fee = $1,000.00 per unit. 
Maximum fee = $3,000.00 per unit. 
Examples: 
0.5 acre lot = 0.5 × $3,000.00 = $1,500.00 fee per unit. 
0.25 acre lot = 0.25 × $3,000.00 = $750.00, $1,000.00 fee per unit 
5 acre lot = 5 × $3,000.00 = $15,000.00, $3,000.00 fee per unit. 
New multi-unit dwellings: 
First unit: 
Acreage of lot multiplied by $3,000.00. 
Minimum fee = $1,000.00. 
Maximum fee = $3,000.00 
Additional units = $500.00 per unit. 
Examples: 
Duplex on 0.75 acres = 0.75 × $3,000.00 = $2,250.00. 
1 additional unit = $500.00. 
Total = $2,750.00. 
Apartment with 8 units on 1 acre = 1 × $3,000.00 = $3,000.00 
7 additional units = 7 × $500.00 = $3,500.00. 
Total = $6,500.00. 
New commercial property: 
$3,000.00 per acre. 
Minimum fee $1,000.00 per unit, whichever is greater. 
Existing commercial or residential property: 
No impact fee is assessed. 
Property holder must adhere to section 114-220 and abandon, clean and fill any septic tank, cesspool, and any similar private sewage disposal facility within 60 days after connection to the public sewer system. 
    These impact fees do not include the cost in making the physical connection to the sewer main. This connection shall be made by the property holder under the supervision of the city (see section 114-176). 
    Impact fees shall be paid to the city before services are allowed to connect to the public sewer main. 
(c)  The expansion of this public sewer main is contingent upon the acquisition of easements. All easements necessary for this sewer expansion would be required before the start of construction. Easement acquisition would need to be a cooperative effort between the city and the citizen or citizens wanting the public sewer. The city would request that all easements be given to the city so the cost of construction is not increased. If easements are not given, the city council will decide the price per foot that the city will pay for all easements in the improvement area and in turn, whether the impact fees outlined above need be adjusted. 
(d)  The design and development of sewer mains for future subdivisions in the improvement area would still be the responsibility of the developer. During the city's review process of these subdivisions, the city may wish to modify the developer's design in order to accommodate any further expansion of the sewer main. The city may compensate the developer for these modifications. 
(Ord. No. 1381-15, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Secs. 114-223-114-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS 

Sec. 114-231. - No sewer connection outside city limits. 
    It shall be the policy of the city to require property be brought inside the city limits before a sewer connection is made. 
(Code 1980, § 28-67) 
Secs. 114-232-114-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 114-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the overflow level rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises. 
    Backflow means the flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of a public water supply. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means any double check valve or reduced pressure principle backflow preventer having resilient-seated shut-off valves on both the upstream and downstream end and the necessary test cocks as integral parts of the assembly. 
    Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
    Containment means protection of the public water supply by installing a backflow prevention assembly or air gap separation on the main service line to a facility. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process fluids, or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure. 
    Cross connection means any physical link between a potable water supply and any other substance, fluid, or source, which makes possible contamination of the potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or distribution system. 
    Hazard, degree of means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Hazard, plumbing means a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air gap separation or backflow prevention assembly. 
    Hazard, pollution means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potable quality of the public or consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Isolation means protection of a facility's internal plumbing system by installing a backflow prevention assembly, air gap separation, or other backflow prevention device on an individual fixture, appurtenance, or system. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonable affect such waters for domestic use. 
    Public potable water system means any publicly or privately owned water system supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the state department of natural resources. 
    Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
    Water purveyor means the owner, operator, or individual in responsible charge of a public water system. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-237. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply from contamination or pollution by containing within the consumer's internal distribution system or private water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public potable water system. 
(2)  To promote the elimination, containment, isolation, or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and non-potable water system, plumbing fixtures, and industrial-process systems. 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(b)  Application. This division shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water system of the city. 
(c)  Policy. This division will be reasonably interpreted by the water purveyor. It is the water purveyor's intent to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    The water purveyor shall be primarily responsible for protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement and maintain the program to control cross connections. The water purveyor and consumer are jointly responsible for preventing contamination of the water system. 
    If, in the judgment of the water purveyor or his authorized representative, cross connection protection is required through either piping modification or installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall immediately comply by providing the required protection at his own expense; and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to provide such protection shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such protection has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-238. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where actual or potential cross connections to the public potable or consumer's water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the water purveyor, and as required by the laws and regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter a public potable or consumer's water system unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources. 
(c)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises in which the plumbing system, facilities, and fixtures have not been constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the water purveyor as necessary for the protection of health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-239. - Survey and investigations. 
(a)  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the water purveyor, or his authorized representative, for the conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system. 
(b)  On request by the water purveyor or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices within his premises. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-240. - Type of protection required. 
    The type of protection required by this division shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows: 
(a)  An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard. 
(b)  An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard. 
(c)  An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-241. - Where protection is required. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the state department of natural resources, actual or potential hazards to the public potable water system exist. The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(b)  An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the state department of natural resources, the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection with the activities, or material stored on the premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross connection occur, even though such cross connection may not exist at the time the backflow prevention assembly is required to be installed. This includes but is not limit to the following situations: 
(1)  A premise which has an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist. 
(3)  Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure the cross connections do not exist. 
(4)  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 
(5)  Premises, which due to the nature of the enterprise therein, are subject to recurring modification or expansion. 
(6)  Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters. 
(7)  Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled such that if back-siphoning or backpressure should occur, a serious health hazard may result. 
(c)  The types of facilities listed in section [114-246] fall into one or more of the categories of premises where an approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required by the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources to protect the public water supply and must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources. 
(d)  The type of facility listed in section [114-247] are premises where an approved double check valve assembly is required by the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources as the minimum level of protection for the public water supply and must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources. 
(e)  Customer facilities not listed in section [114-246] or section [114-247] may be designated a backflow hazard by written notification from the water purveyor. The notice shall specify the nature of the customer activity that necessitates designation of the facility as a backflow hazard, the type of backflow protection required and the date by which the customer shall install or construct the required assembly. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-242. - Backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  Any backflow prevention assembly protecting the type of facilities listed in section [114-246] and section [114-247] shall be of a model or construction approved by the water purveyor and the state department of natural resources. 
(1)  Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel, but in no case less than one inch. 
(2)  A double check valve assembly for class II hazards or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly for class I hazards shall be approved by the water purveyor, and shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention assemblies maintained by the state department of natural resources (double check valve assemblies and reduces pressure backflow prevention assemblies approved by the University of Southern California's Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research). 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-243. - Installation. 
(a)  Backflow prevention assemblies required by this division shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the water purveyor and shall be installed at the expense of the water consumer. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and in an orientation as specified by the manufacturer. The department of natural resources maintains a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies and the orientation allowed for each assembly. 
(c)  Modification to an assembly using spare parts other than those of the original manufacturer invalidates the approval of the device. 
(d)  No bypass piping shall be allowed around a backflow prevention assembly unless the bypass is equipped with the same degree of backflow prevention protection and is tested annually. 
(e)  Backflow prevention assemblies installed on the service line to a customer's water system shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and protected from freezing. No reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be located where it will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid. 
(f)  No plug or additional piping shall be affixed to the pressure differential relief port valve (except for specifically-designed funnel apparatus available from the manufacturer). The pressure differential relief port must be a minimum of 12 inches above the floor level. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-244. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention assemblies required by this division are installed to have inspections, tests, and overhauls make in accordance with the following schedule or more often where test results indicate a need. The water purveyor may establish the annual test date based on the nature of the customer's water use requirements. 
(1)  Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter. 
(2)  Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for proper operation at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested for proper operation at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter. 
(b)  Inspections, tests, and overhauls of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by a State of Missouri certified backflow prevention assembly tester. 
(c)  Whenever backflow prevention assemblies required by this division are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay. 
(d)  Modification to an assembly using spare parts other than those of the original manufacturer invalidates the approval of the device. 
(e)  The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow prevention assembly from purchase to retirement. This shall include a comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections, and repairs. Records of inspection, tests, repairs, and overhauls shall be made available to the water purveyor upon request. 
(f)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed, or otherwise made ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-245. - Violations. 
(a)  The water purveyor shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention assembly required by this division is not installed, tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the water purveyor, or if it is found that the backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. 
(b)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this division to the satisfaction of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-246. - Types of facilities representing high hazard cross connections. 
(a)  Aircraft and missile manufacturing plants; 
(b)  Automotive plants including those plants which manufacture motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles and construction and agricultural equipment; 
(c)  Potable water dispensing stations which are served by a public water system; 
(d)  Beverage bottling plants including dairies and breweries; 
(e)  Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants; 
(f)  Car washes; 
(g)  Chemical, biological and radiological laboratories including those in high schools, trade schools, colleges, universities and research institutions; 
(h)  Hospital, clinics, medical buildings, autopsy facilities, morgues, mortuaries, dental clinics, veterinary facilities and other medical facilities; 
(i)  Metal or plastic manufacturing, fabrication, cleaning, plating or processing facilities; 
(j)  Plants manufacturing paper and paper products; 
(k)  Plants manufacturing, refining, compounding or processing fertilizer, film, herbicides, natural or synthetic rubber, pesticides, petroleum or petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, radiological materials or any chemical which would be a contaminant to the public water system; 
(l)  Commercial facilities that use herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers or any chemical which would be a contaminant to the public water system; 
(m)  Plants processing, blending or refining animal, vegetable or mineral oils; 
(n)  Commercial laundries and dye works; 
(o)  Sewage, stormwater and industrial waste treatment plants and pumping stations; 
(p)  Waterfront facilities including piers, docks, marinas and shipyards; 
(q)  Industrial facilities which recycle water; 
(r)  Restricted or classified facilities or other facilities closed to the supplier of water or the department; 
(s)  Fire sprinkler systems using any chemical additives; 
(t)  Auxiliary water systems; 
(u)  Irrigation systems with facilities for injection of pesticides, herbicides or other chemicals or with provisions for creating back pressure; 
(v)  Portable tanks for transporting water taken from a public water system; and 
(w)  Facilities which have pumped or re-pressurized cooling or heating systems that are served by a public water system, including all boiler systems. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 114-247. - Types of facilities representing low hazard cross connections. 
(a)  Tanks to store water from the public water system for fighting fires only, unless the tanks meet the requirements of the department for construction to maintain bacteriological quality of the water; 
(b)  Fire sprinkler systems not using chemical additives. This only applies to new fire sprinkler systems or fire sprinkler systems scheduled for modifications; 
(c)  Irrigation systems without facilities for injection of pesticides or other chemicals. The backflow prevention assembly may be installed between the customer service line and the irrigation system; and 
(d)  Cross-connections that could permit introduction of contaminants into the public or customer water system and create a nuisance, be aesthetically objectionable, or cause minor damage to the water distribution system or its appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 1292-11, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Chapter 118 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, adopted March 27, 2018, amended chapter 118 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 118-39, which pertained to granting or denying a taxi-cab license, and derived from the Code of 1980, § 29-26, has been repealed by the above ordinance. The historical notation remains with the rest of the amended sections. For a detailed description of the amendments please see the code comparative table. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 118-1-118-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate businesses, § 12.1. 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Definition of "taxicab," RSMo 390.020(27); taxicabs exempted from motor carriers law, RSMo 390.030(1), (2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public taxicab/vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle offered to the public by a public taxicab business for the purpose of carrying or transporting passengers for a charge or a fee. 
    Public taxicab business means the business of offering to the public motor vehicles for the carrying or transportation of passengers for a charge or a fee. 
(Code 1980, § 29-16; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18; Ord. No. 1469-18, § 1, 8-14-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-27. - Fixed termini. 
    No public taxicab or vehicle for hire shall conduct stops between fixed termini located on public streets, city parks, public sidewalks, or other points owned or maintained by the city unless otherwise granted by the city council. 
    Public taxicabs/vehicles for hire may operate between fixed termini and conduct stops thereon, if the property is privately owned, and permission is granted by the owner of said property. 
(Ord. No. 1469-18, § 1, 8-14-18) 
Secs. 118-28-118-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 118-36. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, operate or conduct a public taxicab business within the city without first paying the license tax required in section 118-44 and obtaining a license as provided by this division. 
(Code 1980, § 29-24; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-37. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to secure a license to engage in, operate or conduct a public taxicab business within the city shall file with the city clerk a written application in duplicate giving the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the name and address of all the partners; if a corporation, the name and address of all the officers and directors; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; and the address of the principal place of business of the applicant. 
(2)  The number of taxicabs actually owned by the applicant and the number held by the applicant under lease, if any. 
(3)  The make, model, motor number and serial number of each taxicab and the registered owner; provided, however, the make, model, motor number and serial number of each new motor vehicle included in the application may be supplied by the applicant and endorsed on the application at any time prior to the actual issuance of the license by the city clerk. 
(4)  The experience, if any, the applicant has had in such business. 
(b)  Additionally, the applicant for the taxicab business seeking this license shall supply in writing, on a form issued by the city clerk, for each driver that will be authorized to drive for the business, the following information: 
(1)  The proposed driver's name, residence, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, whether previously issued a state chauffer's driver's license, and if so, whether such license has ever been revoked, and if so, for what reason, and the proposed driver and license applicant shall both sign and swear to the truth of the contents of the application. 
(2)  A copy of the proposed driver's chauffer's license. 
(Code 1980, § 29-25; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-38. - Liability insurance required. 
    No license to engage in a public taxicab business shall be issued to the applicant therefor by the city clerk until such applicant, in addition to all other requirements of this article, has filed with the city clerk a certificate of public liability and property damage insurance covering each motor vehicle being operated in the taxicab business by the holder of the certificate of convenience and necessity in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 for injury or death to any one person, $300,000.00 for injuries or deaths from any one accident and $100,000.00 property damage for any one accident, or in amounts as required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 29-33; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-39. - Issuance; license to be displayed. 
(a)  After any applicant has been granted the license required in this division and after the applicant has filed the insurance policy or bond required in section 118-38 with the city clerk and such has been approved, the city clerk shall endorse upon one copy of the application filed "license approved," together with the date of such approval. 
(b)  The city clerk shall, upon the payment of the license tax required in section 118-44, which shall be determined by the number of taxicabs covered by the license whether in actual operation or not, issue and deliver such licenses to the applicant. 
(1)  Every vehicle used in the taxicab business shall display in an appropriate place the vehicle for hire license issued by the city clerk before such vehicle is placed in business or use. 
(2)  Each vehicle for hire license shall contain the following information: 
a.  The business license number for the taxicab business. 
b.  The vehicle identification number, make, model, and year of the vehicle authorized for operation. 
c.  The seal of the city. 
(c)  The clerk shall keep a record of the number of taxicab licenses issued to each licensee. 
(Code 1980, § 29-35; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-40. - Duration. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall be for the duration of one year beginning on March 1 of the year issued and terminating on February 28 of the following year. 
(Code 1980, § 29-27; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-41. - Renewal. 
    After any license required under this division shall have been issued, the licensee shall be entitled to the renewal thereof for the succeeding year, provided, the licensee makes written application therefor to the city clerk and pays the required license fees prior to the expiration of his license. 
(Code 1980, § 29-28; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-42. - Transferability. 
    No owner or operator of a taxicab business may delegate his license privilege to any lessee or deferred payment purchaser of such taxicab business. All licenses issued or granted under this division shall be non-assignable and nontransferable. 
(Code 1980, § 29-29; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-43. - Change of ownership. 
    Change of ownership of or title to any taxicab of a licensee shall automatically revoke any certificate or license for the operation of such taxicab by the purchaser. 
(Code 1980, § 29-30; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-44. - Fees. 
    Every person engaged in operating or conducting a public taxicab business shall pay a license tax for one public taxicab used in such business and for each additional public taxicab used in such business. Such new business and renewal fees shall be in accordance with business licensing fees as authorized by the city council from time to time. 
    A fee of $25.00 per vehicle, including the first vehicle, shall be charged for both new applications and renewals annually. 
(Code 1980, § 29-31; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-45. - Revocation. 
    If, at any time, the council is of the opinion that any licensee granted a license pursuant to this division to engage in, operate or conduct a public taxicab business is engaged in any unlawful calling or has violated this article or any other city ordinance, state law or federal statute or is conducting such business in such a manner as to constitute a danger to public safety or a menace to the general welfare and well-being of the city or that such licensee has become unqualified, unfit or incapable of engaging in, operating or conducting a public taxicab business or that the operation of a public taxicab business by such licensee does not serve the public convenience and necessity, the council may, after due hearing, revoke such license. However, no such license shall be revoked by the council until after the holder of such license shall have received reasonable notice and has been afforded a hearing before the council, at which hearing the licensee shall be permitted to appear and to offer such testimony in his behalf as may be relevant to the question of the revocation of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 29-32; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-46. - Revocation upon failure to provide liability insurance. 
    Such insurance policy or bond as required in section 118-38 shall at all times be in full force and effect during the period of time for which a license has been issued pursuant to this division. If such insurance policy or bond is canceled or for any reason whatsoever is not in force or effect during the period of time for which such license has been issued, the council shall revoke the license forthwith in a summary manner. 
(Code 1980, § 29-34; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-47. - Additional taxicabs. 
(a)  No licensee under this division shall operate more taxicabs or any taxicabs other than those included in the license, unless application and payment shall have been made and approved increasing the number of taxicabs to be operated by the licensee. 
(1)  Such application for additional taxicabs shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state the name and address of the licensee; the number of taxicabs sought to be licensed, together with the vehicle identification number, make, model, and year; whether the taxicabs are owned or leased by the licensee; and proof of liability insurance as required by section 118-38 of this chapter. 
(2)  The vehicle identification number, make, model, and year of the new taxicab(s) included in the application for additional vehicles, in addition to the proof of liability insurance may be supplied by the applicant and endorsed on the application at any time prior to the issuance of the additional vehicle for hire licenses by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 29-36; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-48. - Substituting unlicensed vehicles for licensed taxicabs. 
(a)  Any licensee holding a license pursuant to this division may substitute other taxicabs in place of those for which the certificate and license is granted upon the conditions in this section. 
(b)  The licensee shall file a written application with the city clerk setting forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee. 
(2)  The make, model, motor number and serial number of both the substituted taxicabs and the taxicabs which are being replaced. 
(3)  Proof that the licensee is a bona fide owner or lessee with the sole right of control of the taxicabs sought to be substituted. 
(4)  A current certificate from a certified motor vehicle inspector showing that the substituted taxicabs have been inspected and are in good mechanical condition. 
(c)  The city clerk, upon payment of a fee required in section 118-44 of this chapter for each license issued, shall issue the licensee a new vehicle for hire license for the substituted taxicab and shall note on his record the substitution made. 
(d)  When any substitution is made under this section, the licensee shall promptly remove the license from the taxicab for which another was substituted, and it shall not thereafter be used. 
(Code 1980, § 29-37; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 118-49. - Adding and removing drivers from business. 
(a)  The license applicant may, at any time, incorporate additional drivers to the business by contacting the city clerk's office and completing the requirements of subsection 118-37(b) of this chapter. This form must be submitted prior to a new driver commencing operation. 
(b)  The license applicant may, at any time, remove any driver for the business by contacting the city clerk's office and providing, in writing, the name of the driver to be removed, along with the reason for such removal. 
(Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Secs. 118-50-118-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CHAUFFEURS' LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Chauffeurs' and drivers' licenses, RSMo 302.010 et seq.; prohibition on municipal licensing not to deprive municipalities of right to license taxicab drivers, RSMo 302.041. 

Sec. 118-61. - Required. 
    No person, whether owner, independent contractor, lessee or employee for compensation payable in any manner, shall drive a motor vehicle carrying persons for hire within the city unless such person has a valid chauffeur's license in accordance with state statute. 
(Code 1980, § 29-45; Ord. No. 1458-18, § 1, 3-27-18) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
    An ordinance to promote the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the community by regulating and redistricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, and other open places, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purpose; dividing the city into districts and establishing, by reference to a map, the boundaries of said district for the above purposes; creating and defining the powers of the board of adjustment; providing rules of procedure for improvement and restoration of existing buildings; stating certain exceptions to the height, area and yard restrictions; providing for amendments, interpretation and purpose of the ordinance and for permits; providing a penalty for violation hereof; providing that invalidity of a part shall not invalidate the remainder of the ordinance; and repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, and providing an effective date. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the zoning ordinance of the City of Fulton, Missouri, being Ord. No. 679-94, adopted Dec. 13, 1994, and effective Dec. 15, 1994. Amendments to Ord. No. 679-94 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended sections. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been utilized, subsection heads have been italicized, and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity by either the city or the editor. In all other ways, Ord. No. 679-94 has been set out unchanged and in its entirety. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 62; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 74; parks and recreation, ch. 82; planning, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102. 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and terms as used herein are defined to mean the following: 
    Generally: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" or the word "must" is mandatory and not directory; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the term "used for" includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for." 
    Accessory building or use: A subordinate building or use customarily incident to and located on the same lot and zoning classification occupied by the main building or use. 
    Agricultural: Agricultural activity, including: forests and forest products; harvest and management; dairy farming; livestock grazing and pasturage; truck gardening; the raising of crops, fruit and nursery stock; fish farms; animal kennels and fur bearing animal farms; and the harvesting, processing, packaging, packing, shipping and selling of products produced on the premises; and incidental farm occupations and uses such as machinery, farm equipment and domestic repair and construction, excluding commercial feed lots. 
    Alley: A dedicated public space which affords a secondary means of access only to an abutting property and has a minimum width of eight (8) feet. 
    Alteration: Any addition, removal, extension or change in the location of an exterior wall or roof of a main or accessory building. 
    Apartment: A suite of rooms or a room in an apartment house arranged, intended, designed for, or used as, the place of residence of a single family as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment hotel: An apartment house which furnishes for the use of its tenants services ordinarily furnished by hotels, but the privileges of which are not primarily available to the public. 
    Apartment house: A building arranged, intended, designed for or occupied by more than four (4) families. 
    Arcade: Any licensed business premises containing six (6) or more coin-operated amusement devices which are principally available for public use. 
    Automobile service station: Any land, building, structure or premises used for the sale at retail of motor vehicle fuels, oils or accessories, or for servicing or lubricating motor vehicles, or installing or repairing parts and accessories, but not including the repairing or replacing of motors, bodies or fenders of motor vehicles, or painting motor vehicles, and public garages. 
    Basement: A story partly below finished grade level and having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement is counted as a story, for the purposes of height regulation, if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Bed and breakfast: A home occupation where the owner lives on the premises and offers lodging and breakfast for compensation, where a guest's stay may not exceed a period of ten (10) consecutive days. 
    Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the zoning official shall determine the outline of the block. 
    Board: Board of adjustment, as defined in Section 9. 
    Boardinghouse or lodging house: A building, other than a hotel or apartment hotel, where for compensation, and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. 
    Brick District Overlay zoning area: An overlay zoning over a portion of the C-1 Central Business District. 
    Building: A structure that is permanently affixed to the land and having a roof supported by columns or walls and designed or intended for use as a shelter for enclosure for persons, animals or goods. 
    Building, height of: The vertical distance from the finished grade to: 
(a)  The highest point of a flat roof; 
(b)  The deck line of a mansard roof; or 
(c)  The average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Building inspector: The individual designated to administer the zoning ordinance, and who is responsible for the enforcement of the regulations imposed by said ordinance. 
    Building line or setback line: A line parallel to a street right-of-way, shore of a lake, edge of a stream, or other property line established for the purpose of inhibiting construction of a building or structure in the area between such building line and right-of-way, lakeshore, stream bed or other property line. 
    Building width: The width of the lot left to be built upon after the required side yards are provided. 
    Cellar: See "Basement." 
    Cemetery: Any land and/or facility used principally for burial of the dead, including crematory and similar facilities. 
    City: The City of Fulton, Missouri. 
    Clinic: An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or other allied health care providers practicing in the same building. 
    Club, accommodation type: A structure designed or used for the assemblage of persons for social or fraternal purposes, and containing rooms for temporary or permanent occupancy by individuals. 
    Club, assembly type: A structure designed or used for the assemblage of persons for social, fraternal or entertainment purposes. 
    Commercial feed lot: An area of land devoted to raising and feeding of livestock, where the operation is not a part of normal agricultural activity. 
    Commission: The planning and zoning commission of Fulton, Missouri. 
    Conditional use: A use allowed in a zoning district after a permit is granted by the board of adjustment according to provisions of Section 9. 
    Condominium: A development in which individual ownership in fee is restricted to that which is within the walls or designated bounds of a unit, and collective ownership applies to all other land and facilities beyond the individual units. 
    Cooperative: A development in which individual ownership is a share of the overall development. 
    Cooperative house: A structure designed or used as living quarters by a group or groups of persons organized to share the costs of operation. 
    Council: The city council of Fulton, Missouri. 
    Court: An unoccupied open space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or buildings, which space is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of such building or buildings. 
    Court apartment: An apartment house constructed around a court. 
    Coverage: Percentage of the lot surface area covered or occupied by a building or buildings. 
    Curb level: The main level of the curb in front of the lot, or in the case of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest. 
    Dormitory: A building devoted exclusively to living facilities, in which each person residing in each living unit shall be a duly registered student in any accredited school, college or university, or the spouse of a student, or management employee. Such living facilities may contain sleeping rooms for use of one or more persons, provided that there is at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
    Driveway: An area established or used for ingress or egress of vehicles from a street or thoroughfare to any point on private property. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and apartment hotels, but not hotels. 
    Dwelling, multiple: A dwelling or group of dwellings on one plot, each containing separate living units for three (3) or more families, but which may have joint services or facilities. 
    Dwelling, one-family: A detached building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by two (2) families. 
    Family: 
(a)  An individual or married couple and the children thereof and no more than two (2) other persons related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or marriage (excluding servants), except that a family may include not more than one (1) individual person not related to the family by blood or marriage, provided that such additional person may be provided with sleeping accommodations but not with kitchen facilities; or 
(b)  A group of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood or marriage, living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities on a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis. 
    Family day care home, day care center, preschool center, nursery school, child play center, child experiment station or child development institution: A place for the reception, care, training or instruction of five (5) or more children, not of common parentage, residing therein, regardless of sex, under the age of eighteen (18) years, for compensation or otherwise; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as applying to the regularly established public or parochial schools, colleges, universities, academies or seminaries, or other schools or institutions organized under and by virtue of the United States or the State of Missouri, and under the supervision of the duly constituted authorities thereof. 
    Floor area: The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls, and including the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages or space in a basement or cellar when said basement or cellar space is used for storage or incidental uses. 
    Frontage: All the property on one side of a street or highway, between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or for a distance of four hundred (400) feet on either side of a proposed building or structure, measured along the line of the street; or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street, but not including property more than four hundred (400) feet distant on either side of a proposed building or structure. 
    Garage, community: Any building or premises, other than a public, private or storage garage, providing storage for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing, but not other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of a block. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building or portion of main building for storage by occupants of premises. 
    Garage, public: Any building or premises used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles, which is operated for commercial purposes. 
    Garage storage: Any building or premises, except those defined as a private, public or community garage, providing storage for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services. 
    Grade: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
    Group Homes: A home where eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally or physically handicapped people reside, and may include two (2) additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically handicapped persons. The local zoning authority may require that the exterior appearance of the home and property be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood standards. Further, the local zoning authority may establish reasonable standards regarding the density of such individual homes in any specific single family dwelling neighborhood. 
    Group housing project: A building project consisting of three (3) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground which is not subdivided into customary streets or lots, or where the existing or contemplated street or streets or lot layouts make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual building units in such housing project. 
    Height of buildings: The vertical distance measured from the highest of the following three (3) levels: 
(1)  From the street curb level; 
(2)  From the established or mean street grade, in case the curb has not been constructed; 
(3)  From the average ground level of the portion of the lot adjoining and within ten (10) feet of the building where it sets back from the street line ten (10) feet or more to the level of the highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one (1) inch to the foot, and to the mean height level of the top of the main plate and the highest ridge for other roofs. 
    Height of yard or court: The vertical distance from the lowest level of such yard or court to the highest point of any boundary wall. 
    Home occupation: Any occupation or profession carried on entirely within a building by a member of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit, and which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which, there is used no sign other than a nameplate not more than one (1) square foot in area, or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is customary for home office or domestic household purposes. 
    Hotel: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open to transient persons in contradistinction to a boardinghouse or lodging house as herein defined. 
    Kennel: An establishment where small domestic animals are boarded for compensation or where two (2) or more dogs are bred or raised for commercial purposes. 
    Landscaped area: An area that is permanently devoted to, and maintained for, the growing of shrubbery, grass and other plant material. 
    Loading space: A space within the main building or on the same lot for standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having a minimum area of five hundred forty (540) square feet, a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a minimum depth of thirty-five (35) feet, and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen and five-tenths (14.5) feet. 
    Lodging or rooming house: Same as "Boardinghouse." 
    Lot: A parcel of land included in an approved plat occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces and parking spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the zoning official. 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
    Lot, front of: The front of a lot shall be considered to be that part of a lot which has access upon a public street, except for corner lots, unless otherwise specified by the zoning official. 
    Lot, interior: A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street. 
    Lot line, front: The boundary between a lot and the street right-of-way on which it fronts. 
    Lot line, rear: The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the street line; except that in the case of uncertainty, the zoning official shall determine the rear lot line. 
    Lot line, side: Any lot boundary line not a front or a rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line. 
    Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land the plat or deed of which has been recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
    Lot through (double frontage): An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
    Lot, tier: An inner lot located and situated in one of two (2) or more rows of lots necessitated by unusually rough terrain and shown as such on a subdivision plat approved by the commission and city council, having access to a street, as required by Chapter 25, Code of the City of Fulton, and having a driveway, the minimum width of which shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
    Lot width: The mean horizontal distance between side lines, measured at angles to the depth. 
    Marquee: A rooflike structure or awning projecting over an entrance, not to project more than eight (8) feet from the building and to be not less than eleven (11) feet above the ground at its lowest point. 
    Mobile home: A one-family dwelling unit located in an approved mobile home park and built on a chassis and designed to be transported and to be used with or without a permanent foundation. 
    Motel, motor court, motor lodge or tourist court: Any building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located on the lot, and designed, used or intended, wholly or in part, for the accommodation of automobile transients. 
    Nonconforming use, building or yard: A use, building or yard which does not, by reason of design, use or dimensions, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming use if established prior to the passage of this ordinance and not otherwise approved as provided herein. 
    Nursing home: A home for the aged or infirm in which three (3) or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter, or care, for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
    Parking space: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile, not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, together with driveway connecting the parking space with a street, road or alley and permitting ingress and egress of that automobile without the necessity of moving any other automobile. 
    Place: An open unoccupied space, a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width, other than a street or alley, permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Place of public assembly: A structure designed or used for the congregation of persons in public or private meetings. 
    Planned unit development (PUD): An area to be developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential elements or clusters, which may at times include appropriate commercial, public or quasi-public uses intended to serve the residential development, all as may be approved under a planned unit development plan. 
    Premises: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon. 
    Private club: An organized group not open to, or intended for or controlled by, the public or for the use of the public. 
    Privately endowed cemetery shall include cemeteries, mausoleums, garden crypts, columbariums, crematoriums, scattering gardens, and all other places held for burial purposes for sale to the public, but shall not include any of the foregoing held or operated by the state or federal government or any political subdivision thereof, any incorporated city or town, or any religious organization or fraternal society holding the same for sale solely to members and their immediate families. 
    Public open space: Means an open space area conveyed to the city or otherwise dedicated to public use for recreational or conservation purposes. 
    Restaurant: A building or structure wherein food is prepared as part of a commercial enterprise and served in ready to eat form for consumption on or off the premises. 
    Service building: A structure housing a toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required. 
    Sign: An identification, description, illustration or device, other than a flag, badge or ensign, which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
    Stable, private: An accessory building for the keeping of horses, ponies and mules, used exclusively for pleasure riding or driving, or housed, boarded or kept for hire; including riding track. 
    Standard shrub: Any bush or small evergreen occupying a space of at least eighteen (18) cubic feet. 
    Standard tree: A tree with a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2.5) inches, ten (10) to twelve (12) feet high, of a deciduous hardwood variety normally capable of attaining a twenty-five (25) foot height when the tree is twenty (20) years old. 
    Story: That part of a building included between the surface of the floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A top story attic is a half-story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four (4) feet above the curb level, established on mean street grade, or average ground level, as mentioned in "height of buildings," of this section. 
    Street: A public thoroughfare or place which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Street center line: The street center line is a line halfway between the street right-of-way lines. 
    Street line: The dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
    Structural alteration: Any change, except those required by law or ordinance, which would alter the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, not including openings in bearing walls as permitted by other ordinances. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground; including, but not limited to, advertising signs, billboards and poster panels, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
    Trailer: Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Variance: A modification or variance of the provisions of this ordinance, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning. 
    Watering station: A facility for supplying water storage tanks with potable water. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front: An open space, unoccupied by buildings or structures (except as hereinafter provided) across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the building to the front street line of the lot. 
    Yard, rear: An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided) between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building and the side lot lines. 
    Yard, rear yard depth: The mean horizontal distance from the rear line of the principal building to the center line of the alley where an alley exists; otherwise the rear lot line. 
    Yard side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending through from the street, or from the front yard to the rear yard, or to the rear line of the lot. 
    Yard, side(yard) line: Any lot boundary not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line. 
    Undefined terms: Any term not herein defined specifically or by implication shall have meaning of common or standard usage or that such as the context of this ordinance shall imply. 
(Ord. No. 1320-12, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Sec. 2. - General provisions. 
(A)  Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used except in accordance with the regulation of the district in which the building or land is located. 
(2)  In no case shall there be more than one (1) main building hereafter erected or structurally altered on a lot, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
(3)  Cooperatives, condominiums and all other forms of property ownership do not affect the general provisions of these regulations, and all requirements shall be observed as though the property were under single ownership. 
(4)  In all zoning classifications any display lots for the sale of new and used vehicles, trailers or boats shall be of a dustproof surface consisting of concrete, bituminous concrete or compacted gravel or crushed stone properly sealed and surface treated. 
(Ord. No. 1193-07, § 1, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 3. - Districts and boundaries. 
(A)  District classification. The City of Fulton, Missouri, hereby establishes the following zoning district classifications: 
R-1 Residential R-2 Residential R-3 Residential C-1 Central Business C-2 Commercial C-3 Planned Commercial CEM Planned Cemetery C-NB Commercial Neighborhood Business M-1 Industrial M-2 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MH-1 Planned Mobile Home Park PUD Planned Unit Development  
(B)  District boundaries. 
(1)  The City of Fulton is hereby divided into specific zoning districts in accordance with the classifications identified above. The boundaries of these districts are depicted on the map entitled "Zoning Districts, City of Fulton, Missouri," which is made a part hereof. The district map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, the original of which district map is properly attested and is on file with the city clerk of the City of Fulton, Missouri. 
(2)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council of the City of Fulton, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
(3)  All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Fulton shall be temporarily subject to the use regulations of A-1 Agricultural District, for a period not to exceed six (6) months, during which period the commission and the council shall proceed to establish original zoning use regulations applicable to such territory in accordance with Section 89.070 RSMo. Or when a specific usage is identified within the annexation petition, the city council after reviewing the stated purpose of the land can grant the permanent zoning designation on the date of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 835-99, § 1, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1214-08, § 1, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 4. - Use regulations. 
(A)  District regulations. In the following established districts, a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  R-I Residential District. 
Permitted uses: 
Single-family dwelling; 
Public park or playground; 
Church; 
Public school, nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes, and colleges with twenty (20) or more acres of land; 
Golf course, except miniature course and driving tees operated for commercial purposes; 
Government buildings; 
Bed and breakfast. 
Conditional uses: 
Privately operated lake, swimming pool or tennis courts, on sites of not less than five (5) acres, as a part of subdivision development; 
Hospital, nursing home, and educational, philanthropic or religious institution, on sites of not less than five (5) acres; provided, not more than fifty (50) percent of the site area may be occupied by buildings; and provided further, that the building shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for each foot of building height; 
Parking lot located within three hundred (300) feet of a C or M District; 
Private recreational facility, where buildings do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the site area. 
(2)  R-2 Residential District. 
Permitted uses: 
Any permitted use of the R-1 District; 
Two-family dwelling; 
Row houses and town houses; 
Religious, educational and eleemosynary institution of a philanthropic nature; 
Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, dancing, music, and other similar schools; 
Nursing, rest or convalescent home; 
Parking lot located within three hundred (300) feet of a C or M District. 
(3)  R-3 Residential District. 
Permitted uses: 
Any use permitted in District R-2, including the regulations established therein for garages, stables, and accessory buildings and uses, except that in District R-3, no private garage shall provide space for more than one (1) vehicle for each thousand (1000) square feet of a lot area; 
Apartment houses; 
Boardinghouses, lodging houses, group homes; 
Group housing projects; 
Fraternity or sorority houses and dormitories; 
Family day care homes, day care centers, preschool nursery school, child play, child education, child experiment stations or child development institutions; 
Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics and accessory uses. 
Conditional uses: 
Off-street parking lots for annual or monthly rental, with board approval after public hearing. 
(4)  C-1 Central Business District. 
Permitted uses: 
Any use permitted in the R-3 District; 
Automobile or trailer display, salesroom and repair; 
Automobile parking lot, garage, or storage facility; 
Automobile service station or repair facility; 
Bank or financial institution; 
Bowling alley or billiard parlor; 
Business or commercial school; 
Dancing or music academy; 
Display and salesroom; 
Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household appliances and bicycles, catering and bakery with sale of bakery products on the premises, and other uses of a similar character; 
Farm implements, sale and repair; 
Farm store or feed store, including accessory storage of solid fertilizer; 
Frozen food locker; 
Hotel; 
Laboratory, research, experimental or testing facility; 
Mortuary; 
Motel; 
Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, dancing, music and other similar schools; 
Office or office building; 
Personal services uses, including barbershop, beauty parlor, photographic or art studio, messenger, taxicab, newspaper, or telegraphic branch service station, laundry or dry cleaning receiving station, restaurant, and other uses of a similar character; 
Radio or television broadcasting station or studio; 
Retail store; 
Theater, not including drive-in theater; 
Self-service laundry or cleaning establishment; 
Used car, trailer or boat sales or storage lot; 
Dyeing, cleaning, laundry, printing, painting, plumbing, tinsmithing, tire sales and service, upholstering and other general service or repair establishment of similar character. Not more than ten (10) percent of the lot or tract occupied by such establishment shall be used for the open and unenclosed storage of materials or equipment. 
Conditional uses: 
Drive-through or drive-in establishment, including restaurant; 
Lumberyard; 
Wholesale establishment or warehouse in a completely enclosed building; 
Truck or bus terminal. 
Brick District Overlay zoning area: An overlay zoning over a portion of the C-1 Central Business District requiring that any use in this area must conform to uses as designated for the C-1 Central Business District except in a designated area of this overlay no residential uses shall be allowed on the ground floor of buildings. The boundary of this designated area of the Brick District Overlay zoning area is both sides of Nichols, Court and Market Streets from the north side of West Seventh Street south to the south side of Fourth Street as shown on the attached plat marked Exhibit "A". 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Exhibit "A" is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(5)  C-2 Commercial District. 
Permitted uses: 
Any use permitted in the C-1 Central Business District; 
Drive-in theater; 
Farm store or feed store, including storage of liquid or solid fertilizer; 
Veterinarian, animal hospital or kennel; 
Lumberyard; 
Truck or bus terminal; 
Miniature golf course and driving tees operated for commercial purposes; 
Nurseries growing plants for sale. 
(6)  C-3 Planned Commercial and CEM District. 
A.  Planned Commercial District. Except as approved by the council, development within the district shall be limited to contiguous tracts which are proposed for development as a unit at one time or in stages. 
A building or premises may be used only for the retail sales of merchandise, services, general and professional offices; recreational, except outdoor theaters; parking areas and other facilities ordinarily accepted as shopping center uses. 
B.  CEM District-Planned Cemetery District. Except as approved by the council, development within the CEM District shall be limited to contiguous tracts of over five (5) acres which are proposed for development according to the approved plan for this property. 
Permitted uses: 
1.  Uses related to the use and operation of a cemetery as defined. 
2.  Sale of monuments and grave markers. 
3.  Facilities and buildings as may be necessary to efficient operation and maintenance. 
4.  Mortuaries or funeral homes and adjacent related facilities which may include parking facilities, signs to identify the facility, and the display, storage, and sale of monuments and grave markers for the mortuary and cemetery as shall be specifically described in the plan as approved by subsection C. of this section. 
Conditional uses: None. 
C.  Planning Requirements for C-3 or CEM Districts. Before land is used or a building erected or used for any of the above purposes, a preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission for all contiguous property within this district in any one location. The commission shall have thirty (30) days to consider the plan and forward their recommendations to the council, although this period may be extended by agreement of the parties concerned. The council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary and the final plan with or without modification. From time to time, the proponents may make minor changes in the approved final plan so long as such changes have been approved by the building inspector or upon denial of approval of said building inspector, with the approval of the council. What constitutes a "minor" change will be determined in the sole discretion of the building inspector. No building or occupancy permits shall be issued for any building or use that is not in accordance with an approved final plan. 
The preliminary plan shall: 
(a)  Be drawn to scale; 
(b)  Show boundaries of property to be developed; 
(c)  Show the proposed size and location of the parking area as required by this ordinance. Also, entrance and exit driveways and their relationship to existing and proposed streets; 
(d)  Indicate location, type, use and size of structures on adjacent property within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed development; 
(e)  Provide for the dedication of any rights-of-way for the widening, extension or connection of major streets as shown on the official plan; and 
(f)  Indicate the stages, if any, which will be followed in construction. 
The final plan shall be the standard plot plan required to obtain a building permit, except that it shall show the use or types of uses to be accommodated in each building or portion thereof. The final plan may be submitted separately for the first and each successive stage of development. 
D.  Cemetery Endowed Care Fund Law. The provisions of Sections 214.270 through 214.410 RSMo. providing for the creation, funding and operation of an endowed cemetery shall be extended to all privately operated cemeteries in the City of Fulton, and to all new cemeteries hereafter established. Said sections are herewith made a part of the Fulton City Code by reference as fully as if set out herein. 
(7)  C-NB Commercial Neighborhood Business District. 
1.  Purpose: 
To provide for use and retention of existing residences as dwellings or commercial ventures, or both combined; 
To encourage intermingling or combining of residential and commercial activities; 
To ensure that new construction or substantial remodeling be in harmony with surrounding structures and streetscape character; 
To provide sufficient flexibility to encourage creative solutions in the reuse of older structures and the utilization of contemporary design in a setting of older structures. 
2.  This zoning classification shall be limited to Business Highway 54 in the City of Fulton. 
3.  Special conditions. 
a.  There are no minimum or maximum district size. 
b.  Restrictions on new buildings, additions or alterations to existing buildings: 
(1)  Height may not exceed the mean height of principal buildings on abutting parcels. 
(2)  New buildings, additions or alterations to existing buildings shall not exceed the average setback of the abutting buildings. 
(3)  New buildings, additions or alterations shall be in conformance with neighborhood conservation or neighborhood historic preservation design standards, if applicable. 
c.  Special conditions for business use, including construction, alterations or conversion to business: 
(1)  All off-street parking shall be accommodated in the rear yard. 
(2)  All off-street parking shall be screened in accordance to code. 
(3)  No commercial activity shall be conducted outside the principal building. 
(4)  Business operations shall be limited to the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.. 
(5)  No accessory structures, other than garages, shall be permitted. Accessory uses are limited to uses which are secondary to and supportive of the principal use. 
(6)  Retail sales may be authorized only if incidental to the permitted use and conducted inside the principal building. The retail sales area may occupy not more than ten percent of the floor area devoted to the primary use. 
(8)  M-1 Industrial District. 
(a)  In the M-1 Industrial District, it is provided that: 
1.  No building may be erected, converted, reconstructed, or structurally altered for residential purposes, except that a residence existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be reconstructed or structurally altered, or, such residence existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be razed and replaced with a new residence at or near site of the razed residence provided that the razing of the old residence and construction of the new residence be completed within six (6) months of one another. 
2.  No premises are used for auto wrecking, junkyards and similar storage or salvage. 
3.  Accessory open storage is enclosed in a building or by a concrete or masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height. 
4.  No premises are used for extraction of raw material. 
5.  Fuel oil storage tanks and premises used for bulk storage of oils, petroleum or similar flammable liquids and chemicals, or for the storage of explosives must file a safety plan. Such facilities will be fully in compliance with state and federal regulations. 
When considering the bulk storage of Class IIIB type combustible liquids only, when proposed at sites other than in the M-1 Industrial District, they shall be prohibited except when approved by the Fulton City Council. The City Council's approval shall include, but not be limited to, the following stipulations as with all bulk storage facilities: 
(a)  Storage tanks shall be constructed of steel, shall be UL approved, and built in accordance with recognized good engineering standards. 
(b)  The storage tanks of bulk oil are located at least fifty (50) feet from the site's boundaries. 
(c)  A safety plan as outlined by National Fire Protection Association (NFPA30 2-5.8.4.1) "Emergency action plan" is filed with the City of Fulton. 
(d)  Such facilities will be fully in compliance with local, state and federal regulations and with the guidelines and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA30 2-5.8.4.1). 
(e)  All tanks shall be removed within six (6) months of going out of business or at any time the tanks are no longer in use. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to the foregoing, any commercial or industrial use may be allowed that observes performance standards set under state and federal laws. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Industries using toxic or hazardous materials must present, and inspector must approve, a plan for the handling and use of such materials. Approval shall be based upon safety of the general public and processes or products objectionable on abutting or nearby property. 
Junkyards and auto wrecking yards; provided, however, that all such uses shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet high and that material not be piled any higher than said wall. 
(9)  M-2 Planned Industrial District. 
(a)  Plan required. The M-2 Planned Industrial Districts shown on the zoning district map shall be developed upon submission and acceptance of an approved plan, as provided below, in order to provide for industrial areas of integrated design. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
Research, testing and development; 
Light manufacturing, including assembly and packaging, where the nature of the processes, materials and equipment utilized are to a considerable extent clean, quiet and free from objectionable nuisances or hazard; 
Warehousing where all storage occurs within an enclosed building; 
Printing, lithographic and similar uses; 
Buildings accessory to the uses identified above; 
Signs as permitted in Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Site plan information. A preliminary site plan shall be prepared and submitted to the commission. The plan shall show the location and size of buildings and the general use to be made thereof, the areas to be developed for parking, drives, walkways, recreation or other purposes. A general grading and landscape plan, including the location of major existing growth that is to be retained, shall also be submitted with the site plan. Preliminary plans showing general location and type of utilities, including storm water drainage, as well as general details of all surfaced areas will also be required. 
(d)  Supplemental data. The following data and information shall also be submitted with the preliminary site plan: 
1.  Sketch floor plans and elevations of typical buildings, to indicate the architectural character of the buildings, including statements regarding types of construction. 
2.  Estimates of volumes of traffic movements to and from the completed project from the boundary streets. 
3.  A preliminary schedule for completion of the entire project. 
4.  A statement regarding the proposed method of operating and maintaining the project. 
5.  A statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of the planned district. 
(e)  Minimum standards. The following minimum standards for height, yards and open space shall be observed in the M-2 Planned Industrial District: 
1.  No building shall exceed a height of eight (8) stories or ninety-six (96) feet. 
2.  The minimum yard requirements shall be the same as set out in Section 6, Yard Regulations, subsection A, Minimum yard requirements. 
3.  No open storage, except autos of employees and visitors, shall be permitted within the project. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be provided on the basis of one (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
The commission and city council may vary or reduce the above requirements for an individual building if compensating increases are made for other buildings within the project. 
(f)  Review and approval. The commission shall study the preliminary plan and supporting data and may make suggestions for changes and adjustments. After the commission approves the preliminary plan and construction schedule, it shall submit same with a brief report to the city council. 
Whenever the city council approves the preliminary plan and supporting material, one (1) copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and one (1) copy shall be given to the owner. 
Upon receipt of the approved preliminary plan, the owner may proceed with final plans and specifications for all or any portion of the project that is agreed upon. The final plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the commission and the city council in the same manner as the preliminary plans. No permits shall be issued for any construction upon the project until the final plans have been approved by the commission and the city council. 
(10)  A-1 Agricultural District. 
Permitted uses: 
Agricultural activity; 
Single-family dwelling; 
Park or forest preserve; 
Church; 
Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes; 
Golf course, except miniature course or driving range; 
Roadside stand for the display or sale of agricultural products raised on the premises; 
Greenhouse or nursery. 
Conditional uses: 
Extraction of coal, sand or gravel; 
Airport; 
Public building erected by any governmental agency; 
Hospital, nursing home and educational, religious and philanthropic institution on sites of not less than five (5) acres. 
(11)  MH-1 Planned Mobile Home Park. 
(a)  Plan required. A MH-1 Planned Mobile Home Park District may be developed upon submittal and acceptance of an approved plan as provided. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
1.  Mobile homes. 
2.  Accessory buildings under mobile home park management supervision for use as office space, storage, laundry facilities, recreation, garage storage or other services for the exclusive use of park residents; no accessory building or structure shall exceed one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height. 
3.  Identification signage. 
(c)  Site plan information. A preliminary site plan shall be prepared and submitted to the commission. The plan shall show the location and size of buildings and structures and mobile home pads, as well as lot lay out and general use to be made of the land, including areas to be developed for parking, drives, walkways, recreation, service and other uses. A general grading and landscaping plan, to include the location of major existing growth to be retained as well as new planting and landscaping plans to be provided shall be submitted with the site plan. Preliminary plans showing general location, type and capacity of utilities including storm water, drainage, sanitary sewerage, electric and gas, as well as general details of all surface areas, will also be required. 
(d)  Minimum standards. The following minimum standards for area, lot size, height, open space and other amenities shall be observed in the MH-1 Planned Mobile Home Park District: 
1.  Land area. Land area provided for a mobile home park shall be not less than five (5) acres. 
2.  Site area and coverage. Each mobile home site shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a minimum width of fifty (50) feet. The total site coverage shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent. Site coverage shall be calculated by dividing the total ground floor area in the mobile home unit, plus the total ground floor area of any enclosed structure attached to the mobile home unit, by the total site area. The floor area of a detached, enclosed structure shall not be included in the total ground floor area, provided the area of said structure does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
3.  Mobile home. Each mobile home within such park shall contain a flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and plumbing and electrical connections designed for attachment to appropriate external systems. 
4.  Yard requirements. 
a.  Each mobile home site shall have side yards of a minimum of five (5) feet wide on each side. 
b.  Each mobile home site shall have front and rear yards, with each such yard not less than eight (8) feet and the sum of both yards not less than twenty (20) feet. 
c.  For the purpose of this section, yard width shall be determined by measurement from the mobile home face (side) to its mobile home site boundary, every point shall be not less than the minimum width herein provided. Open patios and carport facilities shall be disregarded in determining yard widths. Enclosed all-weather patios and individual storage facilities shall be included in determining yard widths. The front yard is that yard which runs from the hitch end of the mobile home to the nearest street line. The rear yard is at the opposite end of the mobile home and side yards are at right angles to the front and rear ends. 
5.  A buffer or landscaped area of thirty (30) feet in width shall be provided at the perimeter of the mobile home park. 
The commission and the council may vary or reduce the above requirements if compensating increases are made for other features. 
(e)  Review and approval. The commission shall study the preliminary plan and supporting data and may make suggestions for changes and adjustments. After the commission approves the preliminary plan, it shall submit same with a brief report to the city council. 
Whenever the city council approves the preliminary plan and supporting material, one (1) copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and one (1) copy shall be given to the owner. 
Upon receipt of the approved preliminary plan, the owner may proceed with final plans and specifications for all or any portion of the project that is agreed upon. The final plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the commission and the city council in the same manner as the preliminary plans. No permits shall be issued for any construction upon the project until the final plans have been approved by the commission and the city council. 
(12)  Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of this section to provide for integrated developments having harmony of design and variety of function. It is not intended to permit a greater density of uses than those set forth in the regulations of the district or districts in which the development is located, but rather to provide for a greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards and circulation that would otherwise be possible through the strict application of district regulations, and to produce: 
1.  A maximum choice in the type of environment and living units available to the public. 
2.  Open space and recreation areas. 
3.  A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features. 
4.  An efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets. 
5.  An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development. 
6.  Superior development, and more desirable environment than would be possible for the PUD parcel, through the strict application of other sections of the ordinance. 
(b)  Design characteristics and development density. The proposed PUD shall be designed to provide for the unified development of the area in accordance with the spirit and purposes of the district or districts in which the unit is located. The design may provide for modification of yard, setback, minimum dwelling unit size, height requirements or other variations consistent with the spirit and intent of this ordinance, but the residential density allowed by existing zoning of the PUD parcel shall not be increased. The design may provide for one or more dwelling unit types, and may consist of individual lots or it may have common building sites. Preserved open space and/or common land should be an essential and major element of the plan, which relates to and enhances the long term value of the homes and other uses. 
(c)  Special use. Development plans approved under the provisions of the process contained herein are declared to be in the nature of a special use, and as site development criteria supplemental to the ordinary requirements of the zoning ordinance. A PUD may be authorized, provided that all of the provisions of this section are complied with, but authorization is not mandatory, and PUD is not a use or right. 
(d)  Location. A PUD may be permitted only in residential districts and in no other districts. 
(e)  Preliminary PUD plan. The developer shall submit a site development [plan] in support of the application for a PUD permit. The site development plan shall consist of maps and tests which contain: 
1.  Site characteristics and ownership. 
a.  Name of the PUD. 
b.  Name and address of the developer. 
c.  Name and address of land planner, engineer, architect, landscape architect or others preparing the plans. 
d.  Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining areas, both existing and proposed. 
e.  Existing topographic character of the land, showing contours at five (5) foot contour intervals (or smaller intervals if appropriate), structures, waterways, wooded areas and other significant natural or man-made features. 
f.  Existing zoning in tract and within one thousand (1,000) feet. 
g.  Boundary survey showing measurements and legal description. 
h.  Names of all adjoining property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet, as disclosed by the most recent tax records. 
i.  Acreage of tract in the PUD. 
2.  Concept. 
a.  Proposed land uses, including public uses and open spaces and the approximate location of buildings and other surroundings. 
b.  The character and approximate density of dwelling units per acre within each separately identifiable segment or module of the PUD. 
c.  An explanation of the character of the PUD (describing land areas and uses, dwelling unit types and mix) and a statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the future selling, leasing or renting of all or portions of the PUD. 
d.  The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system and its interrelationship with the vehicular circulation system, indicating proposed treatment of points of conflict. 
3.  Design. 
a.  The approximate location of streets. 
b.  The approximate location of parking areas and parking ratio. 
c.  The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open space, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and semi-public uses. 
d.  The existing and proposed utility systems, including storage and sanitary sewers, water, electric, gas and telephone lines, showing their size, depth and location. 
e.  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD, including materials and techniques used, such as screens, fences, walls, earth berms and landscaping. 
f.  The planning commission may require a circulation diagram, indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the planned development and to and from existing thoroughfares, if the commission finds that the PUD creates special problems of traffic and parking. 
4.  Legal, financial and phasing requirements. 
a.  The expected schedule of development. 
b.  Suitable documentation to show economic or other justification, primarily within the PUD itself, for any proposed nonresidential use. 
c.  Tentative legal instruments (covenants, home owner's association devices) should be included whenever private maintenance and sanctions are to be substituted for normally provided public services and controls. 
The planning commission shall review the plan and make recommendations to the council. Following the public hearing process, the council shall act on the proposed plan, provided all documents submitted under subsection 4(A)(11)(e)4.c., have been approved by the city counselor as to form and sufficiency. Upon approval by the city council, the PUD shall be designated on the zoning district map. Unless the PUD is to be constructed in one (1) phase, the plan shall provide for staged development of the project. 
Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements for a sketch plat of a subdivision. 
Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall be binding upon the owners, their heirs and assigns, until such time as the city council may release such limitations on the use of the subject property under the procedures provided herein. 
(f)  Final PUD plan. A final PUD plan shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission and shall be in accordance with the approved preliminary PUD plan, or one of the development stages thereof, and shall include: 
1.  Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement. 
2.  Location and capacity of parking areas and overall parking schedule. 
3.  Plans showing location of all utilities, and sizes, depth and easements, including storm drainage easements [of such utilities]. 
4.  Any other information normally shown on a preliminary plat of a subdivision, including appropriate certifications. 
5.  Final vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, and updated or refined proposals for any special landscaping, special site grading or nonresidential uses given consideration in the preliminary PUD plan, including detailed feasibility or market studies for proposed commercial uses. 
6.  The dwelling unit density of each residential segment, the gross density of the project, and the area in square feet of all nonresidential buildings, by type of use. 
7.  Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open spaces as will reasonably ensure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be effective without the consent and acceptance by the city council. 
8.  Such declarations, covenants, by-laws and other instruments as may be necessary to establish and govern any homeowners or other association charged with continuing maintenance and operational responsibility under the PUD plan. 
The final PUD plan documents will he reviewed and forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations. All documents submitted under subsections 7 and 8 immediately above must be approved by the city counselor as to form and sufficiency. 
It shall be the responsibility of the commission to determine that the final PUD plan conforms to the intent of the preliminary PUD plan. In the event the commission finds the final PUD plan not to be in conformity with the preliminary PUD plan, the applicant shall have the right of appeal provided by this zoning ordinance. 
If the final PUD plan fails to conform to the intent of the approved preliminary PUD plan, any amendment to the plan and the applications for such amendment shall be handled in the same manner as the original application, with public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and the city council, following due public notice as required by law. 
If the commission, having reviewed the final PUD plan finds that it conforms to the intent of the preliminary PUD plan, its recommendations of the plan shall be forwarded to the city council for its review and final action. 
Approval by the city council of the final PUD plan shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements for a preliminary plat of a subdivision. 
Approval by the city council of the final PUD plan shall be binding upon the owners, their heirs and assigns, until such time as the city council may release such limitations on the use of the subject property, under the procedures provided herein. 
(g)  Coordination with subdivision ordinance. It is the intent of this ordinance that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of PUD under this section of the zoning ordinance. 
1.  The plans required under this chapter (ordinance) must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision ordinance (Chapter 102) for the sketch and preliminary plats required under those regulations. 
2.  In any PUD for which the provisions of the two (2) ordinances are in conflict, the provisions of this section shall prevail and exceptions to the subdivision ordinance may be granted. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in this PUD until the city council shall have approved the final PUD plan and all other applicable ordinance and other requirements are met; provided, however, that building permits may be issued for attached structures prior to final subdivision plat approval, if, in the judgment of the zoning official, such issuance will facilitate more accurate property division for eventual conveyancing purposes. In no event may such structures be certified for occupancy, nor may such properties be conveyed, until the final subdivision plat has been approved. 
(h)  Design standards and development criteria. Conventional zoning and subdivision design standards shall be applicable, except as provided herein, unless specifically requested by the developer, waived by the council, and noted on the approved PUD plan. 
1.  Project size: No minimum project size in acreage or dwelling units. Sufficient size or yield to provide: 
a.  Adequate supporting population for commonly held facilities. 
b.  Project identity and design integrity. 
2.  Ownership: Single ownership, or unified control under a joint venture or similar single-organization structure. Holdings must be contiguous and project management centralized. 
3.  Uses permitted: Residential dwelling units. For purposes of this section, dwelling units shall mean detached, semi-detached, attached, multiple-unit, groups of attached or multiple-unit structures, or any combination thereof. Nonresidential uses which are designed or intended to serve the residents of the PUD and which are essentially justifiable by the PUD may also be allowed if shown to be in the public interest. 
4.  Number of permitted dwelling units: The maximum permitted number of dwelling units within a PUD shall be determined by dividing the minimum lot size of each zone within which the project is located into the total number of square feet in the zone contained in the PUD, excluding: 
a.  Fifteen (15) percent of the total land area (a flat figure which represents the area normally included in streets and rights-of-way). 
b.  Acreage devoted to other than residential, recreational or open space area. 
If the PUD is within two (2) or more residential zoning districts, the permitted density shall be the sum of permitted dwelling units computed separately for the area within each district. 
5.  Access: The PUD site itself must be accessible from public roads which are adequate to carry the traffic generated by the proposed development. The streets, driveways and pedestrian ways within the proposed development must be adequate to serve the residents, visitors or occupants of the PUD. Access to each dwelling unit shall be provided by a public right-of-way, or by a private vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual unit owner in fee or held in common ownership by the residents of the PUD. 
6.  Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the zoning ordinance, unless the applicant can demonstrate the suitability of other standards. The off-street parking requirements may be complied with by providing one or more permanent, common off-street facilities for combined uses within the development, provided that the facility contains the requisite number of spaces for each use and that the spaces provided for residents are both clearly designated and conveniently located. 
7.  Construction timing: The construction of the PUD shall be started within eighteen (18) months of the effective date of approval of the final plan by the city council. Failure to begin substantial development of the plan within eighteen (18) months shall automatically void the development plan. If cause is shown prior to its expiration, the city council may extend this period for such additional time as it may deem appropriate to the circumstances. 
8.  Development staging: The schedule of staging of development shall not be such that a staged implementation of the PUD would result in land use conditions which would establish a precedent for the use of adjoining undeveloped property for purposes other than those shown on the approved PUD plan and/or the Fulton Master Development Plan. 
9.  Perimeter requirements: In all residential districts, no portion of a building or structure shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a perimeter property line or twenty-five (25) feet to a street right-of-way; except that where development or redevelopment is planned in an area where the buildings or structures on adjoining lots have been erected closer to the lot lines than these standards permit, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the city council may allow, the placement of structures closer to perimeter lot lines; provided, that in no instance shall the setback requirements be less than those required for the abutting land uses. 
10.  Homeowners association: A homeowners association or other suitable permanent organization shall be created for purposes of improving, operating and maintaining private common facilities, including streets, drives, service and/or parking areas, and recreation areas, sufficient to secure these ends, whenever the PUD plan provides for such facilities and creates the need for continuing responsibility for their upkeep. 
(i)  Amendments. On request of the PUD developer, the planning and zoning commission may review plans and may authorize minor changes to the final PUD plan, so long as substantial compliance with the original PUD plan and its terms and conditions is assured. Changes which would represent a significant departure from the final PUD plan may only be approved under a revised application for a preliminary PUD plan, reviewed in the same manner and under the same procedure as the originally submitted plan. The determination of whether a proposed change would represent a significant departure from the approved final PUD plan shall be made by the planning and zoning commission. 
(j)  Protest. Property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of a proposed planned unit development may present a formal protest in the same fashion as provided by law for rezoning. 
(B)  Other use regulations. 
(1)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and uses are permitted in accordance with the following: 
(a)  In all districts, accessory buildings and uses are limited to: 
A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area twenty-five (25) percent of the ground floor of the main building; 
A private residential garage used only for the housing of noncommercial passenger automobiles, and with a floor area of not to exceed four hundred eighty (480) square feet. An additional floor area of two hundred (200) square feet may be provided for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area by which such lot exceeds six thousand (6,000) square feet; provided, that no garage shall exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet nor house more than five (5) such automobiles. 
Home occupation; 
Vegetable or flower garden; 
Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar accessory uses. 
On lots exceeding one acre the allowable square footage for accessory buildings shall be as follows: 1-3 acres, 1200 square feet; 3-5 acres, 1500 square feet; 5-7 acres, 1800 square feet; 7-10 acres, 2800 square feet; 10 acres +, 4000 square feet. 
(b)  In Commercial and industrial districts, there may also be: 
Garages conforming with the requirements of section 8 hereof. 
(c)  There shall be the following additional regulations for accessory buildings: 
No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used. However, nothing shall prevent the use of a temporary construction shed or road wagon for the storage of tools, material and equipment by a contractor during building construction; 
No accessory building may be erected in front of a main building unless the accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall; 
Accessory buildings may not be used for dwelling purposes. 
(d)  A driveway or walk to provide access to premises in one district shall not be permitted in a district of a higher classification. Buildings or structures or uses which are necessary to the use permitted in one district shall not be permitted in a district of a higher classification. 
(2)  Mobile homes and trailers. 
(a)  All inhabited mobile homes shall be located in an approved planned mobile home park which conforms with the requirements of this ordinance. No mobile home or trailer located outside an approved mobile home park shall be connected to utilities, except those offered for sale and not inhabited. House trailers may be parked in any district on a vacation basis for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks. 
(3)  Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Continuance of nonconforming uses. The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for over a period of 180 days, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued, and in certain cases altered, although such use does not conform with the provisions herein. Specifically, nonconforming single-family residential uses may be altered or added to in accordance with appropriate provisions of this ordinance regarding height, yard and density requirements of specific zoning districts. In multifamily residential uses, including two (2) family dwellings and all commercial, industrial, agricultural, mobile home and public uses, no structural alterations, except those required by law or in conformity with subsection 4(B)(3)(b) of this ordinance will be made. Furthermore, in the event that active nonconforming uses cease for more than 180 days, future use of said premises shall be in conformity with district classifications and regulations provided in this ordinance. 
A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use or more restricted nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted use than that to which it was changed. If any property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by a change in the district boundaries, or the regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive or of a higher classification by amendment to this ordinance, the provisions for premises existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used at the time of the passage of such amendment. 
The lot area per family restrictions shall not apply to lots where the lot, together with all contiguous land owned by the owner of the lot at the time of the passage of this ordinance and by the owner of the said lot at the time of the proposed construction is, at both such times, less than the permitted area; however, only a single-family dwelling may be erected under this exception. 
The burden of proof shall at all times rest upon any person claiming an exception or exemption under subsections 4(B)(3)(a) and 4(B)(3)(b) of this ordinance. 
(b)  Restoration of nonconforming building. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming building partly destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or act of public enemy, subsequent to the passage of this ordinance, or prevent the continuance of the use of such building or part thereof as such use exists at the time of such destruction of such building or part thereof, or prevent a change of such existing use under the limitations provided herein; provided, that such building is not destroyed more than seventy-five (75) percent of its reasonable valuation. 
This ordinance shall prevent the restoration of such nonconforming building so damaged [not] more than seventy-five (75) percent of the reasonable valuation, if the restoration is not completed within one (1) year from the time of said damage, and shall prevent the continuance of the use of such building or part thereof as such use exists at the time of such damage if such is not restored within one (1) year from the time of said damage, and shall prevent a change of such existing use under the limitations herein if the changes of such existing use under the limitations herein are not made within one (1) year from the time of said damage. 
(c)  Conditional uses not conforming. Existing uses eligible for conditional use permits shall be nonconforming uses, but shall require a conditional use permit for any alteration, enlargement or extension. 
(d)  Intermittent use. The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, and the existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract. 
(e)  Existence of nonconforming use. Whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the board, after public notice and hearing in accordance with the rules of the board. 
(f)  Nonconforming uses not validated. A nonconforming use in violation of a provision of the [former zoning] ordinance, which [this] ordinance repeals, shall not be validated by the adoption of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 839-00, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 1169-07, § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 1183-07, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 1214-08, § 2, 2-26-08; Ord. No. 1215-08, § 1, 2-26-08; Ord. No. 1320-12, § 2, 4-24-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1214-08, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as section 4(A), subsection(7). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, the former subsections 4(A)(7)-4(A)(11) have been redesignated as subsections 4(A)(8)-4(A)(12). 
Sec. 5. - Height regulations. 
(A)  Maximum height. Maximum height limits established for buildings and structures not otherwise specified are as follows: 
(1)  Thirty-five (35) feet in Residential Districts. 
(2)  Forty-five (45) feet in Commercial and Industrial Districts. 
(B)  Exceptions. The above height limits may be exceeded in the following instances: 
(1)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, agricultural buildings, or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding one hundred ten (110) feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is built. 
(2)  Television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, stacked, conveyors and flag poles may be erected to such height as may be authorized by the council. 
(3)  Buildings in the C-3 District may be increased in height one (1) foot for each foot the building is set back from all yard lines, up to a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet, provided that the gross floor area provided, exclusive of enclosed garages, does not exceed the number of square feet of land area of the lot on which the building is placed. 
Sec. 6. - Yard regulations. 
(A)  Minimum yard requirements. The following minimum yards, measured in feet, shall be provided within the districts indicated below: 
District Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard R-1 -2, -3 25 10 25 C-1 None None None C-2 20 10 25 C-3 30 None None M-1, -2 25 None 25  
Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or multiple-dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
(B)  Additional requirements. The following additional yard requirements must also be observed: 
(1)  On lots fronting on two (2) nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
(2)  On corner lots, there must be a front yard on both streets. On corner lots that are lots of record, the buildable width cannot be reduced to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, except that there shall be a yard along the side street side of such a lot, of at least five (5) feet. 
(3)  Where a frontage is divided among districts with different front yard requirements, the deepest front yard required shall apply to the entire frontage. 
(4)  In the C and M Districts there may be more than one (1) building on a lot, provided that the required yards be maintained around the group of buildings. 
(5)  There may be two (2) or more related multifamily, hotel, motel or institutional buildings an a lot; provided that: 
(a)  The required yards be maintained around the group of buildings; and 
(b)  Buildings that are parallel or that are within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel be separated by a horizontal distance that is at least equal to the height of the highest building. 
(6)  Those parts of existing buildings that violate yard requirements may be repaired and remodeled. 
(7)  Required front yards shall be devoted to landscaped area, except for parking of private passenger vehicles in driveways and the necessary paving of driveways and sidewalks, except as provided in subsection 8(C)(2). 
(8)  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(9)  The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches, community buildings and other public and semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be twenty-five (25) feet, except where a side yard is adjacent to a commercial or industrial district, in which case the width of that yard shall be as required in the district in which the building is located. 
(10)  No sign, fence, wall, shrub or other obstruction to vision exceeding three (3) feet in height above the established street grade shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points thirty (30) feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
(C)  Exceptions to yard requirements. The following exceptions may be made to the yard requirements: 
(1)  Where, on the effective date of this ordinance, forty (40) percent of a frontage was occupied by two (2) or more buildings, then the front yard is established in the following manner: 
(a)  Where the building furthermost from the street provides a front yard not more than ten (10) feet deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yards. 
(b)  Where subparagraph (a) above is not the case and lot is within one hundred (100) feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn from the closest front corners of these two (2) adjacent buildings. 
(c)  Where neither subparagraph (a) nor (b) above is the case, and the lot is within one hundred (100) feet of an existing building on one (1) side only, then the front yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building. 
(2)  Sills, belt courses, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may project into a required yard a distance not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches. 
(3)  Filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy required yards; provided, however, that they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from all lot lines. 
(4)  Signs [shall be] in accordance with provisions of the Sign Ordinance. 
(5)  Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more than three and one-half (31/2) feet, when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation, may be permitted by the building inspector. 
(6)  Open, unenclosed porches (not glassed in) and decks, may extend ten (10) feet into a front yard. 
(7)  Terraces which do not extend above the level of the ground (first) floor may project into a required yard, provided these projections be distant at least two (2) feet from the adjacent side lot line. 
(8)  No side yards are required where dwellings are erected above commercial and industrial structures, except such side yard as may be required for a commercial and industrial building, on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. 
(9)  Accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard, but may not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of a rear yard. 
(10)  Any accessory buildings closer than ten (10) feet to a main building shall be considered as part of the main building and shall be provided with the side and rear yards required for the main building. 
(11)  An accessory building more than ten (10) feet from a main building may be erected within two (2) feet of a side or rear lot line, but must be located at least sixty (60) feet from the front street line. 
(12)  Where a garage is entered from an alley, it must be kept ten (10) feet from the alley line. 
(13)  On corner lots the minimum buildable width of twenty-eight (28) feet for main buildings is reduced to twenty-two (22) feet for accessory buildings. 
Sec. 7. - Density regulations. 
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 2,500 sq. ft. More details below
The following minimum lot areas and lot widths must be provided in the districts indicated. 


Lot area per family (SF,TF,MF) 7,000 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 2,500 sq. ft.

Minimum Lot Area Per Family 
Width  Area Family Family Family R-1 65 7,000 SF 7,000 SF N.A. N.A. R-2 65 7,000 SF 7,000 SF 3,500 SF N.A. R-3 65 7,000 SF 7,000 SF 3,500 SF 2,500 SF  
(1)  Special requirements for court apartments. For apartments located along one (1) side of a court, minimum width of said court shall be thirty (30) feet; for such uses located on two (2) sides of a court, the minimum width of said court shall be twenty-two (22) feet; thence distance between main buildings and accessory buildings shall be not less than ten (10) feet. An access road of a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet, on which all parking is prohibited, shall be provided for each apartment up to thirty-six (36) dwelling units; such access road may be placed at the side of the lot, but no building shall be erected within ten (10) feet of it. 
(B)  Exceptions to lot area and width requirements. The minimum lot area and lot width requirements established above may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance has less area or width than herein required in the district in which it is located, and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may nevertheless be used for a one-family dwelling or for any nondwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Existing buildings that are in violation of lot area requirements may be remodeled or repaired, but may not be reconstructed or structurally altered unless made to conform to these requirements. 
(3)  Lot area per family requirements shall not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities, nursing homes, or other similar group quarters where no cooking facilities are provided in individual rooms or apartments. 
Sec. 8. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(A)  Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family dwelling: At least two (2) spaces for each family unit. 
(2)  Multiple dwelling: One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each dwelling unit in the R-2 and R-3 Districts. 
(3)  Rooming houses and boardinghouses, sororities and fraternities: One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Private club or lodge: One (1) parking space of each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Church or temple: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium. 
(6)  School: For high schools, colleges and universities, minimum of ten (10) spaces per classroom; for junior high schools and elementary schools, a minimum of two (2) parking places per classroom. 
(7)  Hospital: Two (2) parking spaces for each bed. 
(8)  Sanitarium or institutional home: One (1) parking space for each three (3) beds. 
(9)  Funeral homes: Ten (10) parking spaces for each chapel plus one (1) for each funeral home vehicle plus one (1) for each family residing on the premises. 
(10)  Auditoriums, theaters and other places of public assembly: One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats. 
(11)  Community center, library, museum or similar public or semi-public building: One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) feet of floor area in the building. 
(12)  Hotel or motel: Five (5) parking spaces, plus one (1) space for each sleeping room or suite. 
(13)  Medical office building: Buildings in which twenty (20) percent or more of the gross area is occupied by members of the health professions, one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of the gross area. 
(14)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse or other similar establishments: Two (2) parking spaces far every three (3) employees on the maximum shift, plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith. 
(15)  All nonresidential buildings, except those above specified: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
(B)  Rules for computing parking spaces. In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Floor area shall mean the gross floor area for the specific use, excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking as herein defined. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking areas required shall be the nearest whole number. 
(3)  In case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(4)  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of twenty (20) percent or more in floor area, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements for the enlarged area. 
(C)  Location of required parking spaces. All parking spaces required herein shall be located as follows: 
(1)  The parking spaces required for residential buildings or use shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served. The parking spaces required for any other building or use may be located on an area within three hundred (300) feet of said building, and two (2) or more owners of buildings may join together in providing the required parking spaces. Where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, the usage of the lot or tract upon which said parking spaces are provided shall be restricted by an instrument of record describing the premises for which said parking is provided and assuring the retention of such parking so long as required by this ordinance. 
(2)  No required parking spaces may be located in a front yard in any R-1 or R-2 District, except in a driveway. In an R-3 District, parking may be allowed in front of the building, provided the requirements of Section 6, paragraph (A) are met and the zoning official approves of the proposed layout. Additionally, in an R-1 District, circle drives may be allowed in front of the building, provided the requirements of Section 6, paragraph (A) are met, the lot as a front footage of one hundred ten (110) feet or more, and the zoning official approves of the proposed layout. 
(D)  Open parking areas. 
(1)  All open parking areas provided in compliance with this ordinance shall be surfaced with a durable, dustproof surface consisting of concrete, bituminous concrete or compacted gravel or crushed stone properly sealed and surface-treated as approved by designated engineering personnel of the city. The parking areas shall be maintained in a usable dust proof condition and graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be so hooded or shielded as to reflect the light away from abutting or neighboring property, including public rights-of-way. One standard tree shall be planted on the lot, approved by the zoning official, for each ten (10) parking spaces. 
The location of each parking space and the direction of movement along the access driveways shall be indicated by a painting upon the surface of the lot. When required by the zoning official, a structurally sound wall or other abutment shall be installed and so placed around each side of the parking lot as to ensure that no part of an automobile either extends over, or is capable of accidentally rolling across, the property line of the parking lot. 
(E)  Parking lot lighting. 
(1)  Definitions: 
    Cutoff fixture. A light fixture that cuts off upward transmission of light. 
    Foot candles. A unit of measure of the amount of light falling on a surface. The illumination level is equal to the amount of light generated by one (1) candle shining on one square foot of surface, one-foot away. Also equal to one (1) lumen per square foot on a horizontal surface. 
    Lumen. The amount of light energy generated by a light source. Lights are typically rated for their efficiency in lumens per watt, where watts are a measure of the amount of electricity a fixture uses. 
(2)  General lighting: Minimum maintained - one-half (1/2) foot candle. Taking into consideration the lamp lumen depreciation, ballast factor and dirt factor for a light fixture this is the minimum light level that would be seen on the parking lot for any given point. 
(3)  Average lighting: A uniform ratio of average to minimum illumination no greater than 4:1. 
(4)  Upper level lighting: The upper limit for the light level shall not exceed eight (8) foot-candles. 
(5)  Spill light: Where commercial zoning abuts a residential zoning, horizontal light calculations following the property line must be provided. This number shall not exceed one-half (1/2) foot candle except at the entrances to the lot or any other special instances. 
(6)  Fixtures: Parking lot lighting fixtures of more than two thousand (2,000) lumens shall be cutoff fixtures except for decorative lighting. All lights shall be shielded. 
(7)  Pole height: Pole height shall be limited to thirty (30) feet. Requests for taller poles on larger parking lots can be made and considered by the planning and zoning commission on an individual basis. 
(8)  Lighting existing on effective date: Outdoor light fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this ordiinance are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance; provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, and structural alteration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(F)  Off-street loading requirements. There shall be provided at the time any building is erected, or additions are made to existing buildings, off-street loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Office buildings, apartments, apartment hotels, motels and hotels: One (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area; two (2) spaces for each fifty thousand (50,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor area; one (1) additional space for each seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area above two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet. 
(2)  Retail or service establishment or wholesale commercial use: One (1) space for each two thousand (2,000) to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area; two (2) spaces for each twenty thousand (20,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area; one (1) additional space for each seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area above one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. 
(3)  Manufacturing or industrial use: One (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(4)  Truck maneuvering space: In all cases where the off-street loading space is located in such a manner that a truck must back directly from a major street into a loading space, a maneuvering space of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be provided on the lot on which the industrial use is located. 
(Ord. No. 1212-08, § 1, 1-22-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1212-08, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as section 8(E). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, the former section 8(E) has been redesignated as section 8(F). 
Sec. 9. - Administration. 
(A)  Board of adjustment; appointment of members and alternates. A board of adjustment, hereinafter called the board, is hereby created, such board to be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the city. The alternate member(s) shall act with full power as a member of the board when a member of the board is disqualified because of a conflict or is excused from serving for any other reason. The membership of the board shall continue as now constituted with the addition of two (2) alternates and from the enactment of this ordinance all newly appointed members and alternates shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each. All members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority, upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairman who shall serve for one (1) year. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo, 1986, as amended. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon questions, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon, shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for that purpose. 
    The board of adjustment of the city is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to make a rule requiring all persons, firms, or corporations, other than the city, its departments or its officials in discharge of their duties, to pay all costs of actions or hearings initiated by them before the board of adjustment, and to further require that a deposit be made in an amount to be set by them to secure said costs, and the board of adjustment is authorized and directed to dismiss any action, petition or request before them if the person, firm or corporation requesting the said action fails to make the required deposit. 
(B)  Appeals to the board of adjustment. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the building inspector and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays any further action on activities covered by the permit, unless the building inspector certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or it, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, specific actions pursuant to the permit as shall be deemed necessary by the building inspector to prevent peril to life or property shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record, on an application or notice to the building inspector and on due cause shown. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(C)  Powers of the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(2)  To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance. 
(3)  In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such ordinances, to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of such ordinance relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. In exercising the above mentioned power, such board may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector. 
(D)  Vote required to reverse orders effect variations, etc. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance. 
(E)  Appeals to circuit court. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to the circuit court of Callaway County, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari, a writ issuing from a superior court calling for the records of an inferior court or to remove a case from a case below, directed to the board, to review such decision of the board, and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be served upon the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
    The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof, or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent, and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from, and shall be verified. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for proper disposition of the matter, it may take additional evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall he made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partially, or may modify the decision brought up for a review. Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(F)  Power to grant conditional use permit. The board of adjustment has the power to hear and decide upon applications for conditional use permits specifically listed in the district regulations of this ordinance. Before authorizing the issuance of such a conditional use permit, the board may impose such conditions as will, in the board's judgment, ensure that: 
The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; 
The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood; 
The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities will be provided; 
The conditional use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located and the board shall find that there is a public necessity for the conditional use. 
Sec. 10. - Enforcement of the ordinance. 
(A)  Building inspector. 
(1)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce this ordinance. The building inspector shall receive applications required by this ordinance, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. The building inspector shall examine premises for which permits have been issued, and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with. The building inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as may be otherwise provided for. The building inspector shall, when requested by the mayor or council, or when the interests of the municipality so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this ordinance and render written reports on the same. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with law, the building inspector shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(2)  Inspections. Inspections shall be made by the building inspector or a duly appointed assistant. 
(3)  Rules. For carrying into effect its provisions, the building inspector may adopt rules consistent with this ordinance. 
(4)  Records. The building inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. The building inspector shall retain on file copies of all papers in connection with building work, so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. All such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector. When possible, copies may be made of records upon request of, and reimbursed in advance by requestor. 
(5)  Cooperation of other officials. The building inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the engineer in fixing grades, of the chief of police in enforcing orders, of the attorney in prosecuting violations, and of other officials. 
(B)  Permits. 
(1)  When required. It shall not be lawful to construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish, or to commence the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure, without first filing with the building inspector an application in writing and obtaining a valid permit. 
(2)  [ Application for. ] Application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building inspector may prescribe. Such application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that the person making the application is authorized to make such application. Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officers. Such application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the building inspector for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work. Such application shall be accompanied by payment of such fees as the council may determine from time to time. 
(a)  Plans. Application for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings as the building inspector may require of the proposed work, drawn to scale, including floor plans, sections, elevations and structural details. 
(b)  Plot diagram. When required by the building inspector, there shall also be filed a plot diagram in a form and size suitable for filing permanently with the permit record, drawn to scale, with all dimensions and figures, showing accurately the size and exact location of all proposed new construction, or in the case of demolition, of such construction as to be demolished, and of all existing buildings; prepared by and signed by a registered surveyor, engineer or architect. 
(c)  Amendments. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed with, and be deemed a part of, the original application. 
(d)  Completion of existing buildings. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of a building, for which a valid permit has been issued or lawful approval given before the effective date of this ordinance; provided, however, construction under such permit or approval shall have been started within six (6) months and the ground story framework, including structural parts of the second floor, shall have been completed within one (1) year and the entire building completed within two (2) years after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(e)  Action on application. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to examine applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, the building inspector finds no objection to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building inspector shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable; provided, that no permit shall be issued in any district in which an application for a modification in zoning has been made, for a period of ninety (90) days after such application has been made. If the building inspector's examination reveals otherwise, the building inspector will reject such application, noting the building inspector's finding in a report to be attached to the application and delivering a copy to the applicant. 
(3)  Permit issuance. 
(a)  Approval in part. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the building inspector from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and detailed statements of said building or structure have been submitted or approved, if adequate plans and detailed statements have been presented for the same and have been found to comply with this ordinance. 
(b)  Condition of the permit. All work performed under a permit issued by the building inspector shall conform to the approved application and plans and approved amendments thereof. The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot diagram, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be strictly adhered to. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot of which a plot diagram has been filed and has been used as the basis for a permit, unless a revised plot diagram showing the proposed change in condition shall have been filed and approved; provided, that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public improvement. 
(c)  Signature on permit. Every permit issued by the building inspector under the provisions of this ordinance shall have the building inspector's signature affixed thereto; but this shall not prevent the building inspector from authorizing a subordinate to affix such signature. 
(d)  Term of permit. 
1.  In all instances, except for the demolition or removal of a building, the term of a permit for the construction or alteration of a structure or building shall be one (1) year, except when extended by the building inspector. 
2.  The term of a permit for the demolition or removal of a building or structure shall be ninety (90) days, except that the permit may be extended by the building inspector for a one-time period of thirty (30) days when good cause is shown that the work cannot be completed in ninety (90) days. 
(e)  Posting of permits. A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises, open to the public inspection, during the prosecution of the work and until the completion of same. The building inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. The building inspector shall be given at least twelve (12) hours notice of the starting of work under a permit. 
(f)  Renovation. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this ordinance in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which a permit or approval was based. 
(C)  Certificate of occupancy for a building. 
(1)  General. No building shall be occupied before a certificate of occupancy has been issued. A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the reconstruction or alteration of an existing building shall be issued within three (3) days after the request for same shall have been made in writing to the building inspector, after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof shall have been completed, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Any temporary certificates will be issued as specified per the current building code. 
(2)  Content of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations. The original certificate shall be given to the property owner, one (1) copy shall be provided the board of public works and one (1) copy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. No fee shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all nonconforming uses. Application for such certificate for nonconforming uses shall be filed within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 836-99, § 1, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 11. - Boundaries of districts. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the district map made [by reference] a part of this ordinance, the following rules apply: 
(A)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of these districts. 
(B)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the district map made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(C)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
Sec. 12. - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this ordinance imposes a greater restriction, this ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 13. - Amendments. 
(A)  Generally. The council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition by the property owner, after public notice and hearings thereon as provided herein, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations and restrictions as established herein and may change, restrict or extend the boundaries of the various districts established herein. Before taking action upon any proposed amendment, modification, change, restriction or extension, the same shall be referred by the council to the city planning and zoning commission for report and recommendation. The council is the zoning authority for the City of Fulton; therefore, all applications for a zone change will be approved or disapproved by the city council. 
(1)  Steps to obtain a zone change by petition. 
(a)  The applicant discusses his proposal with the zoning official; in this discussion the opinions expressed by the zoning official in no way guarantees that a given property will be zoned accordingly. 
Likewise any discussion of zoning problems with any member of the city administrative staff is not to be construed as a zoning commitment. The final legal decision is made by the city council after receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Submit to the zoning official, at least four (4) weeks prior to a regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the following: 
1.  An application form, copies of which are available in the zoning official's office. 
2.  A check made payable to the City of Fulton in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the postage cost of mailing certified hearing notices to property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of proposed rezoning. 
3.  Accurate legal description for each zone district requested, and where practical, the street address. 
4.  An eight and one-half (81/2) inch by eleven (11) inch preliminary plat, at the largest scale possible, and thirty (30) copies of same, to contain the following information: 
a.  Complete dimensions of property(ies) for which rezoning is requested. 
b.  Names of all owners or property within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the boundary of area(s) to be considered for rezoning. 
c.  Present zoning and generalized land use on tract(s) in question and all adjacent tracts. 
d.  The size and location of all exiting utilities and easements, including storm sewers across the particular tract(s) of land, and indication of how property is to be served if utilities are not available on the tract(s). 
e.  All adjacent streets and alleys, including names and width of dedications. 
f.  North point, scale and date. 
g.  Any other information requested by the zoning official. 
(c)  After the zoning official has determined that the application and supporting documents meet all requirements, a public hearing will be set by the zoning official or the planning and zoning commission at their next regular meeting. 
(d)  At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing before the commission, the proposed zone change is advertised in a daily newspaper, and subject property is posted by the zoning official. 
(e)  The applicant and all owners of property within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the area to be rezoned are notified by certified mail of the time and place of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(f)  At the meeting of the commission at which the public hearing is held, all interested parties should be present. 
(g)  At the public hearing, the commission will either make a recommendation to the city council for or against the proposal, or continue the hearing to a future planning and zoning commission meeting. 
(h)  The recommendation of the planning and zoning commission is forwarded to the city council at its next regular meeting, at which time they shall hold another public hearing on the proposed zone change. 
(i)  Following the public hearing held by the city council, the council will then take action on the proposed zone change. 
(B)  Protest. If a protest against such amendment, change, modification, repeal, restriction or extension shall be presented, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of thirty (30) percent or more, either of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendment shall not be passed except by three-fourths vote of the council. 
(C)  Notice of hearings. No action on an amendment, change, modification or repeal of this ordinance shall be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard before both the planning and zoning commission and city council. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of each such hearing shall be published in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1168-07, § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 1216-08, § 1, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 14. - Severability. 
    In case any portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the ordinance shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 15. - Penalties. 
    The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of the regulations of this ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that such violation continues, but if the offense be willful on conviction thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue, or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Any such person who, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with said order within ten (10) days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of this act in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, as updated through April 14, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1980 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-20 1-1-1-20 2-1-2-3 2-2-2-4 2-5, 2-6 2-5, 2-6 2-7 2-361 2-8-2-12 2-7-2-11 2-30(c) 2-31 2-31, 2-32 2-32, 2-33 2-37-2-40 2-34-2-37 2-52 2-51 2-54-2-60 2-52-2-58 2-99(e) 2-71 2-101, 2-102 2-72, 2-73 2-140-2-145 2-156-2-161 2-147-2-149 2-162-2-164 2-151-2-154 2-165-2-168 2-160-2-164 2-169-2-173 2-179, 2-180 2-186, 2-187 2-193 2-236 2-197, 2-198 2-238, 2-239 2-216-2-221 2-218-2-223 2-226 2-111 2-240 2-98 2-241, 2-242 2-175, 2-176 2-243-2-250 2-362-2-369 2-263-2-287 2-266-2-290 2-401-2-405 2-336-2-340 3-1 6-1 3-5, 3-6 6-2, 6-3 3-8 6-4 3-20(a) 6-27 3-22 6-28 3-24, 3-25 6-29, 6-30 3-26 6-26 4-1 10-1 4-2-4-8 10-31-10-37 4-10-4-12 10-38-10-40 4-13-4-19 10-3-10-9 4-20 10-1 10-10 4-21 10-2 4-34, 4-35 10-51, 10-52 4-36-4-40 10-91-10-95 4-41 10-53 4-42-4-45 10-96-10-99 4-57-4-59 10-66-10-68 4-60-4-62 10-121-10-123 4-64 10-124 5-2 14-1 14-9 5-3 14-2 5-4 14-4 5-5(1) 14-41 5-5(1)(a), 5-5(1)(b) 14-42, 14-43 5-5(2)-(6) 14-43 5-6-5-9 14-5-14-8 5-10-5-16 14-10-14-16 5-22, 5-23 14-66, 14-67 5-24-5-26 14-19-14-21 5-27, 5-28 14-17, 14-18 5-29 14-22 5-36-5-50 14-92-14-106 5-51 14-91 5-52 14-3 6-1 18-31 18-56 18-81 18-106 18-131 50-26 6-2 18-32 18-57 18-82 18-107 50-27 6-3 18-33 18-58 18-108 18-133 6-10 2-251 6-20-6-24 18-1-18-5 6-30-6-34 18-156-18-160 6-40 18-6 6-50, 6-51 18-7, 18-8 7-1-7-3 30-1-30-3 7-3.1 30-4 7-4, 7-5 30-81, 30-82 7-8 30-9 7-10 30-10 7-15-7-19 30-11-30-15 7-30, 7-31 30-36, 30-37 7-31.1 30-38 7-32-7-35 30-39-30-42 7-40-7-42 30-56-30-58 7-45, 7-46 30-59, 30-60 7-54-7-58 30-83-30-87 7-58.1 30-88 7-59-7-61 30-89-30-91 7-63-7-69 30-92-30-98 7-81-7-84 30-5-30-8 8-16-8-28 34-26-34-38 9-9 42-1 9-27 42-27 9-30(c) 42-28 10-1, 10-2 50-1, 50-2 10-3-10-5 110-91-110-93 10-6 50-3 10-19.1 50-28 10-20-10-23 50-29-50-32 10-35-10-39 50-56-50-60 10-40 50-63 10-41 50-65 10-42 50-61 10-43 50-64 10-46-10-49 50-76-50-79 11-16-11-31 58-51-58-66 11-39 58-76 11-40 58-80 11-41-11-43 58-77-58-79 11-44-11-49 58-81-58-86 11-57-11-62 58-96-58-101 11-70-11-81 58-111-58-122 12-1 94-1 12-2-12-5 94-26-94-29 12-15-12-27 94-51-94-63 12-36-12-43 94-87-94-94 12-44 94-86 12-45 94-127 12-46 94-95 12-54-12-56 94-106-94-108 12-58-12-61 94-109-94-112 12-69 94-126 12-70, 12-71 94-128, 94-129 12-72 94-134 12-73-12-76 94-130-94-133 13-16-13-18 58-26-58-28 13-49 18-181 13-50-13-52 18-184-18-186 13-53 18-183 13-54 18-182 14-2 18-83 15-16 66-2-66-11 15-17 66-1 15-18-15-23 66-31-66-36 16-1 22-1 16-2-16-14 22-26-22-38 16-15 22-2 16-27 22-61 16-28-16-42 22-65-22-79 16-43 22-62 16-44, 16-45 22-80, 22-81 16-46, 16-47 22-63, 22-64 16-59 22-101 16-60-16-63 22-103-22-106 16-64 22-102 16-76-16-78 110-66-110-68 16-79 110-70 16-80 110-69 16-96-16-99 90-26-90-29 16-113-16-115 22-136-22-138 16-125 22-161 16-133 22-171 16-134 22-184 16-135 22-172 16-136-16-142 22-174-22-180 16-143 22-173 16-144-16-146 22-181-22-183 16-161-16-164 22-206-22-209 17-1-17-9 110-1-110-9 17-22 110-34 17-23-17-25 110-31-110-33 17-26-17-36 110-35-110-45 17-47-17-54 110-401-110-408 17-66-17-100 110-151-110-185 17-110, 17-111 110-196, 110-197 17-123-17-125 110-211-110-213 17-137-17-143 110-226-110-232 17-155-17-157 110-246-110-248 17-170-17-173 110-261-110-264 17-185-17-191 110-276-110-282 17-193 110-283 17-194 110-186 17-206-17-217 110-431-110-442 17-229-17-231 110-306-110-308 17-232-17-264 110-313-110-345 17-265-17-268 110-309-110-312 17-269 110-346 17-280-17-288 110-356-110-364 17-289 110-377 17-290 110-376 17-291 110-378 17-300-17-310 110-121-110-131 17-322-17-325 110-466-110-469 17-337-17-343 110-94-110-100 18-1-18-5 38-1-38-5 19-1-19-7 46-26-46-32 20-1, 20-2 78-1, 78-2 20-4-20-11 78-3-78-10 20-23 78-31 20-51-20-53 78-51-78-53 20-64-20-71 78-76-78-83 20-83-20-85 78-106-78-108 20-86(a) 78-110 20-86(b) 78-109 20-87, 20-88 78-111, 78-112 20-91-20-99 6-56-6-64 21-16 82-1 21-17 82-26 21-18 82-2 21-20-21-23 82-51-82-54 21-32, 21-33 82-76 22-6, 22-7 86-1, 86-2 22-18-22-22 86-26-86-30 23-16, 23-17 70-26, 70-27 23-18-23-22 70-30-70-34 23-23(b) 70-35 24-1-24-9 98-1-98-9 24-21, 24-22 98-31, 98-32 24-35, 24-36 98-56, 98-57 24-37-24-40 98-59-98-62 24-41 98-58 24-42-24-47 98-63-98-68 24-59-24-65 98-91-98-97 24-66 98-10 24-67-24-69 98-98-98-100 25-1, 25-2 102-1, 102-2 25-3-25-6 102-31-102-34 25-7-25-10 102-56-102-59 25-10.1 102-3 25-11-25-15 102-81-102-85 25-16-25-18 102-4-102-6 26-1-26-3 106-1-106-3 26-5-26-7 106-4-106-6 28-1 114-1 28-2-28-7 114-36-114-41 28-8-28-10 114-51-114-53 28-11, 28-12 114-97, 114-98 28-13-28-22 114-76-114-85 28-23 114-96 28-24-28-28 114-99-114-103 28-29-28-32 114-146-114-149 28-32.1 114-150 28-33-28-36 114-131-114-134 28-37-28-39 114-116-114-118 28-40 114-171 28-41-28-50 114-173-114-182 28-51-28-60 114-196-114-205 28-61-28-66 114-216-114-221 28-67 114-231 28-70 114-172 29-16 118-26 29-24, 29-25 118-36, 118-37 29-26 118-39 29-27-29-32 118-41-118-46 29-33 118-38 29-34 118-47 29-35 118-40 29-36, 29-37 118-48, 118-49 29-45 118-61 30-1, 30-2 46-57, 46-58 30-3 46-56 30-15-30-18 46-91-46-94 30-30-30-32 46-106-46-108 30-44-30-47 46-71-46-74 30-59-30-61 46-75-46-77 30-74 46-59 31-1-31-4 2-126-2-129 31-5(a) 2-130 31-5(b) 98-11 31-6, 31-7 2-131, 2-132 32-1 2-1 32-3(A), 32-3(B) 2-201, 2-202 32-4 2-237 32-5 2-96 32-7 2-97 32-8(A) 2-216 32-8(B) 2-220 32-8(C) 2-217 32-9 2-112 32-10(A), 
32-10(B) 70-28, 70-29 32-11 2-174 32-12 2-252 32-13 82-27 32-15 94-28 32-16 50-62 32-17(A)- 
32-17(C) 2-321-2-323 33-4 62-29 33-21-33-23 62-26-62-28 33-25 62-30  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter  4- 1-86 1.1-15.6 1.1-15.6  1-23-96(711-96) 2       Rpld 10.1-10.7       Added 10.1-10.7  2-10-98(766-98) 1       Added 2.3 9.2(b)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, as updated through April 14, 1992, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since April 14, 1992, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 338-86 11-11-86 1(9-26) 42-26 410-88  3-22-88 1(A)-1(D) 54-1-54-4 2(A) 54-5 2(B) 54-31 2(C)-2(G) 54-6-54-10 2(I) 54-11 3(A) 54-46 3(B) 54-32 3(C) 54-47 4 54-86 5(A)-5(C) 54-87-54-89 6(A), 6(B) 54-101, 54-102 7(A) 54-116 8(A)-8(E) 54-61-54-65 9 54-33 10 54-35 11 54-34 594-92  2-24-92 1       Added 78-12 602-92  4-28-92 1 94-95 603-92  4-28-92 1 46-26-46-32 611-92  5-26-92 1 78-77, 78-78 612-92  6- 9-92 1 10-1 10-10 613-92  6- 9-92 1 110-66-110-70 621-92  8-25-92 1 2-362 622-92  8-25-92 1 114-39 114-83 114-117 630-92 11-24-92 1 110-359(a)(1), (2) 637-93  4-13-93 1 110-359(a)(2) 640-93  5-25-93 1 54-4 641-93  5-25-93 1 86-26-86-30 644-93  6-22-93 I 10-51(11) 10-94(a) 648-93  8-24-93 1 2-2-2-13 649-93  8-24-93 I, II 2-301-2-303, 2-311-2-315 650-93  9-21-93 I       Rpld 58-51-58-66, 58-76-58-86, 58-96-58-101, 58-111-58-122       Added 58-51-58-58, 58-81-58-104, 58-121-58-149, 58-171-58-187, 58-201 652-93  9-21-93 1       Added 110-187 2 110-341(a) 3       Added 110-359(f) 653-93 10-12-93 A       Rpld 2-216-2-223 B       Added 2-216-2-223 656-93 10-26-93 1-7 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 657-93 10-26-93 1       Added 66-61-66-68 658-93 11- 9-93 1-13       Added 2-401-2-413 659-93 11-23-93 1, 3 38-2(b) 662-94  2-26-94 1 78-31 663-94  1-26-94 1 2-222 666-94  5-24-94 A       Rpld 46-26-46-32 B       Added 46-26-46-34 672-94  8-23-94 1 2-9-2-13 674-94  9-27-94 1-5       Added 92-1-92-5 6-10       Added 92-21-92-25 11-34       Added 92-41-92-64 675-94 10-25-94 1       Added 78-11 678-94 10-25-94 1-5 66-2-66-6 679-94 12-13-94 1       Added App. A, §§ 1-15 680-94 12-13-94 1       Added 78-84 682-95  2-28-95 1 110-283 683-95  2-28-95 1 110-341(a) 684-95  2-28-95 1       Added 110-347 685-95  2-28-95 1       Rpld 62-30       Added 62-30-62-37 688-95  3-14-95 1 110-248(3) 714-96  3-12-96 1 110-248(3) 2 110-341 715-96  4-23-96 1 110-248(3) 718-96  6-25-96 1 2-8 2 2-361 725-96  9-24-96 1       Added 102-81(e) 726-96  9-24-96 1 110-343 730-96 11-26-96 1       Rpld 22-61-22-81       Added 22-61-22-69 737-97  3-25-97 1 110-43(e) 745-97  6-10-97 1 92-24(a)(1) 2 92-62(2) 748-97  6-24-97 1       Rpld 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56-18-58, 18-81-18-83, 18-106-18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-156-18-160, 18-181-18-186       Added 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56, 18-57, 18-81-18-83, 18-106-18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-156, 18-157, 18-166-18-168, 18-176-18-180, 18-191-18-196 50-26-50-28 750-97  7-22-97 1 110-248(3) 2 110-341(a) 759-97 10-28-97 1 6-1 2       Added 6-5 761-97 12-16-97 1 114-96(b)(8) 763-98  1-27-98 1 110-341 765-98  2-10-98 1 110-376-110-378 769-98  2-24-98 1 92-1 2 92-52(3) 3 92-56(a) 4 92-56(c) 770-98  3-10-98 1 110-248(2) 774-98  4-14-98 1       Added 6-65, 6-66 775-98  4-14-98 1 50-26(a) 2 50-28 788-98  7-14-98 1 110-341 789-98  7-14-98 1 110-358(a) 2 110-359(a)(6) 790-98  7-14-98 1 110-248(2) 800-98 12-15-98 1       Rpld 94-128       Added 94-128 810-99  2-23-99 1 110-341 828-99  9-21-99 1       Added 6-65(3) 835-99 12-14-99 1 App. A, § 3(B)(3) 836-99 12-14-99 1 App. A, § 10(C)(1) 838-00  1-11-00 1 110-359(a) 839-00  1-25-00 1 App. A, § 4(7)(a) 841-00  2- 8-00 1 110-283 843-00  3-28-00 1       Added 22-39 852-00  8- 8-00 1 110-341 2 110-283 855-00  9-12-00 1 6-56 6-58, 6-59 6-62-6-65 866-00 11-14-00 1 94-128(4) 871-01  1-11-01 1       Added 108-1-108-4, 108-9, 108-10, 108-14-108-26, 108-30-108-37, 108-42, 108-48, 108-53, 108-58, 108-59 875-01  3-27-01 1 110-44(b) 879-01  5-22-01 1 94-128(b)-(d) 880-01  6-12-01 1 110-172(b) 883-01  8-14-01 1 2-9-2-13 887-01 10- 9-01 1 110-248 888-01 10-23-01 1 42-1 891-01 11-27-01 1 58-53(b) 58-173(b) 58-182(b) 892-01 11-27-01 1 14-66 898-02  1- 8-02 1       Rpld 62-30-62-37       Added 62-30-62-39 901-02  3-12-02 1       Rpld 54-1-54-11, 54-31-54-35, 54-46, 54-47, 54-61-54-65       Added 54-1-54-12, 54-17-54-20, 54-24-54-28, 54-32-54-38 905-02  7- 9-02 1 46-91 912-02  8-27-02 1 14-1-14-22       Rpld 14-41-14-43       Rnbd ch. 14, arts. III, IV as II, III 14-66-14-67, 14-91-14-106 914-02  9-24-02 1 92-51 919-03  2-11-03 1       Rpld 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56, 18-57, 18-81-18-83, 18-106-18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-156, 18-157, 18-166-18-168, 18-176-18-180, 18-191-18-196       Added 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56-18-58, 18-81-18-83, 18-106-18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-156, 18-157, 18-166-18-168, 18-176-18-180, 18-191-18-196 924-03  4-15-03 1 110-43(c) 2 110-43(f) 925-03  4-15-03 1 46-26(6) 2       Added 46-35 932-03  6-24-03 1 46-35(5) 938-03  8-26-03 1 2-9-2-13 940-03  9-23-03 1 46-35(6) 942-03 10-28-03 1 114-52(a) 944-03 11-18-03 1 78-110(a)(3) 947-03 12-16-03 1 10-51(11) 2, 3 10-94(a), (b) 4 10-95 951-04  2-24-04 1 110-341(a) 2 110-283 952-04  3- 9-04 1 14-3(a) 953-04  3- 9-04 1 110-44(c) 955-04  5-11-04 1       Added 110-233 2 110-283 958-04  5-25-04 1 86-29 974-04 12-14-04 1 110-283 978-05  1-24-05 1 110-248(3) 979-05  2- 8-05 1       Rpld 54-1-54-38       Added 54-1 1002-05  7-12-05 1 14-67(5) 1104-05  8- 9-05 1 110-172(b) 1105-05  8-23-05 1 2-9-2-13 1108-05 10-11-05 1 110-248(2) 1109-05 10-11-05 1 110-248(3) 1110-05 10-11-05 1 110-359(a)(2), (6) 1111-05 10-11-05 1 78-111 1115-05 10-25-05 1 110-261 1117-05 10-25-05 1 110-283 1128-06  2-14-06       Rpld 92-1-92-64       Added 92-1-92-65 1131-06  2-28-06 1 110-359(a)(1), (2), (6), (b) 1136-06  4-25-06 1 22-136 1142-06  6-27-06 1 110-341(a) 1147-06  9-26-06 1 110-283 1149-06 10-24-06 1 22-136 1153-06 11-28-06 1 94-128(a) 1161-07  1-23-07 1 110-341(a) 1168-07  3-27-07 1 App. A, § 13(A)(1)(b)2. 1169-07  3-27-07 1 App. A, § 4(6)A. 1170-07  3-27-07 1 110-341(a) 1174-07  4-10-07 1       Added 38-2(c) 1182-07  6-12-07 1 110-261 1183-07  6-26-07 1 App. A, § 4(B)(1)(a) 1185-07  6-26-07 1 114-99-114-103       Added 114-104 1189-07  8-28-07 1 2-9-2-13 1191-07  9-25-07 1       Added 114-222 1193-07 10-23-07 1       Added App. A, § 2(A)(4) 1195-07 10-23-07 1       Rpld §§ 18-1-18-8 18-31-18-33 18-56-18-58 18-81-18-84 18-106-18-108 18-131-18-133 18-156, 18-157 18-166-18-168 18-176-18-180 18-191-18-196       Added 18-1-18-8 18-31-18-33 18-56-18-58 18-81-18-83 18-106-18-108 18-131-18-133 18-156, 18-157 18-166-18-168 18-176-18-178 18-186-18-190 18-202-18-207 1212-08  1-22-08       Rnbd App. A, § 8(E)       as App. A, § 8(F) 1       Added App. A, § 8(E) 1213-08  2-12-08 1       Rpld 58-26-58-28 58-51-58-58 58-81-58-104 58-121-58-149 58-171-58-187 58-201       Added 58-1, 58-2 58-26-58-40 1214-08  2-26-08 1 App. A § 3(A) 2       Rnbd App. A, § 4(A)(7)-(11)       as 4(A)(8)-(12)       Added App. A § 4(A)(7) 1215-08  2-26-08 1 App. A § 4(A)(5) 1216-08  2-26-08 1       Rpld App. A § 13(D) 1222-08  6-24-08 1       Rpld 108-1-108-4 108-9, 108-10 108-14-108-26 108-30-108-37 108-42 108-48 108-53 108-58 1229-08  9-16-08 1 110-341(a) 1241-09  1-13-09 1 22-27 1245-09  3-10-09 92-1       Added 92-48.1 1251-09  6-23-09 110-283 1252-09  7-14-09 1       Dltd 94-126-94-134       Added 94-126-94-134 1258-09  9-22-09 1 110-248(3) 2 110-283 1262-09 11-24-09 1 110-248(3) 1264-09 11-24-09 1 110-43 1270-10  2- 9-10 1       Added 58-51-58-54 1273-10  3-23-10 1 94-131(1)b. 1274-10  3-23-10 1 110-341 1276-10  4-27-10 1 78-111 1282-10  8-24-10 1 78-112 1284-10 10-12-10 1 110-341 1288-10 11- 2-10 
(election date)       Added 93-1-93-12 1292-11  5-10-11 1       Added 114-236-114-237 1293-11  5-24-11 1 94-128(f) 1300-11  8-23-11 1 110-248(3) 1303-11 10-11-11 110-283 1304-11 10-11-11 110-341 1305-11 10-25-11 1       Rpld 98-96       Added 98-96 1306-11 11- 8-11 1       Rpld 46-35       Added 46-35 1308-11 12-20-11 1 14-1 14-3 14-66(c), (d)       Rnbd 14-22       as 14-23       Added 14-22 1309-11 12-20-11 1 42-1 1312-12  1-24-12 1 110-341 1313-12  1-24-12 1 110-283 1314-12  1-24-12 1 110-248(3) 1316-12  2-14-12 1 110-283 1318-12  4-24-12 1 54-1 1320-12  4-24-12 1 App. A, § 1 App. A, § 4(A)(4) 1321-12  6-26-12 1 110-358(a) 1322-12  6-26-12 1 110-312 1323-12  6-26-12 1 110-339       Rnbd 110-340-110-347       as 110-339-110-346 1324-12  6-26-12 1 110-359(a), (b) 1328-12  9-11-12 1       Dltd 94-126-94-134       Added 94-126-94-133 1331-12 11-13-12 1 110-44 1333-12 11-13-12 1 46-35 1336-12 11-27-12 1 110-283 110-340(a) 1337-13  1- 8-13 1 10-52 1338-13  1- 8-13 1 110-283 1339-13  1- 8-13 2 110-248 1345-13  4-23-13 1 78-111 1349-13  7- 9-13 1 110-359 1350-13  8-13-13 1 2-9-2-13 1354-13  9-10-13 1 110-38 1356-13  9-24-13 1 78-82 1381-15  2-10-15 1       Rpld 114-171-114-182, 114-196-114-205, 114-216-114-222       Added 114-171-114-182, 114-196-114-205, 114-216-114-222 1384-15  3-10-15 1 110-248(3) 1388-15  6- 9-15 1       Rpld 58-29       Added 58-37(c) 1389-15  6- 9-15 2 110-283 1391-15  7-14-15 1 2-9-2-13 1403-15 11-24-15 1 14-92 1406-15 12-15-15 1 38-2(a)(1) 1417-16  6-28-16 1-4       Added 18-144-18-147 1420-16  8- 9-16 1       Rpld 90-28, 90-29 1421-16  8- 9-16 2 110-340(a) 1423-16  9-27-16 1 110-340(a) 1427-16 11-22-16 1       Added 2-370 1429-17  1-24-17 1 110-248(2) 1436-17  6-13-17 1 46-35(c)-(e)       Rpld 46-35(f)       Rnbd 46-35(g), (h)       as 46-35(f), (g) 1438-17  7-11-17 1 110-283 1439-17  8- 8-17 1       Rpld 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-56-18-58, 18-81-18-83, 18-107, 18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-144-18-147, 18-156, 18-157, 18-166-18-167, 18-176-18-178, 18-186-18-190, 18-202-18-207       Added 18-1-18-8, 18-31-18-33, 18-45-18-47, 18-56, 18-57, 18-81-18-83, 18-106-18-108, 18-131-18-133, 18-144-18-147, 18-156-18-158, 18-166-18-168, 18-176-18-178, 18-186-18-190, 18-202-18-207 1445-17 11-14-17 1 110-340 1448-17 11-14-17 1 110-248(3) 1451-17 11-28-17 1 114-217 1454-18  1- 9-18 2       Added 34-1 1458-18  3-27-18 1 118-26 118-36-118-38       Rpld 118-39       Rnbd 118-40-118-49       as 118-39-118-48       Added 118-49, 118-61 1460-18  5-22-18 1       Rpld 46-26-46-35, 46-56-46-59, 46-71-46-77, 46-91-46-94, 46-106-46-108       Added 46-1-46-14, 46-31-46-41, 46-61-46-65 1461-18  6-12-18 1 110-340 1468-18  7-24-18 1 18-33 1469-18  8-14-18 1 118-26       Added 118-27 1473-18 10-23-18 1 110-248(2) 1477-18 11-27-18 1 18-83 1488-19  3-26-19 1       Rpld 94-126-94-133       Added 94-126-94-132 1496-19  5-28-19 1 2-71 1498-19  5-28-19 1 14-1-14-23 14-66, 14-67 14-91-14-106  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
RSMo Section  
this Code 1.020 et seq. 1-2 1.020(10) 1-2 1.020(11) 1-2 1.020(12) 1-2 1.020(15) 1-2 1.030(2) 1-2 1.040 1-2 1.050 1-2 ch. 44 ch. 34 44.010(4) 34-37 44.080 Ch. 34, Art. II 34-27 34-33 44.080(2) 34-32 44.080(3) 34-37 44.090 34-28 34-32 44.115 34-29 52.250 106-2 52.290 106-2 67.398 46-31 67.400 et seq. 46-1 70.210-70.230 50-1 70.220 106-2 70.230 106-2 70.600-70.760 2-171 70.655 2-172 70.705 2-171 70.730 2-171 71.010 et seq. Ch. 2 71.370-71.420 50-1 71.610 Ch. 22 82.040 Ch. 2, Art. II 82.110 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 89 54-1 89.010-89.140 App. A, § 9(A) 89.070 Ch. 86, Art. II App. A, 
§ 3(B)(3) 89.110 54-34 89.300 et seq. Ch. 102 89.310 Char. § 6.1 89.310 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II 89.340 86-2 90.010 Ch. 82 91.540 Char. § 6.1 114-51 92.040 22-62 94.400 Ch. 106 106-3 ch. 115 et seq. Ch. 42 140.010 et seq. 106-6 143.191-143.261 22-27 144.010-144.510 22-27 191.010 et seq. Ch. 58 192.010 et seq. 192.020 192.140 193.010 et seq. Ch. 30 194.010 et seq. Ch. 30 195.010 66-11 209.150 110-442 213.010 66-1 213.040(1) 66-2 213.040(6)-(13) 66-11 213.045 66-3 213.050 66-4 213.055 66-5 213.065 66-6 214.010 et seq. Ch. 30 214.020 30-38 214.270-214.410 App. A, 
§ 4(A)(6)D. 260.200-260.276 94-94 300.010 110-1 300.030 110-469 300.065 110-33 300.075 110-31, 110-32 300.080 110-5 300.085 110-4 300.090 110-6 300.095 110-3 300.100 110-157 300.105 110-212 300.110 110-466 300.115 110-467 300.120(1), 300.120(2) 110-466, 
110-467 300.125 110-468 300.130 110-122 300.130 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. V 300.135 110-121 300.140 110-123 300.145 110-124 300.150 110-125 300.155 110-126 110-283 300.160 110-127 300.165 110-128 300.170 110-129 300.175 110-130 300.180 110-131 300.185 110-182 300.190 110-182 300.195 110-35, 110-36 300.200 110-37 300.205 110-246 300.215 110-226 300.220(1), 300.220(2) 110-228, 
110-229 300.225 110-227 300.230 110-230 300.235 110-232 300.240 110-262 300.245 110-263 300.250 110-264 300.255 110-276 300.260 110-277 300.265 110-278 300.270(2) 110-279 300.275 110-280 300.280 110-281 300.285 110-213 300.290 110-160 300.295 110-282 300.300 110-180 300.305 110-181 300.310 110-176 300.315 110-175 300.320 110-9 300.325 110-38 300.330 110-177 300.335 110-179 300.340 110-8 300.345 110-178 300.347 110-408 300.350 110-7 300.355 110-174 300.365 110-173 300.370 110-431 300.375(1), 300.375(2) 110-432, 
110-433 300.375(3) 110-432 300.375(4) 110-197 300.380 110-434 300.385 110-435 300.390 110-436 300.395 110-437 300.400(1) 110-439 300.405 110-438 300.410 110-440 300.415 110-316 300.420(1), 300.420(2) 110-326, 
110-327 300.425 110-328 300.430 110-329 300.435 110-337 300.440 110-318 300.445 110-317 300.450 110-320 300.455 110-325 300.460 110-319 300.465 110-323 300.470 110-322 300.475 110-321 300.480 110-324 300.485 110-330 300.490 110-331 300.495 110-332 300.500 110-332 300.505 110-333 300.510(1)-(3) 110-334 300.510(4) 110-335 300.515 110-336 300.520 110-306 300.525 110-307 300.530 110-313 300.535 110-314 300.540 110-315 300.545 110-308 300.550 110-183 300.575 110-39 300.580 110-40 300.585 110-41 300.590 110-42 110-312 300.595 110-43 110-311 ch. 301 94-1 301.010 110-66 301.142 110-378 301.143 110-376 110-378 302.010 et seq. Ch. 118, Art. II, Div. 3 302.020 110-151 302.041 Ch. 118, Art. II, Div. 3 302.060 110-152 302.130 110-152 304.014-304.026 110-163 304.015 110-163 304.016 110-196 304.017 110-164 304.019 110-231 304.044 110-164 304.050 110-186 304.051 110-186 304.052-304.070 110-186 304.080 110-442 304.120(2) Ch. 110, Art. VI, Div. 6 304.150 110-169 304.250 110-94 304.351 110-211 110-283 307.020(9) 110-100 307.040 110-100 307.070 110-100 307.075 110-100 307.170(2) 110-96 307.170(3), 307.170(4) 110-98, 110-99 307.170(5) 110-95 307.175 110-91, 110-92 311.090(2) 10-51 311.180(1)-311.180(9) 10-51 311.190 10-51 311.200 10-51(1) 10-94(a) 311.200(1)-311.200(4) 10-51 311.220 10-51 311.298 10-95 311.300 10-5 311.310 10-3 311.320 10-6 311.325 10-7 311.350 10-97 311.480(3) 10-51 312.100(1) 10-67 312.100(3), 312.100(4) 10-67 312.140 10-67 312.300 10-121 312.400 10-3 312.405 10-6 312.407 10-7 312.410 10-122 312.440 10-124 314.100 66-7 320.126.4 78-112 Ch. 352 2-401 Ch. 353 2-401 Ch. 355 2-401 367.031 22-39 390.020(27) Ch. 118, Art. II 390.030(1), (2) Ch. 118, Art. II 408.200 66-7 432.070 2-2 432.080 2-2 445.010 et seq. Ch. 102 479.010 et seq. Ch. 38 479.040 38-1 479.050 38-3 479.260(2) 38-2 488.012.3(5) 38-2 488.027.2 38-2 ch. 536 46-9 46-35 563.660 Ch. 14 566.130 78-31 569.140 78-52 570.030 78-51 571.010(10) 78-109 571.094 78-110 574.010 78-77 574.020 78-78 574.030 78-76 574.040 78-79 574.050 78-80 574.060 78-81 575.040(2), (3) 78-5 575.060 78-5 575.070 78-6 575.120 78-4 575.150 78-3 78-9 575.160 78-3 78-10 577.010 110-166 577.012 110-167 577.020-577.041 110-167 577.060 110-168 577.100 78-108 578.005 Ch. 14 578.012 14-16 590.140 38-2 610.120 2-410  
