Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100.010. How Code Designated and Cited. [R.O. 2006
§100.120; Ord. No. 2003 §1, 11-18-1996]
The ordinances embraced in this and the following Chapters and Sections
shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of the City of
Fenton, Missouri" and may be so cited.
Section 100.020. Catchlines of Sections. [R.O. 2006 §100.130; Ord.
No. 2003 §1, 11-18-1996]
The catchlines of the several Sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such Sections, nor as
any part of the Section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such Sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.
Section 100.030. Definitions and Rules of Construction. [R.O. 2006
§100.140; Ord. No. 2003 §1, 11-18-1996]
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, the following rules or
definitions shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen:
ALDERMAN — A member of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton,
Missouri.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — Whenever the words "Board of Aldermen",
"Board", "this Board" or "the Board" are used, they mean the Board of
Aldermen of the City of Fenton, Missouri.
CITY — The words "the City" or "this City" shall mean the City of Fenton, in
St. Louis County, Missouri.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first (1st) day and including the last.
COUNTY — The words "County", "the County" or "this County" shall mean
St. Louis County, Missouri.
GENDER — A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as
to males.
AO:1
HIGHWAY — Shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place
or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the
City, dedicated or devoted to public use.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NUMBER — Any word importing the singular number shall include the
plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which,
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words, "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC. — Whenever any Officer, Department,
Board, Commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of
Fenton, Missouri".
OR, AND — "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include
any part-owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person", as applied to
partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION — The words "signature" or "subscription"
shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE — The words "the State" or "this State" shall be construed to mean
the State of Missouri.
STREET — Shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place,
square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the
City, dedicated or devoted to public use.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
Section
100.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
100.030
AO:2
WRITTEN, IN WRITING AND WRITING WORD FOR WORD — Includes
printing, lithographing or other mode of representing words and letters,
but in all cases where the signature of any person is required, the proper
handwriting of the person, or his/her mark, is intended.
YEAR — A calendar year.
Section 100.035. Self-Preemption. [Ord. No. 3521 §1, 6-25-2015]
No provision of the Municipal Code of the City of Fenton shall apply to any
circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under superseding
Federal or State law and furthermore, if any Section, Subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase, or portion of this Code is now or in the future superseded
or preempted by State or Federal law or found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such provision shall be automatically
interpreted and applied as required by law.
Section 100.040. Amendments or Additions To Code. [R.O. 2006
§100.150; Ord. No. 2003 §1, 11-18-1996]
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any Chapter, Section or Subsection or any
portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by
omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered
and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence
of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code
by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
Section 100.050. Severability of Parts of Code. [R.O. 2006 §100.160;
Ord. No. 2003 §1, 11-18-1996]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen
that the Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code
are severable and, if any, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section
of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs
and Sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen without the incorporation in this Code of any
such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section.
Section 100.060. General Penalty. [R.O. 2006 §100.170; Ord. No.
2463 §1, 4-15-2002]
A. Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the City, or in any rule,
regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the
City under authority duly vested in him/her or it, any act is prohibited or
is declared to be unlawful or an offense, misdemeanor or ordinance
Section
100.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.060
AO:3
violation or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act
is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or ordinance
violation, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof,
upon conviction of a violation of any such provision of this Code or of
any such ordinance, rule, regulation, notice or order, the violator shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding three (3)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, that in any
case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by a Statute of the State,
the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be imposed for such offense,
except that imprisonments may be in the City prison or workhouse
instead of the County Jail.
B. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or any such
rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof,
or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of
another person to do said act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this
Code, an attempt to do the act is likewise prohibited.
D. Minor Traffic Violations. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
herein, no punishment for a minor traffic violation as defined by Section
300.010 of this Municipal Code shall: [Ord. No. 3558 § 2,
11-19-2015; Ord. No. 3629 § 2, 9-22-2016]
1. Impose a fine, when combined with the amount of Court costs, that
exceeds two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00);
2. Be punishable by imprisonment, unless the violation involved:
a. Alcohol or controlled substances,
b. Endangered the health and welfare of others, or
c. Involved eluding or giving false information to a Law
Enforcement Officer.
3. Place a person convicted of a minor traffic violation in confinement
for failure to pay a fine unless such non-payment violates the terms
of the person's probation or unless the due process procedures
mandated by Missouri Supreme Court Rule 37.65 or its successor
rule are strictly followed by the Court;
4. Assess Court costs where a defendant has been found to be
indigent under Subsection (5) or if a case has been dismissed;
5. Assess Court costs against a defendant who the Municipal Court
finds to be indigent based on standards set by the Presiding Judge
of the 21st Judicial Circuit Court of the State of Missouri; or
Section
100.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
100.060
AO:4
Section 100.065. Enforcement — Attorneys' Fees. [Ord. No. 3521 §4,
6-25-2015]
The City shall be entitled to enforce any provision of this Code through
all remedies lawfully available, and any user of City services, rights-of-way
or other property as a condition of such use, and additionally all other
persons violating any provision herein, shall, to the full extent permissible
6. Issue an additional charge for the failure to appear on a minor
traffic violation.
E. Municipal Ordinance Violations. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary herein, no punishment for a municipal ordinance violation as
defined by Section 479.350, RSMo., and Section 300.010 of this
Municipal Code of the City of Fenton shall impose a fine, when
combined with the amount of Court costs, that exceeds: [Ord. No.
3629 § 2, 9-22-2016]
1. For municipal ordinance violations committed within a twelvemonth
period beginning with the first violation:
a. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first municipal
ordinance violation,
b. Two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00) for the second
municipal ordinance violation.
c. Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the third municipal
ordinance violation, and
d. Four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for the fourth and any
subsequent municipal ordinance violations;
2. Be punishable by imprisonment, unless the violation involved:
a. Alcohol or controlled substances,
b. Endangered the health and welfare of others, or
c. Involved eluding or giving false information to a Law
Enforcement Officer.
3. Place a person convicted of a minor traffic violation in confinement
for failure to pay a fine unless such non-payment violates the terms
of the person's probation or unless the due process procedures
mandated by Missouri Supreme Court Rule 37.65 or its successor
rule are strictly followed by the Court;
4. Assess Court costs where a defendant has been found to be
indigent under Subsection (5) or if a case has been dismissed; or
5. Assess Court costs against a defendant who the Municipal Court
finds to be indigent based on standards set by the Presiding Judge
of the 21st Judicial Circuit Court of the State of Missouri.
Section
100.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.065
AO:5
by law, pay the City's costs of enforcement, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, in the event the person is determined judicially to have violated the
terms of this Code or any requirement, provision or agreement enacted or
hereunder.
Section 100.070. Contracts With City — Authority To Execute. [R.O.
2006 §100.030; Ord. No. 495 §§1—3, 5-22-1979]
Section 100.080. Disposition of Unclaimed or Abandoned Personal
Property and Surplus Property of The City Through Public Sale.
[R.O. 2006 §100.040; Ord. No. 600 §1, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 1908 §1,
11-20-1995; Ord. No. 2092 §1, 9-15-1997]
A. No contract entered into by or on behalf of the City shall be valid unless
the same shall be within the scope of the City's powers or shall be
expressly authorized by law, nor unless such contract shall be made
upon a consideration wholly to be performed or executed subsequent to
the making of the contract, nor unless such contract including the
consideration therefor shall be made in writing and dated when made,
and shall be subscribed by the parties thereto, or their agents
authorized by law and duly appointed and authorized in writing.
B. The Mayor or acting Mayor, in the Mayor's absence, shall execute all
contracts on behalf of the City and his/her signature shall be attested to
by the City Clerk.
C. Authorization for the Mayor or the acting Mayor, in the Mayor's
absence to enter into and execute contracts on behalf of the City shall
be provided by passage of an ordinance or adoption of a resolution.
A. Definitions. For purpose of this Section, the following definitions will
apply:
ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY — Personal property in the
possession of the City of Fenton, and/or its agents, including the St.
Louis County Police Department/City of Fenton, for which the owner
cannot be located through reasonable effort, and which is being held
for no legal purpose.
SURPLUS PROPERTY OF THE CITY OF FENTON — Personal property
owned by the City of Fenton for which no need exists, and is established
as surplus by a majority vote of the Board of Aldermen.
UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY — Personal property in the
possession of the City of Fenton, and its agents, including the St. Louis
County Police Department/City of Fenton, for which no owner is known,
and which is being held for no legal purpose.
B. Inventory. Annually on June thirtieth (30th) and December thirty-first
(31st), all Department Heads and/or its agents shall report to the City
Administrator on all unclaimed and abandoned personal property in the
possession of the City of Fenton. The City Administrator shall keep a
Section
100.065
FENTON CITY CODE Section
100.080
AO:6
Section 100.090. Disposition of Unclaimed, Abandoned or
Confiscated Firearms and Dangerous and Deadly Weapons. [R.O.
2006 §100.050; Ord. No. 601 §1, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 1908 §1,
11-20-1995]
All weapons seized as evidence or that come into the possession of the
St. Louis County Police Department/City of Fenton shall be reclaimed or
disposed of by the lawful rules and regulations of the Property Control Unit
of the St. Louis County Police Department.
Section 100.100. Approval of Industrial Development Authority
Projects. [R.O. 2006 §100.060; Ord. No. 621 §1, 12-20-1982]
current written inventory list of all surplus property owned by the City
of Fenton.
Said unclaimed and abandoned personal property owned by the City
of Fenton shall be sold at public sale at the discretion of the Board
of Aldermen upon recommendation of the City Administrator. All
Department Heads shall make reasonable efforts to locate the owners
of the personal property in the possession of their department. Said
public sale shall be called from time to time as may be necessary by the
City Administrator upon authorization from the Board of Aldermen. All
proceeds of said sale will go into the General Revenue Fund of the City.
All abandoned and unclaimed personal property in the possession of the
St. Louis County Police Department/City of Fenton shall be disposed of
by the Property Control Unit pursuant to rules and regulations of the St.
Louis County Police Department. Any proceeds from such sale shall be
given to the City of Fenton within thirty (30) days of the sale for deposit
into the General Revenue Fund.
C. Notice. Said public sale held by the City of Fenton shall be held only
after notice has been published at least once per week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of daily or weekly circulation. Said
public sale shall be held at a public place designated by the City
Administrator. Said notice shall include date, time and place of the
public sale, but need not describe the property to be sold.
D. Reclamation. Individuals may reclaim personal property up to the time
of sale by reasonable showing of ownership documentation to the City
Administrator or the City Clerk.
E. Abandoned Automobiles Not Affected. Nothing in this Section shall in
any way affect or conflict with those ordinances, if any, dealing with
abandoned motor vehicles.
F. Firearms Not Affected. Nothing in this Section shall in any way affect or
provide any authority to dispose of firearms or deadly and dangerous
weapons and shall not in any way conflict with the provisions of Section
100.090.
Section
100.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.100
AO:7
Section 100.110. Scholarship Fund. [R.O. 2006 §100.100; Ord. No.
1385 §§1—7, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 1582 §1, 3-16-1992; Ord. No. 1838
§1, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 2347 §1, 11-20-2000]
A. The Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton shall review all projects of
the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Fenton (hereinafter
"Fenton IDA"), after the Fenton IDA shall have conducted a public
hearing thereon and recommended approval of the project to the
Board.
B. Upon receiving the recommendation of the Fenton IDA, the Board shall
at its next meeting take up the matter. The Board shall approve said
projects by written resolution, but if any project be disapproved, then
the disapproval shall be entered in the minutes.
A. Individual scholarships are hereby authorized and approved and will be
awarded annually in an amount to be determined by the Board of
Aldermen, if money is available in the budget. This merit-based
program encourages top-rated students to attend Missouri schools and
is based on the State of Missouri's higher education academic
scholarship program, "Bright Flight".
B. The number of scholarships to be awarded will be set annually by the
Board of Aldermen.
C. The Board of Aldermen hereby declares its intention that these
scholarships will be awarded annually to graduating high school
seniors, and college undergraduates, who meet the scholarship
qualifications and criteria then in effect with a maximum of four (4)
scholarships awarded to each qualifying applicant.
D. The following qualifications are established for eligibility for the
scholarships:
1. Criteria for graduating high school seniors:
a. The applicant shall be a graduating high school senior.
b. The applicant must maintain permanent resident status within
the corporate City limits of Fenton at least one (1) year prior to
the last day applications are accepted.
c. The applicant shall have a cumulative grade point average of
3.0 or higher.
d. The applicant must attend a Missouri college, university, junior
college, or trade school as a full-time student and be enrolled
for a minimum of twelve (12) credit hours.
2. Criteria for college undergraduates:
a. The applicant shall have successfully completed the equivalent
of twenty-four (24) credit hours. Freshmen shall have
Section
100.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
100.110
AO:8
completed twelve (12) credit hours and shall be currently
enrolled for twelve (12) credit hours during the Spring
semester. These credit hours shall be earned at an accredited
university, college, junior college or trade school.
b. The applicant must maintain permanent resident status within
the corporate City limits of Fenton for at least one (1) year
prior to the last day applications are accepted.
c. The applicant shall have a cumulative grade point average of
3.0 or higher.
d. The applicant must attend a Missouri college, university, junior
college, or trade school as an undergraduate for the
succeeding school year.
e. During the period when the scholarship is in effect, the student
shall maintain full-time scholastic status. Full-time status shall
be the equivalent of twenty-four (24) credit hours annually
earned at an accredited Missouri university, college, junior
college or trade school.
E. The following procedures are established for awarding the
scholarships:
1. Applicants will be asked to complete a scholarship application on
forms provided by the City of Fenton.
2. Information provided by the applicant will be verified by the school
the student is presently attending.
3. The applications, identified only by a code number, will then be sent
to the Scholarship Committee as appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
4. The Scholarship Committee shall rank the applications by scores
according to the criteria established by the Board of Aldermen.
5. On a date and time designated by the Board of Aldermen,
scholarships shall be awarded to those students who have met the
qualifications and criteria as established by this Section.
F. The following criteria are established and may be used for awarding the
scholarships:
High School Senior College Student
1. Grade point
average
40% 50%
2. ACT or SAT 20% N/A
3. Student
curriculum
20% 25%
4. Essay 10% 15%
Section
100.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.110
AO:9
Section 100.120. Insufficient Fund Check Fee. [R.O. 2006 §100.105;
Ord. No. 1858 §1, 5-16-1995]
The Finance Officer of the City of Fenton is authorized to collect a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each insufficient fund check issued to the
City of Fenton in addition to the face amount of the check.
Section 100.130. Non-Discrimination Policy — Grievance
Procedure. [R.O. 2006 §100.110; Ord. No. 1562 §1, 1-22-1992; Ord.
No. 2092 §1, 9-15-1997]
High School Senior College Student
5. Extracurricular
activity/employment
10% 10%
G. All officers and employees of the City of Fenton are authorized and
directed to do all things necessary to make the scholarship program a
success.
A. Statement Of Non-discrimination Policy. The City of Fenton does not
discriminate on the basis of handicapped status in the admission of or
access to or employment in its municipal programs or activities.
B. Complaint/Grievance Procedures. Complaints alleging any action
prohibited under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 must be
filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged
discrimination. In any case where the alleged violation of the Act or
regulation is also an alleged violation of another law, regulation or
agreement, nothing in this process shall preclude an individual or an
organization from filing a complaint or grievance under such law or
agreement with respect to the non-Section 504 case of action, as well as
filing a complaint or grievance under Section 504.
Assistance in filing a complaint or grievance may be obtained by
contacting the City Administrator at Fenton City Hall, 625 New Smizer
Mill Road, 343-2080.
C. Steps To Be Taken.
1. The City Administrator shall investigate the complaint and make
every effort to resolve the complaint on an informal basis. If this is
not successful or the grievant is not satisfied with the results, then
go to Step 2.
2. The grievant should contact the City Administrator to file a written
complaint or grievance. Complaints and grievances will be
investigated and a written determination will be forwarded to the
grievant within five (5) working days of filing. This notification will
include notice to the grievant of his/her right to request an
impartial hearing with the Fenton Human Rights Commission and
the City Attorney and an explanation of the hearing procedure. This
Section
100.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
100.130
AO:10
Chapter 101
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS POLICY
notice will be mailed by "Certified Mail, Return Receipt
Requested". Informal resolution will be attempted. If a satisfactory
resolution is not achieved through these efforts, go on to Step 3.
3. The grievant may request an impartial hearing by writing to the
Human Rights Commission within four (4) working days of receipt
of the written determination.
4. The formal grievance appeal shall contain the following
information:
a. Name of the aggrieved party;
b. A statement of facts upon which the grievance is based;
c. The date on which the event first occurred;
d. The date of the submittal of the grievance in writing;
e. Such other information as the aggrieved party deems relevant;
and
f. The remedy or relief which is requested.
5. The time for the hearing will be set. The parties to the grievance
shall be notified of the hearing date at least five (5) working days
before the hearing. The hearing will be conducted by the City
Attorney within thirty (30) working days after the complaint is filed.
The Hearing Officer shall provide the Human Rights Commission
with a written decision within ten (10) working days after the date
of the hearing.
6. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen will review the Hearing Officer's
decision and the Mayor will forward that decision with its final
written determination to the grievant and other interested parties
within sixty (60) working days of the filing of the grievance. The
decision will be mailed by "Certified Mail, Return Receipt
Requested". The grievant will also be advised of his/her right to file
a request for review with the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division, 1222
Spruce Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63103-2836, ATTN: Mr. Roy
Pierce.
Section
100.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.130
AO:11

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 101.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
following terms mean:
CLOSED MEETING, CLOSED RECORD OR CLOSED VOTE — Any meeting,
record or vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided as
detailed in Section 101.110 of this Chapter, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to performance
of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative or
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
orders or ordinances of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or
Board of Aldermen.
1.
2. Any department or division of the City.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power.
3.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above-named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of
the named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly
to the public governmental body's governing board or its Chief
Administrative Officer, policy or policy revisions or expenditures of
public funds.
4.
Any quasi-public governmental body. The term "quasi-public
governmental body" means any person, corporation or partnership
organized or authorized to do business in this State pursuant to the
provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, RSMo., or unincorporated
association which either:
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
a.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily or
ordinance-based capacity, to confer or otherwise advance, through
approval, recommendation or other means, the allocation or
b.
5.
Section
101.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
101.010
AO:13
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to this Chapter at which any public business is discussed, decided or
public policy formulated, whether such meeting is conducted in person
or by means of communication equipment including, but not limited to,
conference call, video conference, Internet chat or Internet message board.
The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of
members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes
when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this Chapter, but the
term shall include a vote of all or a majority of the members of a public
governmental body, by electronic communication or any other means,
conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the members of the
public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in order to conduct
public business.
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum, or other document or study prepared for the public
governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in
whole or in part by public funds, including records created or maintained by
private contractors under an agreement with a public governmental body
or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term "public record" shall
not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or
on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice,
opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decisionmaking
process of said body, unless such records are retained by the public
governmental body or presented at a public meeting. Any documents or
study prepared for a public governmental body by a consultant or other
professional service as described in this subdivision shall be retained by the
public governmental body in the same manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote, whether conducted in person, by telephone, or
by any other electronic means, cast at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
Section 101.020. Meetings, Records and Votes To Be Public —
Exceptions.
issuance of tax credits, tax abatement, public debt, tax exempt
debt, rights of eminent domain, or the contracting of lease-back
agreements on structures whose annualized payments commit
public tax revenues; or any association that directly accepts the
appropriation of money from the City, but only to the extent that a
meeting, record or vote relates to such appropriation.
A. All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except that any
meeting, record or vote relating to one (1) or more of the following
matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in this
Chapter, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes to
make them public:
1. Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public
governmental body and any confidential or privileged
Section
101.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
101.020
AO:14
communications between a public governmental body or its
representatives and its attorneys. However, any minutes, vote or
settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action
or litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent
or entity representing its interests or acting on its behalf or with
its authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf of
a public governmental body as its insured, shall be made public
upon final disposition of the matter voted upon or upon the signing
by the parties of the settlement agreement, unless, prior to final
disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court
after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or
plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy
considerations of Section 610.011, RSMo., however, the amount
of any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental
body shall be disclosed; provided however, in matters involving
the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be
announced or become public immediately following the action on
the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal
work product shall be considered a closed record.
2. Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental
body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely
affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any minutes or
vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing,
purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall
be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the
real estate.
3. Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by
a public governmental body when personal information about the
employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final
decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire,
promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body
shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to
the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting
where such action occurs; provided however, that any employee so
affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during
the seventy-two (72) hour period before such decision is made
available to the public. As used in this Subsection, the term
"personal information" means information relating to the
performance or merit of individual employees.
4. Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving an
identifiable person, including medical, psychiatric, psychological,
or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment.
5. Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination
is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again.
6. Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
Section
101.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
101.020
AO:15
7. Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf
of a public governmental body or its representatives for
negotiations with employee groups.
8. Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation
thereof.
9. Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the
specifications are officially approved by the public governmental
body or the specifications are published for bid.
10. Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and
sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related
to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed, or all
proposals are rejected.
11. Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or
records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment,
except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions,
salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public
agencies once they are employed as such.
12. Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
13. Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological
innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest.
14. Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting
of abuse and wrongdoing.
15. Confidential or privileged communications between a public
governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work
product; however, all final audit reports issued by the auditor are to
be considered open records pursuant to this Chapter.
16. Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted, or
maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement,
public safety, first response, or public health for use in responding
to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger
individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall
be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases,
or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines
or policies. When seeking to close information pursuant to this
exception, the agency shall affirmatively state in writing that
disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of
persons, and shall in the same writing state that the public interest
in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the
records. This exception shall sunset on December 31, 2008.
17. Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real
property owned or leased by a public governmental body, and
Section
101.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
101.020
AO:16
information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental
body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that
infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public
safety.
a. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating
to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open.
b. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception,
the public governmental body shall affirmatively state in
writing that disclosure would impair the public governmental
body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real
property and shall in the same writing state that the public
interest in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in
disclosure of the records.
c. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
shall be reviewed by the receiving agency within ninety (90)
days of submission to determine if retention of the document is
necessary in furtherance of a State security interest. If
retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to
the non-public governmental body or destroyed.
d. This exception shall sunset on December 31, 2008.
18. Records that identify the configuration of components or the
operation of a computer, computer system, computer network or
telecommunications network and would allow unauthorized access
to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network of a public
governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or
deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data
file or database containing public records. Records related to the
procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer,
computer system, computer network or telecommunications
network, including the amount of monies paid by, or on behalf of, a
public governmental body for such computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network, shall be open.
19. Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital
certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or
authorization codes that are used to protect the security of
electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a
person or entity doing business with a public governmental body.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to close the record of a
person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public
governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person
using a credit card or other method of payment for which
reimbursement is made by a public governmental body.
Section
101.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
101.030
AO:17
Section 101.030. Electronic Transmissions — Public Record —
When.
Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this Section
shall only apply to messages sent to two (2) or more members of that body
so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's members are
copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at the member's
office computer shall be a public record subject to the exception of Section
610.021, RSMo.
Section 101.040. Notices of Meetings.
A. All public governmental bodies shall give notice of the time, date and
place of each meeting and its tentative agenda in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered, and if
the meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means,
the notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting
will be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board or other prominent
place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly designated for
that purpose at the principal office of the body holding the meeting, or if
no such office exists, at the building in which the meeting is to be held.
B. Notice conforming with all of the requirements of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of a governmental body unless for good
cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much
notice as is reasonably possible shall be given.
C. The City shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape or other
electronic means of any open meeting. The City may establish
guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is conducted
so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio recording of any
meeting, record or vote closed pursuant to the provisions of Section
101.020 shall be permitted without permission of the City; any person
who violates this provision shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Each governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote
shall give notice of the time, date and place of such closed meeting or
Section
101.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
101.040
AO:18
Section 101.050. Closed Meetings — How Held.
Section 101.060. Journals of Meetings and Records of Voting.
vote and the reason for holding it by reference to a specific exception
allowed pursuant to Section 101.020 hereof. The notice shall be the
same as described in Subsection (A) herein.
E. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice during a lawful meeting of the parent
governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following
that meeting if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the
parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides
with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental
body.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection (D) of Section 101.040, no meeting or
vote may be closed without an affirmative public vote of the majority of
a quorum of the public governmental body. The vote of each member of
the governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or
vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote by
reference to a specific Section of this Chapter shall be announced
publicly at an open meeting of the governmental body and entered into
the minutes.
B. Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to Section 101.020 shall be closed
only to the extent necessary for the specific reason announced to justify
the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies shall not
discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or vote which does not
directly relate to the specific reason announced to justify the closed
meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies holding a closed meeting
shall close only an existing portion of the meeting facility necessary to
house the members of the public governmental body in the closed
session, allowing members of the public to remain to attend any
subsequent open session held by the public governmental body
following the closed session.
A. Except as provided in Section 101.020, rules authorized pursuant to
Article III of the Missouri Constitution and as otherwise provided by
law, all votes shall be recorded, and if a roll call is taken, as to attribute
each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of
the individual member of the public governmental body. Any votes
taken during a closed meeting shall be taken by roll call. All public
meetings shall be open to the public and public votes and public records
shall be open to the public for inspection and duplication. All votes
taken by roll call in meetings of a public governmental body consisting
of members who are all elected, shall be cast by members of the public
governmental body who are physically present and in attendance at the
meeting. When it is necessary to take votes by roll call in a meeting of
the public governmental body, due to an emergency of the public body,
Section
101.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
101.060
AO:19
Section 101.070. Accessibility of Meetings.
Section 101.080. Segregation of Exempt Material.
If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure,
as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall
separate the exempt and non-exempt material and make the non-exempt
material available for examination and copying in accord with the policies
provided herein. When designing a public record the custodian shall, to
the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from non-exempt
information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to
inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe
the material exempted unless that description would reveal the contents of
the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption.
Section 101.090. Custodian Designated — Response To Request For
Access To Records.
with a quorum of the members of the public body physically present
and in attendance and less than a quorum of the members of the public
governmental body participating via telephone, facsimile, Internet, or
any other voice or electronic means, the nature of the emergency of
the public body justifying that departure from the normal requirements
shall be stated in the minutes. Where such emergency exists, the votes
taken shall be regarded as if all members were physically present and
in attendance at the meeting.
B. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body including, but not limited to,
a record of any vote taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
the date, time, place, members present, members absent, and a record
of votes taken. When a roll call vote is taken, the minutes shall attribute
each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of
the individual member of the public governmental body.
A. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the
public and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance
by members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the
public unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or
impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special
access to the meeting to handicapped or disabled individuals.
B. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four (24)
hours' notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the
public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the
nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes.
A. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible
for maintenance and control of all records of the public governmental
bodies of the City. The City Clerk may designate deputy custodians in
Section
101.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
101.090
AO:20
Section 101.100. City May Seek Interpretation of Law.
If the City is in doubt about the legality of closing a particular meeting,
record or vote the City Attorney may bring suit in the Circuit Court to
ascertain the propriety of any such action, or seek a formal opinion of the
attorney general or an attorney for the governmental body.
Section 101.110. Fees For Copying Public Records — Limitations.
operating departments of the City and such other departments or
offices as the custodian may determine. Deputy custodians shall
conduct matters relating to public records and meetings in accord with
the policies enumerated herein.
B. Law enforcement records of the St. Louis County Police Department
providing services to the City, including arrest reports, incident reports,
and investigative reports, are records of said department and not of the
City. The City Clerk is not the custodian of such records and shall direct
individuals requesting such records to the St. Louis County Police
Department.
C. Each public governmental body shall make available for inspection and
copying by the public of that body's public records. No person shall
remove original public records from the office of a public governmental
body or its custodian without written permission of the designated
custodian. No public governmental body shall, after August 28, 1998,
grant to any person or entity, whether by contract, license or otherwise,
the exclusive right to access and disseminate any public record unless
the granting of such right is necessary to facilitate coordination with, or
uniformity among, industry regulators having similar authority.
D. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third (3rd) business
day following the date the request is received by the custodian of
records of a public governmental body. If records are requested in a
certain format, the public body shall provide the records in the
requested format, if such format is available. If access to the public
record is not granted immediately, the custodian shall give a detailed
explanation of the cause for further delay and the place and earliest
time and date that the record will be available for inspection. This
period for document production may exceed three (3) days for
reasonable cause.
E. If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon
request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such
statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is
denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of
the third (3rd) business day following the date that the request for the
statement is received.
Section
101.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
101.110
AO:21
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, each public governmental body
shall provide access to and, upon request, furnish copies of public
records subject to the following:
1. Fees for copying public records, except those records restricted
under Section 32.091, RSMo., shall not exceed ten cents ($.10) per
page for a paper copy not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14)
inches, with the hourly fee for duplicating time not to exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for clerical staff of the public
governmental body. Research time required for fulfilling records
requests may be charged at the actual cost of research time. Based
on the scope of the request, the public governmental body shall
produce the copies using employees of the body that result in the
lowest amount of charges for search, research, and duplication
time. Prior to producing copies of the requested records, the
person requesting the records may request the public
governmental body to provide an estimate of the cost to the person
requesting the records. Documents may be furnished without
charge or at a reduced charge when the public governmental body
determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public
understanding of the operations or activities of the public
governmental body and is not primarily in the commercial interest
of the requester.
2. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on
computer facilities, recording tapes or disks, videotapes or films,
pictures, maps, slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or
visual items or devices, and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by
fourteen (14) inches shall include only the cost of copies, staff time,
which shall not exceed the average hourly rate of pay for staff of
the public governmental body required for making copies and
programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk, tape or other
medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or plats
that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to
duplicate such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is
required beyond the customary and usual level to comply with a
request for records or information, the fees for compliance may
include the actual cost of such programming.
B. Payment of such copying fees may be requested prior to the making of
copies.
Section
101.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
101.110
AO:22
Chapter 105
RESERVED
Chapter 110
PERSONNEL CODE AND CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN
Editor's Note — The personnel provisions will be kept on file in the city
offices.
Chapter 115
ELECTIONS
Section 115.010. Conformance of City Elections With State Law.
All City elections shall be conducted and held in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 115, RSMo.
Section 115.020. Date of Municipal Election.1 [Ord. No. 3244 §2,
1-26-2012]
A. A municipal election for the qualified voters of this City shall be held on
the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of each year.
B. On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of oddnumbered
years, a municipal election of the qualified voters of the City
of Fenton shall be held for the purpose of electing a Mayor who shall
hold his/her office for a term of two (2) years and until his/her successor
is elected and qualified.
C. On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of oddnumbered
years, a municipal election of the qualified voters of the City
of Fenton shall be held for the purpose of electing one (1) Alderman
from each ward who shall hold his/her office for a term of two (2) years
and until his/her successor is elected and qualified.
D. On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of evennumbered
years, a municipal election of the qualified voters of the City
of Fenton shall be held for the purpose of electing one (1) Alderman
from each ward who shall hold his/her office for a term of two (2) years
and until his/her successor is elected and qualified.
E. Reserved.
1. Editor's Note — Beginning in April 1997, the Mayor with the consent and approval of the
Board of Aldermen was authorized by voter approval at an election held April 4, 1995 to
appoint a Chief of Police who shall perform all duties of a City Marshal as required by law.
Additionally, at the April 5, 2011 general election, the voters approved a proposition
changing the City Collector position from elected to appointed. See also §125.010.
Section
101.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.030
AO:23
Section 115.030. Declaration of Candidacy — Dates For Filing.
Any person who desires to become a candidate for an elective City office
at the general City election shall file with the City Clerk, not prior to the
hour of 8:00 A.M., on the sixteenth (16th) Tuesday prior to, nor later than
5:00 P.M., on the eleventh (11th) Tuesday prior to the next City municipal
election, a written declaration of his/her intent to become a candidate at
said election. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of the names
of the candidates, the offices for which they seek election, and the date of
their filing, and their names shall appear on the ballots in that order.
Section 115.035. Candidates For Municipal Office — No Arrearage
For Municipal Taxes Permitted.2 [Ord. No. 3463 §1, 9-25-2014]
No person shall be a candidate for municipal office unless such person
complies with the provisions of Section 115.342, RSMo., regarding payment
of municipal taxes.
Section 115.040. Declaration of Candidacy — Notice To Public.
The City Clerk shall, on or before the sixteenth (16th) Tuesday prior to any
election at which City offices are to be filled by said election, notify the
general public of the opening filing date, the office or offices to be filled,
the proper place for filing, and the closing filing date of the election. Such
notification may be accomplished by legal notice published in at least one
(1) newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Section 115.050. Notice of Elections.
In City elections, the City Clerk shall notify the Board of Election
Commissioners prior to 5:00 P.M. on the tenth (10th) Tuesday prior to any
City election except as noted in Section 115.125.1, RSMo. The notice shall
be in writing, shall specify that the Board of Aldermen is calling the election,
the purpose of the election, the date of the election, and shall include a
certified copy of the legal notice to be published including the sample ballot.
The notice and any other information required by this Section may, with the
prior notification to the election authority receiving the notice, be accepted
by facsimile transmission prior to 5:00 P.M. on the tenth (10th) Tuesday
prior to the election, provided that the original copy of the notice and a
certified copy of the legal notice to be published shall be received in the
office of the election authority within three (3) business days from the date
of the facsimile transmission.
Section 115.060. Withdrawal of Candidacy.
Any person who has filed a declaration of candidacy for elective office and
who wishes to withdraw as a candidate may do so under the provisions set
forth in Section 115.127, RSMo.
2. State Law Reference — As to arrearage or delinquency in all taxes, §115.342, RSMo.
Section
115.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
115.070
AO:24
Section 115.070. Wards. [R.O. 2006 §115.010; Ord. No. 1353 §1,
2-19-1990]
The City of Fenton is hereby divided into four (4) City Wards, descriptions of
which can be found on file in the office of the City Clerk. The City shall have
eight (8) Aldermen, two (2) elected from each Ward, in alternating years,
for terms of two (2) years.
Chapter 120
MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Cross Reference — As to pay plan, see Ord. No. 1453, on file in city offices.
Section
115.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.070
AO:25

ARTICLE I
Mayor and Board of Aldermen — Generally
Section 120.010. Aldermen — Qualifications. [Ord. No. 3383 §1,
1-23-2014]
No person shall be an Alderman unless he/she be at least eighteen (18)
years of age, a citizen of the United States, and an inhabitant and resident
of the City for one (1) year next preceding his/her election, and a resident,
at the time he/she files and during the time he/she serves, of the ward from
which he/she is elected.
Section 120.020. Mayor — Qualifications.
No person shall be Mayor unless he/she be at least twenty-five (25) years of
age, a citizen of the United States, and a resident of the City at the time of
and for at least one (1) year next preceding his/her election.
Section 120.025. Officers To Be Registered Voters.
Any person desiring to be a candidate for any elective office in the City shall
be a registered voter in the City of Fenton, St. Louis County, Missouri.
Section 120.030. Board To Select An Acting President — Term.
The Board shall elect one (1) of their own number who shall be styled
"Acting President of the Board of Aldermen" and who shall serve for a term
of one (1) year.
Section 120.040. Acting President To Perform Duties of Mayor —
When.
When any vacancy shall happen in the office of Mayor by death, resignation,
removal from the City, removal from office, refusal to qualify, or from
any other cause whatever, the Acting President of the Board of Aldermen
shall, for the time being, perform the duties of Mayor, with all the rights,
privileges, powers and jurisdiction of the Mayor, until such vacancy be filled
or such disability be removed; or, in case of temporary absence, until the
Mayor's return.
Section 120.050. Mayor and Board — Duties.
The Mayor and Board of Aldermen of each City governed by this Chapter
shall have the care, management and control of the City and its finances and
shall have power to enact and ordain any and all ordinances not repugnant
to the Constitution and laws of this State, and such as they shall deem
expedient for the good government of the City, the preservation of peace
and good order, the benefit of trade and commerce, and the health of the
inhabitants thereof, and such other ordinances, rules and regulations as
may be deemed necessary to carry such powers into effect and to alter,
modify or repeal the same.
Section
120.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.060
AO:27
Section 120.060. Mayor May Sit in Board.
The Mayor shall have a seat in and preside over the Board of Aldermen
but shall not vote on any question except in case of a tie, nor shall he/
she preside or vote in cases when he/she is an interested party. He/she
shall exercise a general supervision over all the officers and affairs of the
City and shall take care that the ordinances of the City, and the State laws
relating to such City, are complied with.
Section 120.070. Style of Ordinances. [R.O. 2006 §105.010; Ord. No.
413 §1, 11-15-1976]
The style of ordinances of the City of Fenton shall be: "Be it ordained by the
Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton, Missouri, as follows:".
Section 120.075. Passage of Ordinances — Bills. [R.O. 2006
§105.020; Ord. No. 413 §2, 11-15-1976]
No ordinance shall be passed except by bill, and no bill shall become an
ordinance unless on its final passage a majority of the members elected to
the Board of Aldermen shall vote for it and the "ayes" and "nays" be entered
on the journal.
Section 120.080. Bills To Be Read Two Times. [R.O. 2006 §105.030;
Ord. No. 1157 §1, 11-21-1988; Ord. No. 3446 §1, 7-24-2014]
All bills shall be read two (2) times before their final passage.
Section 120.082. Bills To Be Read Completely — Exception. [R.O.
2006 §105.040; Ord. No. 1328 §1, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 3446 §2,
7-24-2014]
Section 120.085. Bills To Be Presented At Two Meetings —
Exception. [R.O. 2006 §105.050; Ord. No. 1157 §1, 11-21-1988; Ord.
No. 1238§1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 3446 §3, 7-24-2014]
A. All bills shall be introduced to the Board of Aldermen in writing. The
first and second readings shall be of the full bill in its entirety, or by title
only.
B. If the reading of the bill is by title only, copies of the bill shall be made
available for public inspection prior to the time the bill is under
consideration by the Board of Aldermen.
A. No bill shall become an ordinance until it shall have been presented at
two (2) meetings of the Board of Aldermen except in the following
situations:
1. Three-fourths of members of the Board of Aldermen present so
vote. When the Board of Aldermen shall by three-fourths vote of the
members present vote to allow the reading of the bill two (2) times.
Section
120.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
120.085
AO:28
Section 120.086. Bills To Be Signed. [R.O. 2006 §105.060; Ord. No.
1157 §1, 11-21-1988]
No bill shall become an ordinance until it shall have been signed by the
Mayor or person exercising the duties of the Mayor's office or shall have
been passed over the Mayor's veto as herein provided.
Section 120.087. When Bills Become Ordinances. [R.O. 2006
§105.070; Ord. No. 1157 §1, 11-21-1988]
Every bill duly passed by the Board of Aldermen as herein provided and
presented to the Mayor and by him/her approved shall become an
ordinance.
Section 120.088. Mayor's Veto. [R.O. 2006 §105.080; Ord. No. 1157
§1, 11-21-1988]
2. Budgeted contract amount. When a bill is presented approving the
form of a contract and authorizing the Mayor to execute and when
said contract shall be authorizing the provision of services or the
provision of supplies previously established in the budget of the
City of Fenton and the total expenditure shall be less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) then said bill may be read
two (2) times at the same meeting, except if objection shall be made
by a majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen present. If
objection is made to the reading of said bill approving the form of a
contract by either a majority of the members of the Board of
Aldermen present, then said bill shall be presented at two (2)
meetings. In all cases when an objection is made, a reason shall be
stated and set out in the minutes.
A. Every bill presented to the Mayor as herein provided but returned at
the next regular meeting of the Board of Aldermen with the Mayor's
objections thereto shall stand reconsidered. The Board of Aldermen
shall cause the objections of the Mayor to be entered at large upon the
journal and proceed at its convenience to consider the question pending
which shall be in this form:
"Shall the bill pass, the objections of the Mayor thereto
notwithstanding?"
The vote on this question shall be taken by "ayes" and "nays" which
shall be entered upon the journal with the names of the members
of the Board of Aldermen voting upon the question and if two-thirds
(2/3) of all the members elected to the Board of Aldermen shall vote
in the affirmative, the City Clerk shall certify that fact and the bill
thus certified shall become an ordinance in the same manner and
with like effect as it had received the approval of the Mayor.
B. The Mayor shall have the power to sign or veto any ordinance passed by
the Board of Aldermen; provided, that should he/she neglect or refuse
Section
120.085
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.088
AO:29
Section 120.090. Board To Keep Journal of Proceedings.
The Board of Aldermen shall cause to be kept a journal of its proceedings,
and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be entered on any question at the request
of any two (2) members. The Board of Aldermen may prescribe and enforce
such rules as it may find necessary for the expeditious transaction of its
business.
Section 120.100. Board Shall Publish Semi-Annual Statements.
The Board of Aldermen shall semi-annually each year, at times to be set
by the Board of Aldermen, make out and spread upon their records a full
and detailed account and statement of the receipts and expenditures and
indebtedness of the City for the half year ending with the last day of the
month immediately preceding the date of such report, which account and
statement shall be published in some newspaper in the City.
Section 120.110. No Money of City To Be Disbursed Until Statement
Is Published — Penalty.
In the event the financial statement of the City is not published as required
by Section 120.100, the Treasurer of the City shall not pay out any money
of the City on any warrant or order of the Board of Aldermen after the
end of the month in which such financial statement should have been
published until such time as such financial statement is published. Any
Treasurer violating the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of
an ordinance violation.
Section 120.120. Board May Compel Attendance of Witnesses —
Mayor To Administer Oaths.
The Board of Aldermen shall have power to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of papers and records relating to any subject
under consideration in which the interest of the City is involved and shall
have power to call on the proper officers of the City, or of the County in
which such City is located, to execute such process. The officer making such
service shall be allowed to receive therefor such fees as are allowed by law
in the Circuit Court for similar services, to be paid by the City. The Mayor or
Acting President of the Board of Aldermen shall have power to administer
oaths to witnesses.
Section 120.130. Mayor To Sign Commissions.
The Mayor shall sign the commissions and appointments of all City Officers
elected or appointed in the City and shall approve all official bonds unless
otherwise prescribed by ordinance.
to sign any ordinance and return the same with his/her objections in
writing at the next regular meeting of the Board of Aldermen, the bill
shall become a law without his/her signature.
Section
120.088
FENTON CITY CODE Section
120.140
AO:30
Section 120.140. Mayor Shall Have The Power To Enforce Laws.
The Mayor shall be active and vigilant in enforcing all laws and ordinances
for the government of the City, and he/she shall cause all subordinate
officers to be dealt with promptly for any neglect or violation of duty; and
he/she is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the City over
eighteen (18) years of age and under fifty (50) to aid in enforcing the laws.
Section 120.150. Mayor — Communications To Board.
The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the Board of Aldermen
such measures as may, in his/her opinion, tend to the improvement of
the finances, the Police, health, security, ornament, comfort and general
prosperity of the City.
Section 120.160. Mayor May Remit Fine — Grant Pardon.
The Mayor shall have power to remit fines and forfeitures and to grant
reprieves and pardons for offenses arising under the ordinances of the City;
but this Section shall not be so construed as to authorize the Mayor to remit
any costs which may have accrued to any officer of said City by reason of
any prosecution under the laws or ordinances of such City.
Section 120.170. Compensation. [R.O. 2006 §120.100; Ord. No.
1056 §1, 1-18-1988]
The Mayor and members of the Board of Aldermen shall receive such
compensation as may be designated from time to time by ordinance as
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 120.180. Board of Aldermen Committees. [R.O. 2006
§120.060; Ord. No. 7 §5, 9-11-1956; Ord. No. 3431 §1, 6-26-2014]
A. Committees. The following Board of Aldermen Committees are hereby
established:
1. Capital Improvements.
2. Finance.
3. Health and Safety.
4. Personnel.
5. Police.
6. Public Works/Forestry.
7. Community Affairs.
8. Information Services.
B. Membership.
Section
120.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.180
AO:31
1. The Board of Aldermen will meet annually on the fourth Thursday
in April or as soon thereafter as possible to approve the Board
membership. Membership of the Board committees will be decided
by the Board of Aldermen with the following conditions:
a. One Alderman from each ward shall serve on each committee;
b. Each Alderman shall serve on four (4) committees; and
c. Each Alderman may serve as Chairman on no more than two
(2) committees.
2. Each ward shall decide among them which member shall serve on
which committee so that one Alderman from each ward serves on
each committee and present such selection to the Board for Board
approval. If the two (2) members from each ward cannot decide on
which Board committee each shall serve upon, the majority of the
remaining members of the Board of Aldermen shall vote upon
which committee each Alderman from that specific ward shall
serve. Once the membership of each committee is established, each
committee shall select a Chairman subject to the condition in
Subsection (B)(1)(c) above.
C. Meetings. Unless otherwise changed by a majority vote of the Board of
Aldermen, the Board committees shall meet on the first and second
Thursday of every month.
Section
120.180
FENTON CITY CODE Section
120.180
AO:32
ARTICLE II
Board of Aldermen Meetings
Section 120.190. Meetings. [R.O. 2006 §120.010; Ord. No. 1082 §1,
3-21-1988; Ord. No. 1275 §1, 8-21-1989; Ord. No. 1362 §1,
3-19-1990; Ord. No. 2971 §1, 6-16-2008]
Section 120.200. Special Meetings.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor upon notification to the City
Clerk who shall thereupon prepare a notice of such special meeting in
conformance with Chapter 101, Open Meetings and Records Policy, of this
Code.
Section 120.210. Quorum Must Be Present.
At the hour appointed, the Mayor, or in his/her absence the Acting President
of the Board of Aldermen, shall call the Board to order, the Clerk shall call
the roll of members and announce whether or not a quorum is present. A
majority of the members elected to the Board shall constitute a quorum. If a
quorum not be present, a smaller number may lawfully adjourn the meeting
from day to day until a quorum is present.
Section 120.220. Members To Attend Meetings. [R.O. 2006
§120.030; Ord. No. 1 §3, 7-22-1954]
Members of the Board of Aldermen shall be required to attend all stated
and special meetings of the Board unless leave is granted by the Board,
or unless excused by the Chairman or Acting Chairman for illness or other
special reason.
A. The regular meetings of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton
shall be held on the fourth (4th) Thursday of each month at the hour of
7:00 P.M. at Fenton City Hall, Fenton, Missouri, effective August 1,
2008.
B. Committee meeting(s) of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton
shall be held on the first (1st) and second (2nd) Thursdays of each
month at the hour of 7:00 P.M. at Fenton City Hall, Fenton, Missouri,
effective August 1, 2008.
C. All meetings of the Board of Aldermen, whether regular, special or
committee, shall end on or before 10:30 P.M. CST/DST, unless by a vote
of the majority of the Board members present, the business to be
conducted is declared a valid emergency.
D. Exception. When the regular meeting date falls on a nationally
observed holiday, the meeting date will be adjusted accordingly. The
City Clerk will give appropriate notice to all concerned parties at least
thirty (30) days in advance of such occasion.
Section
120.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.230
AO:33
Section 120.230. Meetings — Called To Order. [R.O. 2006 §120.050;
Ord. No. 7 §3, 9-11-1956]
The Mayor shall call the meetings of the Board of Aldermen to order, or in
his/her absence the President of the Board of Aldermen or in their absence a
Temporary Chairman, elected from the Aldermen present at the meeting to
preside during such meeting, shall call the meeting to order. The Clerk shall
then call the roll and shall announce whether or not a quorum is present.
Section 120.240. Roberts Rules of Order. [R.O. 2006 §120.090; Ord.
No. 7 §7, 9-11-1956; Ord. No. 3263 §1, 5-24-2012]
Roberts Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the Board of
Aldermen and any question of procedure arising before said Board shall
be determined thereby. The decision concerning compliance with Roberts
Rules of Order shall be made by the City Attorney subject to appeal to the
Board of Aldermen, which appeal may be made by any member of the Board
of Aldermen.
Section
120.230
FENTON CITY CODE Section
120.240
AO:34
Chapter 125
CITY OFFICIALS
Section
120.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.240
AO:35

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 125.005. Elective Officers — Terms.
The elective officers of the City and their terms shall be those set out in
Section 115.020 of this Code.
Section 125.010. Appointive Officers. [Ord. No. 3244 §3, 1-26-2012;
Ord. No. 3414 §1, 4-24-2014]
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members
of the Board of Aldermen, shall have the power to appoint a City Treasurer,
City Attorney, Prosecuting Attorney, Special Prosecuting Attorney, City
Administrator, Municipal Judge, City Assessor, Street Commissioner, Night
Watchman, City Collector and such other officers as he/she may be
authorized by ordinance to appoint, and if deemed for the best interests of
the City, the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen may, by ordinance, employ
special counsel to represent the City, either in a case of a vacancy in the
office of City Attorney or to assist the City Attorney, and pay reasonable
compensation therefor.
Section 125.020. Removal of Officers.
The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected
to the Board of Aldermen, remove from office, for cause shown, any elective
officer of the City, such officer being first given opportunity, together with
his/her witnesses, to be heard before the Board of Aldermen sitting as a
Board of Impeachment. Any elective officer, including the Mayor, may in
like manner, for cause shown, be removed from office by a two-thirds (2/
3) vote of all members elected to the Board of Aldermen, independently of
the Mayor's approval or recommendation. The Mayor may, with the consent
of a majority of all the members elected to the Board of Aldermen, remove
from office any appointive officer of the City at will, and any such appointive
officer may be so removed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members
elected to the Board of Aldermen, independently of the Mayor's approval or
recommendation. The Board of Aldermen may pass ordinances regulating
the manner of impeachments and removals.
Section 125.030. Officers To Be Voters and Residents — Exceptions.
All officers elected to offices or appointed to fill a vacancy in any elective
office under the City Government shall be voters under the laws and
Constitution of this State and the ordinances of the City except that
appointed officers need not be voters of the City. No person shall be elected
or appointed to any office who shall at the time be in arrears for any unpaid
City taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office. All officers, except appointed
officers, shall be residents of the City.
Section
125.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.040
AO:37
Section 125.040. Officers' Oath — Bond.
Every officer of the City and his/her assistants and every Alderman, before
entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take and subscribe to an
oath or affirmation before some court of record in the County, or the City
Clerk, that he/she possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his/her
office by law; that he/she will support the Constitution of the United States
and of the State of Missouri, the provisions of all laws of this State affecting
Cities of this class, and the ordinances of the City, and faithfully demean
himself/herself while in office; which official oath or affirmation shall be
filed with the City Clerk. Every officer of the City, when required by law
or ordinance, shall, within fifteen (15) days after his/her appointment or
election, and before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his/her
office, give bond to the City in such sum and with such sureties as may
be designated by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his/her duty, and that he/she will pay over all monies belonging to the
City, as provided by law, that may come into his/her hands. If any person
elected or appointed to any office shall fail to take and subscribe such oath
or affirmation or to give bond as herein required, his/her office shall be
deemed vacant. For any breach of condition of any such bond, suit may be
instituted thereon by the City, or by any person in the name of the City, to
the use of such person. The bond provisions of this Section may be satisfied
by the securing of a blanket bond or blanket bonds, approved by the Board
of Aldermen, covering such officers by name or position.
Section 125.050. Salaries Fixed By Ordinance.
The Board of Aldermen shall fix the compensation of all the officers and
employees of the City by ordinance. The salary of an officer shall not be
changed during the time for which he/she was elected or appointed.
Section
125.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
125.050
AO:38
ARTICLE II
City Clerk
Section 125.060. Clerk To Be Elected By Board. [R.O. 2006
§135.010; Ord. No. 131 §1, 8-26-1963]
The Board of Aldermen shall elect a Clerk for such Board, to be known as
"The City Clerk of the City of Fenton, Missouri".
Section 125.070. Election and Term. [R.O. 2006 §135.020]
The City Clerk of the City of Fenton, shall be elected by the Board, as
prescribed in Section 125.060, at the first (1st) regular meeting of the Board
of Aldermen following the election of the Mayor of the City of Fenton in
April of alternate years, and shall hold his/her office for a term of two (2)
years, said term to coincide with the term of the office of the Mayor of the
City of Fenton, or until his/her successor is appointed and qualified or until,
if for any reason, the City shall vacate said office or unless he/she be sooner
removed from office in the manner provided in Section 79.240, RSMo.
Section 125.080. Powers and Responsibilities. [R.O. 2006 §135.030;
Ord. No. 131 §§3 — 4, 8-26-1963; Ord. No. 325 §4, 4-17-1972]
A. The City Clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the Board of
Aldermen, shall keep all of the books and records belonging to the City
which may be entrusted to his/her care, shall be the general accountant
of the City, shall extend all assessments and taxes upon the books of the
Collector, shall keep the official Seal of the City and affix it to
documents as may be required, shall administer official oath and oaths
to persons certifying demands or claims against the City, and shall
perform such other duties as may be incident to and inherent in said
office or may be delegated from time to time by the Board of Aldermen
of the City of Fenton.
B. The City Clerk shall receive all applications and issue such permits as
directed by the Board of Aldermen.
Section
125.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.080
AO:39

ARTICLE III
City Collector
Section 125.090. Duties Generally.
The Collector shall perform all the duties specified in this Code and shall
perform such other duties as may be directed by the City Clerk and/or
Mayor or as may be required by Statute.
Section
125.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.090
AO:41

ARTICLE IV
City Attorney and Prosecuting Attorney
Section 125.100. City Attorney — Qualifications. [R.O. 2006
§150.010; Ord. No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991]
The office of the City Attorney shall be filled by a licensed and practicing
attorney at law in the State of Missouri who shall be a least twenty-one (21)
years of age to be appointed as hereinafter provided.
Section 125.110. Appointment and Term of City Attorney. [R.O.
2006 §150.020; Ord. No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3031 §1,
5-28-2009; Ord. No. 3414 §2, 4-24-20143]
The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of the majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen. The City
Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
Section 125.120. Duties of City Attorney. [R.O. 2006 §150.030; Ord
No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991]
A. General Duties And Compensation.
1. The City Attorney shall advise the Mayor and/or the Board of
Aldermen on all legal matters connected with their duties as such
and shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of
Aldermen each month unless excused by the Mayor.
2. The City Attorney shall advise the members of other boards,
committees and commissions of the City on legal questions which
may arise.
3. The City Attorney shall answer questions of City Officials.
4. The City Attorney shall draft bills for introduction to the Board of
Aldermen upon the request of the members of the Board and/or the
Mayor.
5. When directed by the Mayor and/or the Board of Aldermen, the City
Attorney shall handle negotiations, discussions on contracts and
correspondence relative to City matters; annexations; appearances
in Court or before administrative commissions; handle all litigation
of which the City is a party, except trial de novo and appeals
thereon of municipal ordinance violations; handle condemnation
proceedings; prepare, examine and approve all deeds, releases,
easements, contracts, bonds and other legal documents relating to
the City's affairs; and any and all other matters as directed by the
Mayor and/or the Board of Aldermen.
3. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance also amended the title of this Article, which was
formerly City Attorney and Assistant City Attorney.
Section
125.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.120
AO:43
Section 125.130. Prosecuting Attorney. [R.O. 2006 §150.040; Ord.
No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3414 §1, 4-24-2014]
The office of Prosecuting Attorney shall be filled by a licensed and
practicing attorney at law in the State of Missouri who shall be at least
twenty-one (21) years of age to be appointed as hereinafter provided.
Section 125.140. Appointment and Term of Prosecuting Attorney.
[R.O. 2006 §150.050; Ord. No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3031
§§1, 4, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. 3414 §§1, 4 4-24-2014]
The Prosecuting Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of the majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen. The
Prosecuting Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen.
Section 125.150. Prosecuting Attorney — Duties of. [R.O. 2006
§150.060; Ord. No. 1478 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3414 §1,
4-24-2014]
B. Other Responsibilities.
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the City
Attorney shall be responsible for the prosecution and defense of all
litigation brought by or against the City of Fenton.
2. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to periodically report to the
Board of Aldermen on the progress of all litigation.
3. Prior to filing any new suit in any court of record on behalf of the
City of Fenton, the City Attorney shall report to the Mayor and the
Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may, by vote of a
majority thereof, prohibit the filing of any new suit by the City
Attorney and the City Attorney shall abide by the decision of the
Board of Aldermen.
A. The Prosecuting Attorney shall act as Prosecuting Attorney for the City
and shall prosecute all municipal ordinance violations in the City of
Fenton Municipal Court, a Division of the 21st Judicial Circuit, State of
Missouri.
B. The Prosecuting Attorney shall prosecute such applications for trial de
novo and appeals thereon of municipal ordinance violations.
C. The Prosecuting Attorney shall periodically report to the Mayor and the
Board of Aldermen on the status of all municipal ordinance violation
prosecutions.
D. The Prosecuting Attorney shall perform all duties of the City Attorney
when required to do so in the absence of the City Attorney and shall
assist the City Attorney in the discharge of his/her duties when
necessary.
Section
125.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
125.160
AO:44
Section 125.160. Special Prosecuting Attorneys. [R.O. 2006
§150.080; Ord. No. 2721 §1, 2-23-2005; Ord. No. 3031 §3,
5-28-2009]
A. Appointment And Term. The Mayor may, with the consent and approval
of a majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen, appoint Special
Prosecuting Attorneys for the City of Fenton. The Special Prosecuting
Attorneys shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen. [Ord. No. 3414 §5, 4-24-2014]
B. Qualifications. The office of Special Prosecuting Attorney shall be filled
by a practicing attorney at law licensed in the State of Missouri.
C. Duties. The Special Prosecuting Attorneys shall prosecute municipal
ordinance violations in specific cases when the Assistant City Attorney
is unavailable due to conflict, illness, excusable absence or other good
cause and shall handle other matters or dockets as directed by the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen. In such cases, the Special Prosecuting
Attorneys may prosecute in the Fenton Municipal Court, in the Circuit
Court of St. Louis County for certified and trial de novo cases and may
defend any appeals of convictions. The Special Prosecuting Attorneys
shall periodically report to the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen on the
status of all municipal ordinance violation prosecutions being
prosecuted by the Special Prosecuting Attorneys. [Ord. No. 3914,
3-28-2019]
Section
125.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.160
AO:45

ARTICLE V
(RESERVED)4
4. Editor’s Note: Former Art. V, City Administrator, which derived from R.O. 2006 sections
155.010 to 155.070; Ord. No. 2080 §§1–2, 7-21-1997 was repealed, and which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 10-24-2013 by Ord. No. 3362 §2. The position of city
administrator is hereby eliminated. All duties, responsibilities and authority previously
vested in the city administrator shall be vested in the city clerk or such other city
official(s) or employee(s) as may be designated by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.160
AO:47
Chapter 130
FENTON PARK, BEAUTIFICATION AND RECREATION
COMMITTEE
Section 130.010. Fenton Park, Beautification and Recreation
Committee Created — Membership. [R.O. 2006 §145.010; Ord. No.
1603 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1, 2-23-1994]
There is hereby created a Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee
consisting of two (2) citizens from each ward of the City of Fenton, Missouri,
and one (1) member of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton as an
ex-officio member selected as set out herein, known and designated as the
"Fenton Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee".
Section 130.020. Qualifications — Terms — Tenure — Vacancy. [R.O.
2006 §145.020; Ord. No. 1603 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1,
2-23-1994]
A. Qualifications. A person appointed to the Park, Beautification and
Recreation Committee shall be a qualified voter of the City of Fenton
and a resident of the ward for which he or she is appointed.
B. Terms — Citizen Members. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to
confirmation by the Board of Aldermen, the first citizen members for
terms as follows:
Four (4) members shall serve for a term of two (2) years commencing on
February 28, 1994, and four (4) members shall serve for a term of one
(1) year commencing on February 28, 1994. As the term of a member
expires, the Mayor shall appoint a successor for a term of two (2) years,
subject to confirmation by the Board of Aldermen, except as provided
below in Subsections (D) and (E).
C. Ex Officio. The Board of Aldermen shall designate an ex officio member
of the Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee from among its
members. The ex officio member shall act as the liaison for the Mayor
and Board of Aldermen, but shall not have a vote in the decisions of the
committee.
D. Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs on the committee, the Mayor shall fill the
vacancy by appointing a new member, subject to confirmation by the
Board of Aldermen, to serve the balance of the unexpired term.
E. Attendance. If a member is unable to attend a meeting, he or she must
contact the Park Director, Chairman of the Committee or Aldermanic
Liaison. Two (2) unexcused absences within twelve (12) consecutive
months is cause for automatic removal from the committee. The Mayor
shall fill the vacancy created by such action by appointing a new
member, subject to confirmation by the Board of Aldermen, to serve the
balance of the unexpired term.
Section
125.160
FENTON CITY CODE Section
130.030
AO:48
Section 130.030. Meetings — Bylaws. [R.O. 2006 §145.030; Ord. No.
1603 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1, 2-23-1994]
The Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee shall have regular
meetings and meeting times and dates shall be set by the committee. The
Park Director shall notify the Mayor, Board of Aldermen, and City Clerk of
the times and dates of all committee meetings.
Section 130.040. Officers. [R.O. 2006 §145.040; Ord. No. 1603 §1,
5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1, 2-23-1994; Ord. No. 2536 §1,
1-22-2003]
The Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee shall meet each year
during the month of February and elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and a
Secretary to serve one (1) year terms.
Section 130.050. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2006 §145.050; Ord. No.
1603 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1, 2-23-1994; Ord. No. 2092 §1,
9-15-1997]
Section 130.060. Budget. [R.O. 2006 §145.060; Ord. No. 1603 §1,
5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1734 §1, 2-23-1994]
The Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee may, on or before
November fifteenth (15th) of each year, submit to the Mayor and Board
A. Advisory Capacity. The Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee
shall act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen in
the acquisition, construction, development, operation, maintenance, or
improvement of or addition to City parks and in regard to the general
beautification of the City of Fenton. The committee may meet and
confer with any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
local, state or federal agent or governmental organization. The
committee may present a proposed plan or design to the Mayor and the
Board of Aldermen for implementation or approval or adoption by
ordinance.
B. Notification To Park, Beautification And Recreation Committee By City.
The Mayor shall notify the committee of any public meeting at which
major construction, acquisition of park land, development, operation,
maintenance or improvement of the City of Fenton is to be discussed in
detail. The City Administrator shall relay to the committee, as soon as
practicable, material information pertaining to a City facility or park.
C. Subject To Direction Of Mayor And Board Of Aldermen. In carrying out
the duties and powers designated to the Park, Beautification and
Recreation Committee, the committee shall be subject to directives of
the Mayor and Board of Aldermen; all directives to be presented at a
Board of Aldermen meeting or Park, Beautification and Recreation
Committee meeting. The action of the committee shall not bind the City
in any respect.
Section
130.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.060
AO:49
of Aldermen for approval, a budget for park facilities and beautification
projects setting forth the expected income and expenditures for the coming
fiscal year. In establishing the budget for the City, the Board of Aldermen
shall utilize the Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee budget, if
submitted, as an advisory document.
Chapter 135
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 135.010. Court Established. [R.O. 2006 §160.010; Ord. No.
503 §2, 8-20-1979]
There is hereby established in this City a Municipal Court to be known as
the "Fenton Municipal Court, a Division of the 21st Judicial Circuit Court of
the State of Missouri".
Section 135.020. Jurisdiction. [R.O. 2006 §160.020; Ord. No. 503 §3,
8-20-1979]
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases
involving alleged violations of the ordinances of the City.
Section 135.030. Municipal Judge — Appointment — Provisional
Judge. [R.O. 2006 §160.030; Ord. No. 503 §4, 8-20-1979]
The Judge of the City's Municipal Court shall be known as a Municipal Judge
for the 21st Judicial Circuit Court and shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the majority of the Board of Aldermen. When necessary, a
Provisional Judge may be appointed in the same manner as the Municipal
Judge.
Section 135.040. Judge — Term of Office — Compensation —
Vacation of Office. [R.O. 2006 §160.040; Ord. No. 1487 §1,
4-15-1991; Ord. No. 3031 §4, 5-28-2009]
The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of the majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen for a term
of not less than two (2) years. The term of the Municipal Judge so appointed
and approved shall commence on the effective date of such appointment
and approval and shall expire on the later of the fourth (4th) Thursday of
May of the year of the general election for Mayor of the City of Fenton or
at such time as his/her successor shall be duly appointed and qualified. The
Provisional Judge shall hold his/her office for whatever term is designated
by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 135.050. Municipal Judge — Vacation of Office.
A. The Municipal Judge shall vacate his/her office under the following
conditions:
Section
130.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.050
AO:50
Section 135.060. Judge — Qualifications. [R.O. 2006 §160.060; Ord.
No. 503 §7, 8-20-1979]
Section 135.070. Municipal Court Subject To Rules and Authority of
The Circuit Court. [R.O. 2006 §160.070; Ord. No. 503 §8, 8-20-1979]
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part, and to the rules of the Missouri State Supreme
Court. The Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative
authority of the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court, and the Judge and
Court Personnel of the Municipal Court shall obey the directives of the
Presiding Judge.
Section 135.080. Monthly Reports From Judge. [R.O. 2006
§160.080; Ord. No. 503 §9, 8-20-1979]
The Municipal Judge shall cause to be prepared within the first ten (10) days
of every month a report indicating the following:
A list of all cases heard and tried before the Court during the preceding
month, giving in each case the name of the defendant, the fine imposed,
if any, the amount of costs, the names of the defendants committed and in
the cases where there was an application for a trial de novo, respectively.
The same shall be prepared under oath by the Municipal Court Clerk of
the Municipal Judge. This report will be filed with the City Clerk, who shall
thereafter forward the same to the Board of Aldermen for examination at its
first session thereafter.
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the
Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges as provided in
Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12;
2. Upon attaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; or
3. If he/she should lose his/her license to practice law within the State
of Missouri.
A. The Municipal Judge or Provisional Judge shall possess the following
qualifications before he/she shall take office:
1. He/she must be a licensed attorney, qualified to practice law within
the State of Missouri.
2. He/she must be a resident of the State of Missouri.
3. He/she may not hold any other elected or appointed office within
the City Government.
4. He/she must be between the ages of twenty-one (21) and seventyfive
(75) years.
5. He/she may serve as Municipal Judge for any other municipality.
Section
135.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.090
AO:51
Section 135.090. Judge To Keep Docket. [R.O. 2006 §160.090; Ord.
No. 503 §10, 8-20-1979]
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall keep
a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before him/her
and the proceeding therein and he/she shall keep such records of the Circuit
Court of St. Louis County, maintained by the City of Fenton. The Municipal
Judge shall deliver the docket and records of the Municipal Court, and all
books and papers pertaining to his/her office, to his/her successor in office
or to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit.
Section 135.100. Authority of Municipal Judge. [R.O. 2006
§160.100; Ord. No. 503 §11, 8-20-1979; Ord. No. 2418 §2,
9-17-2001]
Section 135.110. Administrative Warrants.
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Establish an Ordinance Violations Bureau as provided for in the
Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic
Courts and Section 479.050, RSMo. He/she shall establish such a
bureau when a request therefor is made by the Board of Aldermen.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules,
and judgments made by him/her, and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court, in the
same manner as a Circuit Judge.
3. Commute the term of any sentence, suspend imposition of any
sentence, stay execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine
or sentence, and make such other orders as the Municipal Judge
deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the
Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts. Any and all rules made or adopted
hereunder may be annulled or amended by an ordinance limited to
such purpose; provided that such ordinance does not violate or
conflict with, the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and
Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts or State Statutes.
5. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Chapter or other ordinances of the City.
A. Warrant Defined — Who May Issue, Execute.
Section
135.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.110
AO:52
1. An "administrative warrant" is a written order of the Municipal
Judge permitting the entry of City officials on or into private
property to enforce the City's housing, zoning, health and safety
regulations when government entry on or into such private
property is otherwise authorized by Missouri law. A warrant may
issue only in conformance with this Section and only for the
enforcement of the City's housing, zoning, health and safety
regulations, specifically:
a. To abate such physical conditions on private property
constituting a public nuisance or otherwise in violation of a
specified regulation as provided herein,
b. To inspect private property to determine or prove the existence
of physical conditions in violation of such a specified
regulation, and
c. To seize, photograph, copy or record evidence of the violation
of such a specified regulation.
A warrant may issue only as a last resort, when all other
reasonable avenues to gain access to the property have
been exhausted.
2. The Municipal Judge, having original and exclusive jurisdiction to
determine violations against the ordinances of the municipality,
may issue an administrative warrant when:
a. The property to be entered is located within the City, and
b. The owner or occupant of the property to be entered:
(1) Has refused to allow same after official request by the City,
or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such entry or inspection.
c. The City establishes probable cause to determine that a public
nuisance or other violation of a specified regulation as
provided herein may exist, and
d. The City demonstrates that all other reasonable avenues to
gain access to the property have been exhausted.
3. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any
other Police Officer of the City and shall be executed by the Chief of
Police or said Police Officer, in conjunction with the appropriate
Code Enforcement Officer or other appropriate official, within the
City limits and not elsewhere.
B. Who May Apply For Warrant — Contents Of Application.
Section
135.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.110
AO:53
1. Any Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or attorney of the City
may make application to the Municipal Judge for the issuance of an
administrative warrant.
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property to be entered, inspected or seized in
sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the
warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. State that the owner or occupant of the property:
(1) Has been requested by the City to allow such action and
has refused to allow such action, or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such entry or inspection, and
in such case the application shall include details of the
City's investigation and effort to request such consent;
e. State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance
of a warrant to enter the private property, including the
specification of the housing, zoning, health or safety regulation
sought to be enforced;
f. State facts sufficient to demonstrate that the City has
exhausted all other reasonable avenues to gain access to the
property;
g. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
h. Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal Court.
3. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified
by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in
determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a
warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description of the
property or place to be entered. Oral testimony shall not be
considered. The application may be submitted by facsimile or other
electronic means.
C. Hearing And Procedure — Contents Of Warrant — Execution And
Return.
1. Hearing and procedure.
a. The Municipal Judge shall determine whether probable cause
exists to enter the private property for the purposes noted
Section
135.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.110
AO:54
herein and whether all other requirements of this Section have
been met.
b. In determining probable cause the Municipal Judge shall
determine whether the action to be taken by the City is
reasonable in light of the facts stated. The Municipal Judge
shall consider the goals of the ordinance or Code Section
sought to be enforced and such other factors as may be
appropriate, including, but not limited to, the physical
condition of the specified property, the age and nature of the
property, the condition of the area in which the property is
located, the known or suspected violation of any relevant City
ordinance or Code Section, the passage of time since the
property's last inspection, and the law, Statute or ordinance
authorizing government entry onto private property. The
standard for issuing a warrant need not be limited to actual
knowledge of an existing violation of a City ordinance or Code
Section.
c. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit
that there is probable cause to enter the private property for
the enforcement of the City's housing, zoning, health and
safety regulations, and that all other requirements of this
Section have been met, a warrant shall immediately be issued.
d. The warrant shall issue in the form of an original and two (2)
copies, and the application, any supporting affidavit and one
(1) copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained in the
records of the Municipal Court.
2. Contents of warrant. The warrant shall:
a. Be in writing and in the name of the City;
b. Be directed to any Police Officer in the City;
c. State the time and date the warrant was issued;
d. Identify the property to be entered in sufficient detail and
particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily
ascertain it;
e. Command that the described property be entered for one (1) or
more specified enforcement purposes as provided herein,
identify the regulation sought to be enforced, and direct that
any evidence of any suspected property violations be seized,
recorded or photographed, and a description of such property
be returned, within ten (10) days after filing of the application,
to the Clerk of the Municipal Court, to be dealt with according
to law;
f. Be signed by the Judge, with his/her title of office indicated.
Section
135.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.110
AO:55
3. Execution and return.
a. A warrant issued under this Section shall be executed only by a
City Police Officer, provided however, that one (1) or more
designated City Officials may accompany the officer, and the
warrant shall be executed in the following manner:
(1) The warrant may be issued by facsimile or other electronic
means.
(2) The warrant shall be executed by conducting the private
property entry as commanded and shall be executed as
soon as practicable and in a reasonable manner.
(3) The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the
property entered a copy of the warrant.
(4) Receipt of property taken.
(a) If any property is seized incident to the search, the
officer shall give the person from whose possession it
was taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt
for the property taken. If no such person is present,
the officer shall leave the receipt at the site of the
search in a conspicuous place.
(b) A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken
shall be delivered to an attorney for the City within
two (2) working days of the execution of the warrant.
(c) The disposition of property seized pursuant to a
warrant under this Section shall be in accordance with
an applicable City ordinance or Code Section, but in
the absence of same, then with Section 542.301,
RSMo.
(5) The officer may summon as many persons as he/she deems
necessary to assist him/her in executing the warrant.
(6) An officer executing an invalid warrant, the invalidity of
which is not apparent on its face, may use such force as he/
she would be justified in using if the warrant were valid.
(7) A warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the required
return made within ten (10) days after the date of the
making of the application.
4. Return requirements.
a. After execution of the warrant, the warrant, with a return
thereon signed by the officer executing the warrant, shall be
delivered to the Municipal Court.
Section
135.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.110
AO:56
Section 135.120. Warrants. [R.O. 2006 §160.120; Ord. No. 503 §13,
8-20-1979; Ord. No. 1909 §1, 11-20-1995]
All warrants issued by the Municipal Judge shall be directed to the Police
Department or the Sheriff of the County. The warrant shall be executed by
a Police Officer, or Sheriff any place within the limits of the County and
not elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for
warrants in criminal cases.
Section 135.130. Ordinance Violations Bureau. [R.O. 2006
§160.110; Ord. No. 503 §12, 8-20-1979; Ord. No. 2418 §1,
9-17-2001]
An Ordinance Violations Bureau is hereby established as provided for in
Chapter 479, Section 479.050, RSMo. The City shall provide all expenses
b. The return shall show the date and manner of execution and
the name of the possessor and of the owner, when not the same
person, if known, of the property entered.
c. The return shall be accompanied by any photographs, copies or
recordings made and by any property seized, along with a copy
of the itemized receipt of such property required by this
Section; provided however, that seized property may be
disposed of as provided herein, and in such a case a description
of the property seized shall accompany the return.
d. The Court Clerk, upon request, shall deliver a copy of the
return to the possessor and the owner, when not the same
person, of the property entered or seized.
D. Warrant Invalid, When. A warrant shall be deemed invalid:
1. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
2. If it was issued without a written application having been filed and
verified;
3. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided in Subsection (C)(1)(b) hereof;
4. If it was not issued with respect to property in the City;
5. If it does not describe the property or places to be entered,
inspected or seized with sufficient certainty;
6. If it is not signed by the Judge who issued it;
7. If it was not executed and the required return made within ten (10)
days after the date of the making of the application; or
8. If it was not issued in compliance with this Section.
Section
135.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.130
AO:57
incident to the operation of same. The Court Clerk is hereby designated as
the Ordinance Violations Clerk for said Bureau.
Section 135.135. Failure To Appear in Municipal Court (Non-Minor
Traffic Violations). [R.O. 2006 §160.135; Ord. No. 2098 §1,
10-20-1997; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 3558 §3,
11-19-2015]
Section 135.140. Trial By Jury. [R.O. 2006 §160.140]
Any person charged with a violation of a Municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury, as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Judge. Whenever a defendant, accused of a
violation of a Municipal ordinance, has a right to a trial by jury, and
demands such trial by jury, the Municipal Judge shall certify the case to the
Presiding Judge for assignment.
Section 135.150. Witnesses — Summons. [R.O. 2006 §160.160; Ord.
No. 503 §17, 8-20-1979]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons when
requested by any party, whose presence may be deemed to be essential
as witnesses at the trial, and to enforce their attendance by attachment,
if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall be the same as those fixed for
witnesses in trial before Associate Circuit Judges and shall be taxed as other
costs in the case. When a trial shall be continued by a Municipal Judge it
shall not be necessary to summon any witnesses who may be present at the
continuance; but the Municipal Judge shall orally notify such witnesses as
either party may require to attend before him/her on the day set for trial to
A. A person commits the offense of failure to appear in Municipal Court if
for any violation of any ordinance of the City of Fenton that is not a
minor traffic violation as defined by Section 300.010 of the Municipal
Code, he or she:
1. Has been issued a summons for a violation and fails to appear
before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time and on the date
on which he/she was summoned, or at the time or on the date to
which the case was continued;
2. Has been released upon recognition of bond and fails to appear
before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time and on the date
on which he/she was summoned, or at the time or on the date to
which the case was continued;
3. Has been placed on Court supervised probation and fails to appear
before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time specified by
said Judge as a condition of the probation.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise of the Municipal
Court of its power to punish for contempt.
Section
135.130
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.150
AO:58
testify in the case, and enter the names of such witnesses on his/her docket,
which oral notice shall be valid as a summons.
Section 135.160. Complaint To Be Made Before Associate Circuit
Judge — When. [R.O. 2006 §160.170; Ord. No. 503 §18, 8-20-1979]
If, in the progress of any trial before a Municipal Judge, it shall appear to
the Judge that the accused ought to be put on trial for an offense against the
criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him/her as Municipal
Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him/
her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made before some
Associate Circuit Judge within the County.
Section 135.170. Parole or Probation. [R.O. 2006 §160.190]
A. Any Judge hearing violations of the Municipal ordinances may, when in
his/her judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to
any person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial
before said Judge. When a person is placed on probation he/she shall be
given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he/she is
being released.
B. In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of
probation, the Court may order conditions which the Court believes will
serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the
victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not
be limited to:
1. Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim, in an
amount to be determined by the Judge; and
2. The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public
or charitable purpose, or purposes, as determined by the Judge.
C. A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free
work. If he/she does so, the Court shall decide the extent or duration of
sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment
accordingly. Any County, City, person, organization, or agency, or
employee of a County, City, organization or agency charged with the
supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance
shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or
probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him/her if such
cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for
intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the
probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the
meaning of the provisions of Chapter 288, RSMo.
D. The Court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term.
Section
135.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.180
AO:59
Section 135.180. Trial De Novo. [R.O. 2006 §160.200; Ord. No. 503
§21, 8-20-1979]
In all cases tried before the Municipal Court, except where there has been
a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant
shall have a right of trial de novo before a Circuit Judge or on assignment
before an Associate Circuit Judge. An application for a trial de novo shall
be filed within ten (10) days after judgement and shall be filed in such form
and perfected in such manner as provided by Supreme Court Rules.
Section 135.190. Jury Trials — Record of The Proceedings. [R.O.
2006 §160.210; Ord. No. 503 §22, 8-20-1979]
In all cases in which a jury trial has been demanded, a record of the
proceedings shall be made, and appeals may be had upon that record to the
appropriate Appellate Court. The costs of this record of proceedings shall
be taxed as costs in the matter.
Section 135.200. Breach of Recognizance. [R.O. 2006 §160.220;
Ord. No. 503 §23, 8-20-1979]
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Judge hearing a Municipal ordinance violation
case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause the
same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them,
in the name of the City as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before
a Circuit Judge or Associate Circuit Judge, and in the event of cases caused
to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge, such shall be on the transcript of
the proceedings before the Municipal Judge. All monies recovered in such
actions shall be paid over to the City Treasury to the General Revenue Fund
of the City.
Section 135.210. Disqualification of Municipal Judge From Hearing
A Particular Case.
A Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he/she is in
any way interested or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the
prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the
case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest
or prejudice of the Judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall
be entitled to file more than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same
case.
Section 135.220. Absence of Judge — Procedure.
If a Municipal Judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting pursuant to
the general administrative authority of the Presiding Judge of the Circuit
Court over the Municipal Divisions within the circuit contained in Section
478.240, RSMo., a special Municipal Judge may be designated in
accordance with the provisions of Section 479.230, RSMo., until such
absence or disqualification shall cease.
Section
135.180
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.230
AO:60
Section 135.230. Court Clerk — Duties. [R.O. 2006 §160.250; Ord.
No. 503 §26, 8-20-1979; Ord. No. 2649 §§1 — 2, 4-27-2004]
Section 135.240. Court Costs. [R.O. 2006 §385.070; Ord. No. 497
§165, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 503 §27, 8-20-1979; Ord. No. 1091 §1,
5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1536 §1, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 1642 §1,
12-21-1992; Ord. No. 1643 §1, 12-21-1992; Ord. No. 1716 §1,
10-19-1993; Ord. No. 1856 §1, 5-16-1995; Ord. No. 1955 §1,
4-15-1996; Ord. No. 2095 §1, 9-15-1997; Ord. No. 2463 §3,
4-15-2002; Ord. No 2919 §1, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 2920 §1,
9-17-2007; Ord. No. 3558 §4, 11-19-2015]
A. Duties Of Court Clerk. The duties of the Court Clerk shall be as follows:
1. To collect such fines for violations of such offenses as may be
described and the court costs thereof.
2. To take oaths and affirmations.
3. To accept signed complaints and allow the same to be signed and
sworn to or affirmed before him/her.
4. To sign and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses
and sign and issue subpoenas duces tecum.
5. To accept the appearance, waiver of trial and plea of guilty and
payment of fine and costs in Traffic Violation Bureau cases or as
directed by the Municipal Judge.
6. To perform all other duties as provided for by ordinance, by Rules
of Practice and Procedure adopted by the Municipal Judge, by the
Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic
Courts and by State Statute.
7. To maintain, properly certified by the City Clerk, a copy of the
ordinances of the City which shall constitute prima facia evidence
of such ordinance before the Court and further maintain a similar
certified copy on file with the Clerk serving the Circuit Court of this
County.
A. Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases
shall mean:
COURT COSTS — The total of fees, miscellaneous charges and
surcharges, imposed in a particular case.
FEES — The amount charged for services to be performed by the Court.
MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES — The amounts allowed by law for
services provided by individuals or entities other than the Court.
SURCHARGES — Additional charges allowed by law which are allowed
for specific purposes designated by law.
Section
135.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.240
AO:61
B. In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the Municipal Judge, or
where the accused has been found guilty, but no fine assessed, there
may be assessed as costs in all cases the following:
1. Costs. Costs of Court in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00)
pursuant to Court Operating Rule (COR) 21.01(a)(5).
2. Surcharges.
a. Police Officer Training. Pursuant to Section 488.5336, RSMo.,
a surcharge of three dollars ($3.00) is hereby established and
assessed as additional Court costs in each Court proceeding,
except that no such fee shall be collected when the
proceedings against the defendant have been dismissed. The
Court shall distribute the surcharge as follows:
(1) Two dollars ($2.00) shall be transmitted monthly to the
Treasurer of the City and used to pay for Police Officer
training as provided by Sections 590.100 to 590.180,
RSMo. The City shall not retain for training purposes more
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) of such
funds for each certified Law Enforcement Officer or
candidate for certification employed by the City. Any
excess funds shall be transmitted quarterly to the City's
General Fund.
(2) One dollar ($1.00) shall be sent to the State Treasury to
the credit of the Peace Officers Standards and Training
Commission Fund created by Section 590.178, RSMo.
b. Crime Victims' Compensation Fund. Pursuant to Section
488.5339, RSMo., a surcharge of seven dollars fifty cents
($7.50) shall be assessed and added to the basic costs in
Subsection (B)(1) of this Section, provided that no such cost
shall be collected in any proceeding when the proceeding or
the defendant has been dismissed by the Court. All sums
collected pursuant to this Subsection shall be paid at least
monthly as follows:
(1) Ninety-five percent (95%) shall be paid to the Director of
Revenue of the State of Missouri for deposit as provided in
Section 595.045.5, RSMo.
(2) Five percent (5%) shall be paid to the City Treasury.
c. Inmate Prisoner Detainee Security Fund. Pursuant to Section
488.5026, RSMo., a two dollar ($2.00) surcharge per case shall
be assessed as costs in all cases, including an infraction and
violation of a municipal ordinance, to be deposited into the
"Inmate Prisoner Detainee Security Fund." Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the moneys collected by the
Municipal Court shall be payable to the City and deposited into
Section
135.240
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.240
AO:62
the "Inmate Prisoner Detainee Security Fund." The Inmate
Prisoner Detainee Security Fund shall be utilized to acquire
and develop biometric verification systems and information
sharing to ensure that inmates, prisoners or detainees in a
holding cell facility or other detention facility or area which
hold persons detained only for a shorter period of time after
arrest or after being formally charged can be properly
identified upon booking and tracked within the local law
enforcement administration system, criminal justice
administration system or the local jail system. Upon the
installation of the information sharing or biometric verification
system, funds in the Inmate Prisoner Detainee Security Fund
may also be used for the maintenance, repair and replacement
of the information sharing or biometric verification system,
and also to pay for any expenses related to detention, custody,
and housing and other expenses for inmates, prisoners, and
detainees. If the amount of such surcharge is increased or
decreased by an amendment to State law, the surcharge
authorized to be collected hereunder shall automatically
increase or decrease correspondingly.
3. Judicial Education Fund and Appointed Counsel Fund. Pursuant to
Section 479.260, RSMo., the Municipal Court may establish a
Judicial Education Fund and an Appointed Counsel Fund, each in
separate accounts under the control of the Municipal Court to
retain one dollar ($1.00) of the fees collected on each case. The
fees collected shall be allocated between the two (2) funds as
determined by the Court. The Judicial Education Fund shall be used
only to pay for: (1) the continuing education and certification
required of the municipal judges by law or Supreme Court rule; and
(2) judicial education and training for the Court Administrator and
clerks of the Municipal Court. The Appointed Counsel Fund shall be
used only to pay the reasonable fees approved by the Court for the
appointment of an attorney to represent any defendant found by
the judge to be indigent and unable to pay for legal representation,
and where the Supreme Court rules or the law prescribes such
appointment. Provided further, that the Municipal Court shall not
retain more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in
the Judicial Education Fund for each judge, administrator or clerk
of the Municipal Court and no more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) in the Appointed Counsel Fund. Any funds in excess of
the prescribed fund limits shall be transmitted quarterly to the
City's General Revenue Fund.
4. Statewide Court Automation Fund Pursuant to Section 476.056,
RSMo., a fee of seven dollars ($7.00) shall be assessed, collected,
and set aside for the Statewide Court Automation Fund, with all
such amounts collected transmitted monthly to the Missouri
Director of Revenue to the credit of the Missouri Statewide Court
Automation Fund. [Ord. No. 3870, 10-25-20185]
Section
135.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.240
AO:63
5. Miscellaneous charges.
a. Mileage. To the extent authorized by Section 488.435, RSMo.,
mileage, in the same amount as provided to the Sheriff in
criminal violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the
officer must travel (both directions) in order to serve any
warrant or commitment or order of this Court.
b. Board bill. To the extent authorized by Section 221.070,
RSMo., every person who shall be committed to the common
jail within any County in this State, by lawful authority, for any
offense or misdemeanor, upon a plea of guilty or a finding of
guilt for such offense, shall bear the expense of carrying him or
her to said jail, and also his or her support while in jail.
6. Non-negotiable instrument fee. A fee of four dollars ($4.00) for
accepting payments of Court costs by means other than by cash or
negotiable instrument should the Municipal Court, by local Court
rule, elect to accept payments of Court costs by means other than
by cash or negotiable instrument.
7. Postage and copies. Pursuant to Court Operating Rule 21.01(22)
and Section 610.026, RSMo., the Court may charge reasonable fees
for postage and per copied page as provided by local Court rule or
order.
8. Bad checks. A person passing a bad check to the Court shall be
prosecuted pursuant to Section 570.120, RSMo., and shall pay, in
addition to all other fines, Court costs and fee, an administrative
handling cost as set forth in Section 510.120.5, RSMo., and a
reasonable service charge, which along with the face amount of the
check, shall be turned over to the City as the person to whom the
bad check was issued (see Section 510.120.6, RSMo.).
9. Reimbursement of costs of arrest for alcohol and drug-related
traffic offenses as authorized by Section 488.5334, RSMo.
a. Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation
of the provisions of the Fenton Municipal Code for any alcohol
or drug-related traffic offense, the Municipal Court may, in
addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order
the person to reimburse the City of Fenton for the costs
associated with that person's arrest for such violation.
b. Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the
arrest, including the cost of any chemical tests to determine
the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the cost
of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in
custody.
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsections (B)(4 — 9) were also renumbered to be Subsections
(B)(5 — 10), respectively.
Section
135.240
FENTON CITY CODE Section
135.240
AO:64
Section 135.250. Costs Assessed Against Prosecuting Witness —
When. [R.O. 2006 §160.270; Ord. No. 1331 §1, 11-20-1989; Ord. No.
3414 §1, 4-24-2014]
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness
and judgment be rendered against him/her, that he/she pay the same and
stand committed until paid, in any case where it appears to the satisfaction
of the Municipal Judge that prosecution was commenced with probable
cause as determined by the Prosecuting Attorney of the City, but later
determined, through the fault of the prosecuting witness, that no probable
cause existed and that the complaint was issued for malicious motives.
Section 135.260. Installment Payment of Fine. [R.O. 2006 §160.280;
Ord. No. 605 §29, 9-16-1982]
When a fine is assessed for violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the
discretion of the Judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he/she may
deem appropriate.
Section 135.270. License To Operate Motor Vehicle May Be
Deposited in Lieu of Bail — Exceptions — Failure To Appear, Notice
To Director of Revenue.
c. The City Police Department may establish a schedule of such
costs, however the Municipal Court may order the costs
reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive
given the circumstances of the case or for good cause shown.
10. All other court costs. All other Court costs, fees, miscellaneous
charges and surcharges authorized or required by Statute.
C. None of the Court costs authorized by Subsection (B) above shall be
collected in any proceeding involving a violation of an ordinance when
the proceeding or defendant has been dismissed by the Court or when
costs are waived or are to be paid by the City.
D. The Municipal Judge may decide not to assess Court costs against a
defendant in those cases where the defendant is found by the Municipal
Judge to be indigent and unable to pay the Court costs.
E. If the Statutory authority for any Court cost, fee, miscellaneous charge
and/or surcharge authorized by the Board of Aldermen herein is
repealed by the State legislature or is now or in the future found by a
Court of competent jurisdiction to be an unauthorized Court cost, fee,
miscellaneous charge or surcharge, then the Board of Aldermen's grant
of authority for such Court cost, fee, miscellaneous charge or surcharge
shall be automatically repealed.
A. Any person arrested and charged with violating a traffic law of this
State or a traffic ordinance of the City may, at the discretion of both the
Section
135.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.270
AO:65
Chapter 140
COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL POLICY
The City of Fenton Purchasing Policy is on file with the City Clerk's office.
Chapter 145
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
officer authorized by law or rule of court to accept bail and the person
arrested, deposit his/her license to operate a motor vehicle with a
member of the highway patrol or with the officer demanding bail in
lieu of any other security for his/her appearance in court to answer any
such charge, except when the charge is for driving while intoxicated,
driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, leaving
the scene of a motor vehicle accident, driving when his/her license is
suspended or revoked, or for any charge made because of a motor
vehicle accident in which a death has occurred.
B. Notwithstanding the fact that the officer authorized by law or rule of
court to accept bail authorizes the person arrested to deposit his/her
license to operate a motor vehicle as his/her security for his/her
appearance in court, in lieu of depositing his/her license to operate a
motor vehicle, the person arrested may decline to deposit his/her
license to operate a motor vehicle as security and instead deposit a
bond with the officer authorized by law or rule of court to accept bail or
other such officer demanding bail in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per traffic offense allegedly committed. The officer shall issue a receipt
for such a bond to the person and deposit the bond with the judge, court
clerk or other officer requiring security for a court appearance.
C. The judge, court clerk or other officer requiring security for an
appearance shall accept the bond or deposit of the license in lieu of bail
and, if the license is accepted, shall issue a receipt to the licensee for
the license upon a form approved by the Director of Revenue. The
licensee may, until he/she has appeared at the proper time and place as
stated in the receipt to answer the charge placed against him/her,
operate motor vehicles while in possession of the receipt, and the
receipt shall be accepted in lieu of the license as provided by Section
302.181, RSMo. If a continuance is requested and granted, the licensee
shall be given a new receipt for his/her license.
D. Whether or not a license to operate a motor vehicle has been deposited
in lieu of bail pursuant to this Section, if the driver fails to appear at the
proper time to answer the charge placed against him/her, the clerk of
the court, or the judge of the court if there is no clerk, shall within ten
(10) days notify the Director of Revenue of the failure to appear, and the
Director shall thereafter withhold any renewal of the license or the
issuance of a duplicate license to the licensee until notified by the court
that the charge has been reduced to final judgment.
Section
135.270
FENTON CITY CODE Section
145.010
AO:66
Section 145.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §175.010; Ord. No. 1850
§1, 4-17-1995]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have these prescribed
meanings:
FIRM — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other
entity providing professional services.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services requiring expertise in a particular
field, beyond the expertise in such field possessed by the City's officers
and employees. Such fields of expertise include, but are not limited to,
engineering, architecture, public improvements, urban planning, health
care, employment practices, financial audit, tax collections, management,
marketing, law, accounting, insurance and any other areas of services for
which additional expertise is deemed necessary by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 145.020. Procedures.
When the Board of Aldermen deems that the City is or may be in need of
professional services, investigation shall be made in the manner directed
by the Board of Aldermen concerning firms that provide the required
professional services. On the basis of such investigation, the Board of
Aldermen shall designate one (1) or more such firm for negotiation. Such
negotiation shall be conducted as directed by the Board of Aldermen. The
Board of Aldermen may then by ordinance approve a written contract for
the required professional services.
Chapter 150
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Section 150.010. Declaration of Policy. [R.O. 2006 §176.010; Ord.
No. 1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §2, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780
§2, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §2, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §2,
8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §2, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §§1 — 2,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2504 §2, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §2,
8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §2, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §2,
8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §2, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §2,
7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
The proper operation of municipal government requires the public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for
disclosure by certain City Officials and City employees of private financial
or other interest in matters affecting the City of Fenton.
Section
145.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.020
AO:67
Section 150.020. Conflicts of Interest. [R.O. 2006 §176.020; Ord.
No. 1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §3, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780
§3, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §3, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §3,
8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §3, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §3,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2370 §1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2504 §3,
8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §3, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §3,
8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §3, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §3,
7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §3, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
Section 150.030. Disclosure Reports. [R.O. 2006 §176.030; Ord. No.
1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §4, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780 §4,
8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §4, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §4,
8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §4, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §4,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2370 §2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2504 §4,
8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §4, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §4,
8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §4, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §4,
7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §4, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
A. All elected officials, candidates for elective office, the Chief
Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer must comply
with Section 105.452 and Section 105.454, RSMo., on conflicts of
interest as well as any other law governing official conduct. For
purposes of this Chapter, the Mayor shall be deemed the Chief
Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer.
B. The Mayor and any member of the Board of Aldermen who has a
substantial personal or private interest, as defined by State law, in any
measure, bill, order or ordinance proposed or pending before the Board
of Aldermen shall disclose that interest on the records of the Board of
Aldermen and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on any
matters relating to such interest.
A. Each elected official, candidate for elective office, the Chief
Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer shall disclose,
in writing, the following information by May first (1st) of each year, or
the appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487, RSMo., if
any such transaction occurred during the previous calendar year:
1. For such person and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
City, other than compensation received as an employee or payment
of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City and other than transfers
for no consideration to the City; and
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest, had with the City, other than payment of any
tax, fee or penalty due to the City or transactions involving
Section
150.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
150.030
AO:68
Section 150.040. Filing of Reports. [R.O. 2006 §176.040; Ord. No.
1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §5, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780 §5,
8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §5, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §5,
8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §5, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §5,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2370 §3, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2504 §5,
8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §5, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §5,
8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §5, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §5,
7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §5, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
The reports shall be filed with the City Clerk, the Secretary of State's office
and with the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports shall be available
for public inspection and copying during normal City business hours. The
reports shall be substantially in the same form as the one issued by the
Missouri Ethics Commission.
Section 150.050. Financial Interest Statements — When Filed. [R.O.
2006 §176.050; Ord. No. 1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §6,
8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780 §6, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §6,
payment for providing utility service to the City and other than
transfers for no consideration to the City; and
3. The Chief Administrative Officer and Chief Purchasing Officer of
the City shall disclose, in writing, by May first (1st), or the
appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487, RSMo., the
following information for the previous calendar year:
a. The name and address of each of the employers of such person
from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more was received during the year covered by the statement.
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he/she
owned; the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in
which he/she was a partner or participant; the name and
address of each partner or co-participant for each partnership
or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by
the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State;
the name and address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited
partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded
corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated
stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the
person owned two percent (2%) or more of any class of
outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity
interests.
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
Section
150.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.050
AO:69
8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §6, 8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §6,
8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §6, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2370 §4,
3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2504 §6, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §6,
8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §6, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §6,
8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §6, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §6,
7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
Section 150.060. Filing of Ordinance. [R.O. 2006 §176.060; Ord. No.
1515 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 1703 §7, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 1780 §7,
8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1880 §7, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1984 §7,
8-19-1996; Ord. No. 2172 §7, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2323 §7,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2504 §7, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 2588 §7,
8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2674 §7, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2749 §7,
8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2818 §7, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2898 §7,
7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3958, 7-25-2019]
Upon the adoption of Ordinance No. 3958 (which makes up this Chapter),
the City Clerk shall send a certified copy of Ordinance No. 3958 (which
makes up this Chapter) to the Secretary of State's office and the Missouri
Ethics Commission within ten (10) days of its adoption and approval. After
September 15, 2007, the City Clerk shall send a certified copy of any
amendment to this Chapter to the Missouri Ethics Commission within ten
(10) days of its adoption and approval.
Chapter 155
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING COMMISSION
A. The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times,
but no person is required to file more than one (1) financial interest
statement in any calendar year.
1. Each person appointed to the office shall file the statement within
thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment covering the
calendar year ending the previous December thirty-first (31st).
2. Every other person required to file a financial interest statement
shall file the statement annually not later than May first (1st) and
the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately
preceding December thirty-first (31st); provided that any member
of the Board of Aldermen may supplement the financial interest
statement to report additional interest acquired after December
thirty-first (31st) of the covered year until the date of filing of the
financial interest statement.
3. Every candidate required to file a personal financial disclosure
statement shall file no later than fourteen (14) days after the close
of filing at which the candidate seeks nomination or election of
nomination by caucus. The time period of this statement shall cover
the twelve (12) months prior to the closing date of filing for
candidacy.
Section
150.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
155.010
AO:70
Section 155.010. Creation of Commission. [R.O. 2006 §180.010;
Ord. No. 2073 §1, 6-16-1997]
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Tax Increment
Financing Commission of the City of Fenton, Missouri" (the "Commission").
Section 155.020. Board Authorizes Certain Powers. [R.O. 2006
§180.020; Ord. No. 2073 §2, 6-16-1997]
The Board of Aldermen hereby authorizes and approves the exercise by the
Commission of only those powers that are required by the Real Property
Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act to be exercised by the
Commission.
Section 155.030. Appointments. [R.O. 2006 §180.030; Ord. No. 2073
§3, 6-16-1997]
The Mayor is hereby directed to appoint six (6) representatives to the
Commission, with the consent of the majority of the Board of Aldermen.
The appropriate officials of the City are hereby directed to provide notice to
other taxing districts of the establishment of the Commission in the manner
required by the Real Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act.
Chapter 160
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF CERTAIN
ACTIONS
Section 160.005. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
AGGRIEVED — A person directly impacted by an action or decision of the
City such that the person would have standing in a court of law to challenge
the action.
BOARD — The Board of Administrative Review established herein.
FINAL ACTION —
UNLAWFUL — Any act or omission in violation of any applicable law or
actions that are not authorized by any applicable law.
Section 160.010. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
The administrative review procedures set forth in this Chapter shall apply
to all final actions of any City Officer, employee, board, commission, or the
Any action or decision for which no further review or amendment is
contemplated or apparent, other than through this procedure, and
1.
Any temporary or interim action or failure to act for which immediate
irreparable injury will occur prior to any formal action being taken.
2.
Section
155.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
160.010
AO:71
Board of Aldermen that are claimed by an aggrieved party to be unlawful
or an unconstitutional taking of property without compensation; provided,
however, that this Chapter shall not apply to appeals of zoning decisions
required to be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section
89.090, RSMo. The City shall not intentionally take any action that is
unlawful nor shall it unconstitutionally deprive property owners of real
property interests without just compensation. This Chapter shall be
construed to provide for the objective and fair review of claims by aggrieved
persons asserting unlawful actions of the City or unconstitutional
deprivation of vested real property rights or interests, without just
compensation. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the
ability of the City to lawfully fulfill its duties and functions.
Section 160.020. Establishment of, and Review by, Administrative
Review Board — Exhaustion Required. [Ord. No. 3521 §2,
6-25-2015]
Section 160.030. Review Procedure. [Ord. No. 3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
A. There is hereby established the Administrative Review Board to review
petitions pursuant to this Code of Administrative Procedure. The Board
of Aldermen hereby designates the Board of Adjustment of the City of
Fenton to act as the Board of Administrative Review (hereinafter
referred to as "the Board") to hear and consider petitions within the
scope of this Code. The Board may establish additional procedures to
fulfill the purposes of this Chapter.
B. Any aggrieved party shall petition to the Board for a review of any final
decision of any City Officer, employee, board, commission, or the Board
of Aldermen. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the review
procedures herein shall be exhausted before any action may be filed in
any court against the City or its officers, employees, boards, officials or
commissions.
A. The following procedures for review of a final action shall be followed:
1. Final decision. The person petitioning for review shall obtain a final
decision before requesting review.
2. Petition for review. Within ten (10) days from the date of the final
decision, the person requesting the review shall file, in the office of
the City Clerk, a written petition for review of that decision. A copy
shall also be filed with the City Attorney.
3. Initial review of decision. The City Clerk, in consultation with the
City Attorney where appropriate, shall review each petition and
determine whether it seeks review authorized by this Code. In the
event that the petition does not allege a review authorized by this
Code, the petition shall be dismissed upon direction of the City
Clerk.
Section
160.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
160.030
AO:72
Section 160.040. Expedited Review Procedure. [Ord. No. 3521 §2,
6-25-2015]
In the event that the aggrieved party claims irreparable harm will occur
unless immediate review is granted, the party may request expedited
review, upon facts justifying such action alleged by affidavit, whereupon
the Board, if it determines it is appropriate, shall shorten the time for
submissions and review.
Section 160.050. Application Information — Submittal. [Ord. No.
3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
4. Stay of final action. Upon request of the petitioner, the Board may
stay pending its review the final action of any decision, other than a
decision of the Board of Aldermen, upon a showing:
a. The petitioner has a substantial likelihood of demonstrating
that the final action to be reviewed is unlawful or an
unconstitutional taking,
b. Irreparable harm if such stay is not issued, and
c. The public interest would not be harmed by issuance of such
stay. Where the final action is a decision of the Board of
Aldermen, the petitioner may seek such stay from the Board of
Aldermen, whereupon in its discretion, such stay may be
granted pending review by the Board.
5. Hearing date. The Board shall set a time to review the decision that
gave rise to the petition as soon as reasonably practical and shall
provide public notice of such meeting. The Board shall hear and
consider the evidence related to and submitted by the petitioner,
the City or other interested parties in the discretion of the Board.
The hearing shall include written submittals.
6. Hearing requirements. Unless a hearing or the requirements
herein are waived by petitioner, each hearing shall provide a record
of the proceedings (by audio, video, stenographic, or other reliable
means of recording capable of transcription) and shall permit the
parties to introduce evidence under oath, and shall provide for
cross-examination, when requested. The formal hearing
requirements herein shall be deemed waived if not affirmatively
requested by petitioner in its petition.
7. Removal. The Board of Aldermen or the Mayor may remove any
matter directly to the Board for review by filing notice with the
Board to such effect.
8. Exception. Nothing herein regarding hearing requirements shall
prevent summary decision on any petition where there is no
genuine dispute as to the relevant facts.
Section
160.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
160.050
AO:73
A. Initial Filing Information. With the petition for review, or within seven
(7) days prior to the date of hearing, the petitioner shall submit the
following by affidavit:
1. The name of the petitioner requesting review;
2. The precise final action to be reviewed, including the date, the
decision maker, and copies of all documentation of the decision;
3. If injury to an interest relating to real property is claimed, the legal
description of the property and the name and business address of
the current owner of the property; the form of ownership, i.e.,
whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation,
partnership, joint venture or other; and if owned by other than a
real person, the name and address of all partners or shareholders
owning ten percent (10%) or more of the outstanding shares;
4. A detailed description of the factual and legal grounds for the claim
that the final action is unlawful or constitutes an unconstitutional
taking, without just compensation; and
5. A description of the protectable right or property interest claimed
to be affected, including a statement of any claimed or threatened
damages and the basis for such computation.
B. Supplemental Information. If the Board determines that additional
information is needed, the Board may further require legal briefing or
such other information to be submitted by affidavit as may be deemed
necessary for adequate and prompt review. With regard to claims of
unconstitutional takings, the Board also requests:
1. The evidence and documentation as to the value of the property
interest claimed taken, including the date and cost at the date the
property was acquired. This material should include any evidence
of the value of that same property before and after the alleged
unconstitutional taking; the name of the party from whom
purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person
requesting a review; and the party from whom the property was
acquired;
2. The terms, including sale price, of any previous purchase or sale of
a full or partial interest in the property during the three (3) years
prior to the date of application;
3. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three
(3) years prior to the date of application;
4. The assessed value of, and ad valorem taxes on, the property for
the previous three (3) years;
5. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans
secured by the property, including the name of the mortgagee or
Section
160.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
160.050
AO:74
Section 160.060. Reviewing Guidelines. [Ord. No. 3521 §2,
6-25-2015]
The Board shall review the facts and information presented by the
petitioner and determine if the final action is unlawful or constitutes an
unconstitutional taking without just compensation. In doing so, the City
Attorney shall serve as legal counsel and shall be consulted. The Board shall
review the facts in light of the applicable City, State, and Federal law. An
affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) members of the Board shall be
required to support any decision.
Section 160.070. Time For Final Decision. [Ord. No. 3521 §2,
6-25-2015]
If the Board fails to hear and decide the petition within thirty (30) days after
the filing of the petition, the final action of the City Officer, employee, board,
commission, or the Board of Aldermen shall be deemed to be submitted
to the Board of Aldermen without recommendation pursuant to Section
160.080(A); provided, however, the Board may extend the time to reach
a decision, not exceeding an additional one hundred twenty (120) days
following the receipt of the information required pursuant to this Chapter,
if prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period, the Board notifies the
petitioner, in writing, of such extension.
Section 160.080. Results of Review. [Ord. No. 3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
lender; current interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of
the loan and other significant provisions, including, but not limited
to, the right of purchasers to assume the loan;
6. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers
received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
7. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility
of development or utilization of the property;
8. For income-producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
9. Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded
liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
10. Such additional information reasonably necessary, in the Board's
opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning the nature of and the
value of the alleged unconstitutional taking.
A. After completing the review, the Board shall make a determination
regarding the petition and, if determined to be necessary and
appropriate, make a recommendation to the Board of Aldermen or the
appropriate officer, employee, board or commission. The evidence
Section
160.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
160.080
AO:75
Section 160.090. Review Advisory. [Ord. No. 3521 §2, 6-25-2015]
The decisions of the Board rendered pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the City's liability for any claimed unlawful action or
unconstitutional taking of a vested property interest. The decision of the
Board rendered pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter is not admissible
in court for any purpose other than to demonstrate that the petitioner has
exhausted the requisite administrative remedies, and in no event shall any
recommended compensation be admissible into evidence. The decision of
the Board of Aldermen pursuant to the preceding Section shall be deemed
the final decision for purposes of judicial review.
Chapter 200
POLICE PROTECTION SERVICES
Section 200.010. Contract For Police Services. [R.O. 2006 §200.010;
Ord. No. 1864 §1, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 1910 §1, 11-20-1995]
The City of Fenton, through a contract with St. Louis County, Missouri,
authorizes the Department of Police of St. Louis County to provide fullservice
Police protection and services including local patrols and traffic
supervision within the Fenton City limits. All Police personnel shall be
employees of St. Louis County and shall be under direct supervision of
St. Louis County Police Department. The terms "Police" and "Policemen"
as used herein shall refer to Law Enforcement Officers. The term Police
Department or City Police Department as used herein shall refer to St. Louis
County Police Department/City of Fenton Precinct. The Commanding Officer
appointed to this position shall be the highest ranking St. Louis County
Police Officer assigned to the City of Fenton or his/her designee.
Section 200.020. Chief of Police.
The Commanding Officer of the Fenton Precinct shall be the Chief of Police
for the City of Fenton and shall perform all duties required of the Marshal
by law.
before the Board shall be submitted to the Board of Aldermen for its
determination.
B. The Board of Aldermen shall have thirty (30) days to take action on the
petition or recommendation of the Board, unless extended by the Board
of Aldermen for cause. No petition shall become final for purposes of
judicial review of the action subject to review until the effective date of
Board of Aldermen action on the petition, or upon expiration of the
review period after the petition is submitted to the Board of Aldermen.
Section
160.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
200.030
AO:76
Section 200.030. Police Shall Enforce Ordinances. [R.O. 2006
§200.030; Ord. No. 1864 §1, 5-22-1995]
It is the duty of all Policemen to acquaint themselves and to be familiar with
the ordinances of the City of Fenton and any amendments thereto and they
are hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances. They are authorized to
make arrests, serve summons and report violations.
Section 200.040. Complaint, Information, Summons and Uniform
Citation — Form, Use, Records and Reports. [R.O. 2006 §200.040;
Ord. No. 1864 §1, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 1910 §1, 11-20-1995]
A. In traffic cases, the complaint or information and summons shall be in
the form known as the "Uniform Citation" as set out in Supreme Court
Rules, as adapted to the City of Fenton. All other complaints or
information used by the City of Fenton shall be approved by the City
Attorney for the City of Fenton. The procedures for handling and
disposal of citations and other complaints shall follow the Supreme
Court Rules of the State of Missouri, and shall be further regulated as
follows:
1. Responsible to Municipal Court. The disposition of all such Uniform
Citations shall be the responsibility of the Fenton Municipal Court.
2. No citation to be altered. Once a Uniform Citation has been filled
out and executed by a Police Officer, the citation so executed shall
not in any circumstances be amended, altered, added to or
subtracted from by the Police Officer. Upon execution, the Uniform
Citation shall be immediately transmitted to the Municipal Court
Clerk, and in no wise shall the issued and executed Uniform
Citation be deposited in the Municipal Clerk's office later than
seventy-two (72) hours after issuance. Should any officer have
comment or recommendation regarding any Uniform Citation
issued and executed, the officer shall cause same to be transmitted
to or communicated with the Prosecuting Attorney. Nothing herein
shall prevent the filing of more detailed information or amended
information by the Prosecution Attorney.
3. Improper disposition. Any person who improperly disposes, or who
solicits, or aids in the disposition of a Uniform Citation in any
manner, other than authorized by the Court or this Section, shall be
proceeded against for criminal contempt in the manner provided by
the Supreme Court Rules.
4. Other complaints. All citizen complaints and other complaints
involving Municipal Ordinance Violations shall be turned over to
the Municipal Court Clerk within the next business day by the
citizen or other persons. The Prosecuting Attorney shall then
determine whether said complaint shall be prosecuted. The proper
disposition of citizen and other complaints shall be subject to the
requirements of this Section.
Section
200.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.040
AO:77
Chapter 205
OFFENSES
5. Violations of State Statutes. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
affect the disposition of matters that are violations of State law,
except that any Uniform Citation issued as a State Statute violation
shall likewise be subject to the provisions of this Section except
that transmission shall be made to the proper County authority.
Section
200.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
200.040
AO:78
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 205.005. Definitions.
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.056,
RSMo.
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE — Has the meaning specified in
Section 556.051, RSMo.
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints or who makes prints from negatives or slides for compensation. The
term "commercial film and photographic print processor" shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
CONFINEMENT —
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
A person is in confinement when he/she is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders his/her release;
He/she is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine him/
her authorizes his/her release without guard and without condition
that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
A person is not in confinement if:
a. He/she is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
He/she is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport him/her to or from a place of
confinement.
b.
2.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor;
1.
Section
205.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.005
AO:79
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016,
RSMo.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted
forcible sodomy if physical injury results, forcible rape, forcible sodomy,
kidnapping, murder in the second degree, assault of a Law Enforcement
Officer in the first degree, domestic assault in the first degree, elder abuse
in the first degree, robbery in the first degree, statutory rape in the first
degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at
the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the offense, statutory
sodomy in the first degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12)
years of age at the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the
offense, and abuse of a child pursuant to Subdivision (2) of Subsection (3)
of Section 568.060, RSMo., and child kidnapping.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy, blackjack or metal
knuckles.
FELONY — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Means either:
INCAPACITATED — That physical or mental condition, temporary or
permanent, in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature
of his/her conduct or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act. A
person is not "incapacitated" with respect to an act committed upon him/
her if he/she became unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act after consenting
to the act.
INFRACTION — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.021, RSMo.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
or intoxication is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable
to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the
conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear
of death, serious physical injury or kidnapping of himself/herself or
another person.
2.
Section
205.005
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.005
AO:80
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Has the meaning specified in Section
569.010, RSMo.
KNOWINGLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
MISDEMEANOR — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
OFFENSE — Any felony, misdemeanor or infraction.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical
condition.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of an offense or a crime be held.
POSSESS OR POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of
an object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession if
he/she has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and convenient
control. A person has constructive possession if he/she has the power and
the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or control over the
object either directly or through another person or persons. Possession may
also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession of an object,
possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession of an object,
possession is joint.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of his/her
employment, any person appointed to a position with any government of
this State, or any person elected to a position with any government of this
State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators, jurors, members of the
judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RECKLESSLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RITUAL OR CEREMONY — An act or series of acts performed by two (2) or
more persons as part of an established or prescribed pattern of activity.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. "Serious
emotional injury" shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
Section
205.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.005
AO:81
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual
intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the breast of a female in an
act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of the genitals or anus of any person, or
the breast of any female person, or any such touching through the clothing
for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL PERFORMANCE — Any performance, or part thereof, which
includes sexual conduct by a child who is less than seventeen (17) years of
age.
VOLUNTARY ACT — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.011, RSMo.
Section
205.005
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.005
AO:82
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against The Person
Section 205.010. Assault.
Section 205.015. Domestic Assault.6
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a deadly weapon;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to another person;
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative; or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with an
incapacitated person, as defined in Section 475.010, RSMo., which
a reasonable person, who is not incapacitated, would consider
offensive or provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
family or household member or an adult who is or has been in a
continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the
actor as defined in Section 455.010, RSMo.; and
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to such family or household member;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument;
3. The person purposely places such family or household member in
apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household
member;
6. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.015
AO:83
Section 205.020. Assault of A Law Enforcement Officer.
Section 205.030. Harassment.
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or
household member knowing the other person will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such family or household member by unreasonably and
substantially restricting or limiting such family or household
member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or
transportation for the purpose of isolation.
A. A person commits the offense of assault of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole Officer if:
1. Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a Law
Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole
Officer;
2. Such person purposely places a Law Enforcement Officer,
Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole Officer in
apprehension of immediate physical injury;
3. Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with a Law Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or
Probation and Parole Officer without the consent of the Law
Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole
Officer.
B. As used in this Section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or
volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or
emergency medical technician as defined in Subdivisions (15), (16) and
(17) of Section 190.100, RSMo.
A. A person commits the offense of harassment if for the purpose of
frightening or disturbing another person he/she:
1. Communicates in writing or by telephone a threat to commit any
felony;
2. Makes a telephone call or communicates in writing and uses coarse
language offensive to one of average sensibility;
3. Makes a telephone call anonymously; or
4. Makes repeated telephone calls.
Section
205.015
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.040
AO:84
Section 205.040. False Imprisonment.7
A person commits the offense of false imprisonment if he/she knowingly
restrains another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere
substantially with his/her liberty.
Section 205.050. Endangering The Welfare of A Child.8
Section 205.055. Leaving A Child Unattended in A Motor Vehicle.9
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if:
1. He/she with criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old;
2. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years old to engage in any conduct which causes or
tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph
(d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years old, he/she
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
4. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years of age to enter into any room, building or
other structure which is a public nuisance as defined in Section
195.130, RSMo.; or
5. He/she operates a vehicle in violation of Subdivisions (2) or (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.024, RSMo., or Subdivision (4) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.060, RSMo., or Sections 342.020 or
342.030 of this Code, while a child less than seventeen (17) years
old is present in the vehicle.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
7. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
8. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
9. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.055
AO:85
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURY — Physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor or any
motorbus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven
on fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child ten (10) years of age or
less unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures another
person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the motor
vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
Section
205.055
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.055
AO:86
ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration of Justice
Section 205.060. Concealing An Offense.10
Section 205.070. Hindering Prosecution.11
Section 205.080. Refusal To Identify As A Witness.
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he/she has witnessed any portion of an offense or crime, or of any other
incident resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, upon
demand by a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his/
her official duties, he/she refuses to report or gives a false report of his/her
name and present address to such officer.
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if:
1. He/she confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. He/she accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for conduct constituting an offense he/she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person;
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law;
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
10.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
11.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.090
AO:87
Section 205.090. Disturbing A Judicial Proceeding.
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
to influence a judicial proceeding, he/she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding.
Section 205.100. Tampering With A Witness — Tampering With A
Victim.12
Section 205.110. Improper Communication.
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness if, with
purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to disobey a
subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself/herself or avoid
subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information
or documents, or to testify falsely, he/she:
1. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property;
2. Uses force, threats or deception;
3. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect,
upon such witness; or
4. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy.
B. A person commits the offense of "victim tampering" if, with purpose to
do so, he/she prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent or dissuade
any person who has been a victim of any offense or crime or a person
who is acting on behalf of any such victim from:
1. Making any report of such victimization to any Peace Officer or
State, local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer or prosecuting
agency or to any judge;
2. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought and
prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof; or
3. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
12.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.110
AO:88
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 205.120. False Impersonation.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation.
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
Social Security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction, misdemeanor or felony that contains the first and last
name, date of birth and Social Security number, or a substantial
number of identifying factors or characteristics to that of such
other person as to cause such other person to be identified as the
actual person arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney, bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
Section
205.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.120
AO:89
Section 205.130. False Reports.
Section 205.135. Obedience To Police and Fire Department
Officials.
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
Section 205.140. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.13
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in a crime or offense;
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that a crime or
offense has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the actor retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention or stop if, knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making
an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or
vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a Law Enforcement
Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully
stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer
from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
13.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.140
AO:90
Section 205.150. Escape or Attempted Escape From Custody.14
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or attempted escape
from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any crime or
offense, he/she escapes or attempts to escape from custody.
Section 205.155. Interference With Legal Process.
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to arrests, stops or detentions with or without
warrants and to arrests, stops or detentions for any offense, crime,
infraction or ordinance violation.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person
continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or
should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or
should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law
enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the
purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any
process, he/she interferes with or obstructs such person.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant or other process or order of a court.
14.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.155
AO:91

ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 205.160. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.
Section 205.170. Littering.
A person commits the offense of littering if he/she throws or places or
causes to be thrown or placed any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks,
hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish of any kind, nature or
description on the right-of-way of any public road or State highway or on or
in any of the waters in this City or on the banks of any stream or on any land
or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board, department,
agency or commission thereof or on any land or water owned, operated
or leased by the Federal Government or the City or on any private real
property owned by another without his/her consent.
Section 205.180. Littering Via Carcasses.
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of airtight icebox if he/
she abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises
under his/her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or
more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a
door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable
of securing such door or lid without rendering such equipment
harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other
hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. If any person or persons shall put any dead animal, carcass or part
thereof, the offal or any other filth into any well, spring, brook, branch,
creek, pond or lake, every person so offending shall, on conviction
thereof, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. If any person shall remove or cause to be removed and placed in or near
any public road or highway, or upon premises not his/her own, or in any
river, stream or watercourse any dead animal, carcass or part thereof,
or other nuisance to the annoyance of the citizens of this City, or any of
them, every person so offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
for every offense not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and if such nuisance be not
Section
205.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.180
AO:93
Section 205.190. Corrupting or Diverting Water Supply.
Whoever willfully or maliciously poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the
water of a well, spring, brook or reservoir used for domestic or municipal
purposes, or whoever willfully or maliciously diverts, dams up and holds
back from its natural course and flow any spring, brook or other water
supply for domestic or municipal purposes, after said water supply shall
have once been taken for use by any person or persons, corporation, City for
their use, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by
imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, and shall be liable to the party injured
for three (3) times the actual damage sustained, to be recovered by suit at
law.
Section 205.200. Use of Fireworks. [R.O. 2006 §220.010; Ord. No.
1226 §1, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 2500 §1, 8-19-2002]
removed within three (3) days thereafter, it shall be deemed a second
(2nd) offense against the provisions of this Section.
A. The term "fireworks", as used in this Section, means any combustible or
explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or
articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation and includes but is
not limited to: blank cartridges; toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or
toy guns in which explosives are used; balloons which require fire
underneath to propel them; fire crackers; torpedoes; sky rockets;
Roman candles; bombs; colored flares; cylindrical fountains; colored
cone fire; box fire and torches; wheels; magic snakes; cone fountains;
colored mines and shells; aerial bombs; missiles and other devices,
articles or tablets containing any explosives or flammable compound.
The term "fireworks", however, shall not include toy pistols, toy canes,
toy guns or other devices in which paper caps are used containing not
in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain of
explosive compound per cap.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall possess, use, discharge or explode
within the City of Fenton fireworks of any kind whatsoever. Nothing
contained in this Section shall prohibit the sale, possession and use of
blank cartridges for theatrical purposes or signal purposes in athletic
contests or sporting events or by Police or military organizations.
C. Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit any resident,
wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling fireworks at wholesale,
provided the same are delivered or shipped directly outside the
corporate limits of the City.
D. Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit the use of "common
fireworks" and/or "special fireworks", as defined in Section 320.106,
RSMo., for public displays given by any organization or amusement
Section
205.180
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.200
AO:94
Section 205.203. Unlawful To Sell Fireworks. [R.O. 2006 §615.010;
Ord. No. 1135 §1, 9-19-1988]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell fireworks within the City of
Fenton.
park, provided they have first obtained a permit from the City for giving
such public display of "common fireworks" and/or "special fireworks".
E. Permits for the use of "common fireworks" and/or "special fireworks"
for public displays shall be issued by the City Clerk and all applications
for permits shall be addressed to the City Clerk. Before issuing the
permit, the City Clerk shall investigate the application and if he or she
feels that the public safety will not be endangered by such display, he or
she shall issue such permit, but not otherwise. No permit shall be
issued where "common fireworks" and/or "special fireworks" are to be
exploded or ignited within six hundred (600) feet of any church,
hospital, asylum or public school.
Section
205.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.203
AO:95

ARTICLE V
Offenses Against Public Peace
Section 205.205. Peace Disturbance.
Section 205.210. Construction Noise.
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:
1. He/she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another
person or persons by:
a. Loud noise;
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient;
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. He/she is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. Any building, excavation, demolition, grading, alteration or any other
construction that creates noise of any type including, but not limited to,
the actual work, related vehicular traffic, etc., that can be heard beyond
and/or off said construction or work site other than between the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and sunset on weekdays, and between 8:00 A.M. and
sunset on Saturdays and Sundays is prohibited, except in the following
circumstances:
1. In the case of an emergency affecting public health and safety; or
2. The Board of Aldermen may temporarily extend the hours of
construction for a specific project involving not less than fifty (50)
acres after making a determination that the public interest will be
served by the increased number of hours during which
construction might take place and that the impact upon residential
units will be slight when compared to the public benefit of
completing the construction expeditiously.
Section
205.205
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.215
AO:97
Section 205.215. Disturbing Religious Assembly. [R.O. 2006
§215.030; Ord. No. 73 §§5 — 6, 2-20-1961; Ord. No. 2463 §3,
4-15-2002]
Every person who shall within the City of Fenton, Missouri, wilfully,
maliciously, or contemptuously disquiet or disturb any church,
congregation, camp meeting, or other assembly meeting for religious
worship, or when meeting at the place of worship or dispersing therefrom,
or any school or other meeting or assembly of people meeting together for
any lawful purpose whatever, by making a noise or by rude or indecent
behavior, or profane discourse within the place of assembly or so near the
same as to interrupt or disturb the order or solemnity thereof, or who shall
wilfully menace or threaten or assault any person there being, shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 205.220. Drunkenness or Drinking in Certain Places
Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §215.040]
It shall be unlawful for any person in this City to enter any schoolhouse or
church house in which there is an assemblage of people, met for a lawful
purpose, or any courthouse, in a drunken or intoxicated and disorderly
condition, or to drink or offer to drink any intoxicating liquors in the
presence of such assembly of people.
Section 205.223. Reserved.15
Section 205.225. Disorderly Conduct. [R.O. 2006 §215.050; Ord. No.
98 §§1 — 3, 9-18-1961; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
A. "Disorderly conduct" shall consist of begging on the streets or in public
places; going from house to house soliciting alms or funds without a
license or permit; appearing in public places in an intoxicated
condition; using loud or profane language within the hearing of other
persons; cursing or threatening any person or annoying persons with
threats or abusive or foul language; or acting in a threatening manner
towards any person as if to strike or injure him/her in any manner or
with any instrumentality whatsoever; or to lay hands upon, strike, push
or shove any person; fleeing from or evading arrest or questioning by a
Police Officer; resisting or interfering with a Police Officer in the
performance of his/her duties; or trespassing upon private property of
other persons; hindering or obstructing any vehicles upon the public
streets in the City of Fenton; lounging or sleeping in public places or on
the private property of other persons; peeping, peering or spying into
houses or dwelling places occupied by any person or persons, through
doors, windows or otherwise, whether the occupants are within the
premises or not; or making any indecent proposal to any person, or any
lewd or lascivious condition or indecent exposure of person.
15.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 3060 §1, adopted August 27, 2009, repealed section 205.223
"funeral protests prohibited, when — funeral defined" in its entirety.
Section
205.215
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.225
AO:98
Section 205.227. Unlawful Assembly.
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 205.230. Excessive Noise.
No person shall disturb the peace of another by loud noise, speaking,
shouting, singing, playing any radio, "boom box", tape cassette, disc player,
television, audio system, or musical instrument which is plainly audible
more than fifty (50) feet from the source.
Section 205.233. Rioting.16
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
Section 205.235. Obstructing Public Places.
B. Disorderly conduct as herein defined shall be and is hereby prohibited
within the limits of the City of Fenton.
A. Definition. "Public place" shall be defined to mean any place to which
the general public has access and a right of resort for business,
entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a
place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the
front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or remain idle either alone
or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:
1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians;
2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public
16.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.225
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.235
AO:99
Section 205.237. Refusal To Disperse.
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto;
3. Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of
the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of
the building or premises.
C. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this
Section, a Police Officer or any Law Enforcement Officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move
on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this Section.
Section
205.235
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.237
AO:100
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons and Firearms
Section 205.240. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845, and the United
States Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR Section
178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon.
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
Antique firearm is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof.
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
Section
205.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.240
AO:101
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
Section 205.245. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use.17
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use;
17.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.240
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.245
AO:102
2. Sets a spring gun;
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm;
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner;
5. Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon while intoxicated;
6. Openly carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of
lethal use except in Hunting Heritage Protection Areas as defined
in Section 252.243, RSMo.;
7. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board.
B. Subparagraphs (1), (3), (4) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to or affect any of the following:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general
criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of Counties
or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are on or off
duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the law
enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired Peace
Officers, as defined in Subsection (10) of Section 571.030, RSMo.,
and who carry the identification defined in Subsection (11) of
Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person summoned by such officers
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually
engaged in assisting such officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of an offense or crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
Section
205.245
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.245
AO:103
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
Section 44921;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Board of
Police Commissioners under Section 84.340, RSMo.; and
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner.
C. Subparagraphs (1), (5) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section do not
apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a non-functioning
state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not readily accessible
or when such weapons are not readily accessible. Subparagraph (1) of
Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any person twenty-one
(21) years of age or older transporting a concealable firearm in the
passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, so long as such concealable
firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor when the actor is also in
possession of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon for the lawful
pursuit of game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or upon premises over
which the actor has possession, authority or control, or is traveling in a
continuous journey peaceably through this State. Subparagraph (6) of
Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply if the firearm is otherwise
lawfully possessed by a person while traversing school premises for the
purposes of transporting a student to or from school, or possessed by an
adult for the purposes of facilitation of a school-sanctioned firearmrelated
event.
D. Subparagraphs (1), (6), and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
not apply to any person who has a valid concealed carried endorsement
or permit issued pursuant to Section 571.101 to 571.121 RSMo., or a
valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by
another State or political subdivision of another State. However, any
person openly carrying a firearm shall display his or her concealed
carry endorsement or permit upon demand of the law enforcement
officer. [Ord. No. 3485 §1, 12-18-2014]
E. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (5) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act of defense
pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored firearm-related events,
provided the student does not carry a firearm or other weapon readily
capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus, or onto the
Section
205.245
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.245
AO:104
Section 205.250. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair, Sale
of Certain Weapons.18
premises of any other function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by
school officials or the district school board.
A. Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair or
sell:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A machine gun;
4. A gas gun;
5. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
6. A firearm silencer;
7. A switchblade knife;
8. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm; or
9. Knuckles.
B. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if his/her
conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution;
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection;
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise;
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio,
ornament, or keepsake, or to using it in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful dramatic performance; but if the weapon is the
type described in Paragraphs (1), (3) or (5) of Subsection (A) of this
18.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.245
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.250
AO:105
Section 205.252. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 205.255. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.19
Section 205.260. Possession of Concealable Firearm Unlawful For
Certain Persons.20
Section it must be in such a non-functioning condition that it cannot
readily be made operable. No barreled rifle, short-barreled
shotgun, or machine gun may be possessed, manufactured,
transported, repaired or sold as a curio, ornament, or keepsake
unless such person is an importer, manufacturer, dealer, or
collector licensed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the
Gun Control Act of 1968, U.S.C. Title 18, or unless such firearm
is an "antique firearm" as defined in Subsection (3) of Section
571.080, RSMo., or unless such firearm has been designated a
"collectors item" by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the
U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845(a).
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a concealable
firearm if he/she has any concealable firearm in his/her possession and:
1. He/she has pled guilty to or has been convicted of a dangerous
felony, as defined in Section 556.061, RSMo., or of any attempt to
commit a dangerous felony, or of an offense or crime under the laws
of any State or of the United States which, if committed within this
State, would be a dangerous felony, or confined therefor in this
State or elsewhere during the five (5) year period immediately
preceding the date of such possession; or
19.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
20.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.250
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.260
AO:106
Section 205.265. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty For Violation.
2. He/she is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated or
drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally incompetent.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises.
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subdivision shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subdivision are temporarily conducting any business
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in Subsection (B)(1)
of Section 205.245 while within their jurisdiction and on duty, those
persons listed in Subsections (B)(2) and (3) of Section 205.245, or
such other persons who serve in a law enforcement capacity for a
court as may be specified by Supreme Court Rule pursuant to
Subdivision (6) of this Subsection from carrying a concealed
firearm within any of the areas described in this Subdivision.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the
areas listed in this Subdivision shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
Section
205.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.265
AO:107
5. Any meeting of the Board of Aldermen except that nothing in this
Subparagraph shall preclude a member of the body holding a valid
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm at
a meeting of the body which he or she is a member. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of Fenton
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
Fenton. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied entrance
to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of
the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation.
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer for consumption on the premises, which portion is
primarily devoted to that purpose, without the consent of the owner
or manager. The provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to the
licensee of said establishment. The provisions of this Subdivision
shall not apply to any bona fide restaurant open to the general
public having dining facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons
and that receives at least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual
income from the dining facilities by the sale of food. This
Subdivision does not prohibit the possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the establishment and shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. Nothing
in this Subdivision authorizes any individual who has been issued a
concealed carry endorsement to possess any firearm while
intoxicated.
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law.
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the Governing Body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher
education institution or elementary or secondary school facility
shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed
from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
Section
205.265
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.265
AO:108
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subdivision shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license
containing a concealed carry endorsement.
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry endorsement from carrying concealed
firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not
authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry
endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property of
the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the public,
the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on or about
the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in
vehicles owned by the employer.
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
Section
205.265
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.265
AO:109
Section 205.270. Discharging Air Gun, Etc..
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of this City to discharge
any BB gun which expels a projectile by means of a spring, air or any other
means, paintball gun or air gun or shall shoot any pebble, bullet, slug, arrow
or other hard substance by means of a sling, crossbow, rubber band or bow
or any other means.
Section 205.280. Exceptions To Prohibitions On The Discharge of
Weapons. [R.O. 2006 §220.020(C — E); Ord. No. 192 §§1 — 5,
1-17-1966; Ord. No. 271 §1, 8-18-1969; Ord. No. 1656 §1, 2-18-1993;
Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry endorsement issued
pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial to the
premises or removal from the premises. If such person refuses to
leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned, such person
may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st) offense. If a second (2nd)
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six (6) month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third (3rd) citation for a similar violation is
issued within one (1) year of the first (1st) citation such person
shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Upon conviction of charges arising from a citation
issued pursuant to this Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of
the County which issued the certificate of qualification for a
concealed carry endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry
endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.060 of this Code of Ordinances.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to State law to fail to carry the
concealed carry endorsement at all times the person is carrying a
concealed firearm, or to fail to display the concealed carry endorsement
upon the request of any Peace Officer.
A. Provisions of Sections 205.245(A)(3) and 205.270 shall not apply to any
Police target or Police shooting range nor to any club or individual
Section
205.265
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.280
AO:110
Section 205.285. Martial Arts Weapons. [R.O. 2006 §220.070; Ord.
No. 1622 §1, 9-21-1992; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
target, trap, skeet or practice shooting range which has received a
permit from the City of Fenton, nor to the discharge of firearms where
necessary to protect life, livestock, crops or other property.
B. Special permits for individual target, trap, skeet or practice shooting
range shall be issued only by the Board of Aldermen of the City of
Fenton, Missouri, and subject to such terms, conditions and permit fees
as it may from time to time impose.
C. The discharge of firearms in connection with any turkey shoots or other
charitable event may be authorized by the Board of Aldermen. Prior to
the issuance of said Special Permit, written permission stating firearms
may be discharged on the premises, executed by the owner of the
premises upon which firearms are to be discharged, shall be obtained
and presented to the City Clerk.
A. It is hereby prohibited for any person or individual to engage in the sale
or purchase or to have on their person or in their possession an object
or item known as a Nunchaku.
B. A "Nunchaku" is hereby defined as follows:
Nunchaku or any other similar flailing instrument consisting of two (2)
or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to
swing freely, which instrument may also be known as a "Nunchuck or
Nun Chanka, Shuriken fighting chain or any weapon of like kind.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be constructed or interpreted to
prohibit the use of said Nunchaku at a regularly scheduled or regularly
held class teaching the martial arts; further to the degree said school
must acquire or possess said object for their students, said acquisition
or possession shall be legal, for use only upon the school premises.
D. The sale, purchase or possession of an object or item known as a
throwing star as herein defined is prohibited.
E. "Throwing star" is any instrument, without handles consisting of a
metal plate having three (3) or more radiating points with one (1) or
more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross
star, diamond or other geometric shape that can be used as a weapon
for throwing.
Section
205.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.285
AO:111

ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property
Section 205.290. Tampering.21
Section 205.300. Property Damage.22
Section 205.310. Claim of Right.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another;
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle;
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), proof that a
meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the
person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the
electric, gas, steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects
described in paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), shall be sufficient to
support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact
from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a
violation of such subdivision by the person or persons who use or
receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if:
1. He/she knowingly damages property of another; or
2. He/she damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
21.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
22.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.310
AO:113
Section 205.320. Trespass in The First Degree.23
Section 205.330. Trespass in The Second Degree.
Section 205.335. Trespass of A School Bus.
A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he/she knowingly
and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any school bus.
Section 205.340. Reckless Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding when he/
she knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly
damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another.
Section 205.350. Negligent Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding when he/
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property of another by fire
or explosion.
Section 205.360. Stealing.24
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/she
knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a
building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
B. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if he/she
enters unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of
absolute liability.
B. Trespass in the second degree is an infraction.
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he/she appropriates
property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him/her
23.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
24.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.310
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.360
AO:114
Section 205.365. Theft of Motor Fuel.
Section 205.370. Receiving Stolen Property.25
thereof, either without his/her consent or by means of deceit or
coercion.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution pursuant to
this Section on the issue of the requisite knowledge or belief of the
alleged stealer that:
1. He/she failed or refused to pay for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house;
2. He/she gave in payment for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house a check or negotiable paper on
which payment was refused;
3. He/she left the hotel, restaurant, inn or boarding house with the
intent to not pay for property or services;
4. He/she surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his/her
baggage from a hotel, inn or boarding house; or
5. He/she, with intent to cheat or defraud a retailer, possesses, uses,
utters, transfers, makes, alters, counterfeits or reproduces a retail
sales receipt, price tag or universal price code label or possesses,
with intent to cheat or defraud, the device that manufactures
fraudulent receipts or universal price code labels.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
205.360 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
A. A person commits the offense of receiving stolen property if, for the
purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he/she
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it has
been stolen or believing that it has been stolen.
25.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.370
AO:115
Section 205.372. Regulations On Businesses Purchasing Precious
Metals, Precious or Semi-Precious Stones and/or Jewelry. [Ord. No.
3243 §1, 1-26-2012]
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution
pursuant to this Section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of
the alleged receiver that:
1. He/she was found in possession or control of other property stolen
on separate occasions from two (2) or more persons;
2. He/she received other stolen property in another transaction within
the year preceding the transaction charged;
3. He/she acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he/
she knew was far below its reasonable value; or
4. He/she obtained control over stolen property knowing the property
to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce a person to believe the property was stolen.
A. Any business offering payment for the purchase of gold, silver or other
precious metal, or precious or semi-precious stones and/or jewelry
shall, prior to accepting any such items:
1. Make a copy of the seller's driver's license or, if the seller has no
driver's license, a copy of another government-issued form of
identification;
2. Take a photograph of the article(s) being purchased;
3. Fill out a receipt or record for the transaction, which shall include
the seller's name, address, driver's license number, and phone
number, and the date and time of the transaction. If such
information is contained in the copy of the seller's identification
and/or photograph(s) taken of the article(s) being purchased, such
copy and photograph(s) shall be deemed a sufficient record of the
transaction.
B. Unless already provided to a Law Enforcement Officer, the foregoing
photographs, documents and information shall be maintained by the
business for a period of one (1) year from the date of the transaction.
No business shall refuse to deliver such documents and information to
any Law Enforcement Officer making a request for such photographs,
documents and information within one (1) year from the date of any
transaction.
C. It shall be unlawful for any business that purchases gold, silver or other
precious metal, or precious or semi-precious stones and/or jewelry to
sell, trade, melt down, or in any way dispose of, alter or destroy any
such items until forty-eight (48) hours after the time of the transaction.
Upon written notice that Law Enforcement Officers have reason to
Section
205.370
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.372
AO:116
Section 205.375. Financial Exploitation of The Elderly and
Disabled.26
believe an item has been stolen, the business shall retain such item for
an additional ten (10) days.
D. The requirements of this Section are in addition to any other
requirements on businesses found elsewhere in the Fenton Municipal
Code.
E. Violations of this Section shall be punishable by the general punishment
provisions set forth in Section 100.060 of the Fenton Municipal Code.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person if such person knowingly and by deception,
intimidation or force obtains control over the elderly or disabled
person's property with the intent to permanently deprive the elderly or
disabled person of the use, benefit or possession of his/her property
thereby benefiting such person or detrimentally affecting the elderly or
disabled person. Financial exploitation of an elderly or disabled person
is a misdemeanor if the value of the property is less than fifty dollars
($50.00).
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
DECEPTION — A misrepresentation or concealment of material fact
relating to the terms of a contract or agreement entered into with the
elderly or disabled person or to the existing or pre-existing condition of
any of the property involved in such contract or agreement or the use or
employment of any misrepresentation, false pretense or false promise
in order to induce, encourage or solicit the elderly or disabled person
to enter into a contract or agreement.
"Deception" includes:
Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true.
1.
Failure to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed.
2.
Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved.
3.
Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid or is or is not a matter of official record.
4.
Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
5.
26.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.372
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.375
AO:117
Section 205.380. Fraudulent Use of A Credit or Debit Device.27
DISABLED PERSON — A person with a mental, physical or
developmental disability that substantially impairs the person's ability
to provide adequately for the person's care or protection.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
INTIMIDATION — A threat of physical or emotional harm to an elderly
or disabled person, or the communication to an elderly or disabled
person that he/she will be deprived of food and nutrition, shelter,
prescribed medication, or medical care and treatment.
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good faith effort to assist the elderly or
disabled person in the management of his/her property, but through no
fault of his/her own has been unable to provide such assistance.
E. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property, and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly or disabled
person has become accustomed at the time of such actions.
F. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person that the accused reasonably believed that the victim
was not an elderly or disabled person.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if the person uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged;
2. The device has been revoked or canceled;
3. For any other reason his/her use of the device is unauthorized; or
4. Uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of paying
property taxes and knowingly cancels said charges or payment
without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this Section if a person cancels said charges or payment after
obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
27.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.375
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.390
AO:118
Section 205.390. Deceptive Business Practice.
Section 205.400. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent To Deprive Lawful Owner.28
Section 205.410. Failure To Return Rented Personal Property —
Enforcement Procedure — Penalty — Venue.29
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession he/she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers or exposes for sale or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any commodity or service;
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he/she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities; or
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit.
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
28.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
29.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.410
AO:119
A. A person commits the offense of failing to return leased or rented
property if, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, he/she
purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to the
place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing
for the leasing or renting of such personal property. In addition, any
person who has leased or rented personal property of another, who
conceals the property from the owner or who otherwise sells, pawns,
loans, abandons or gives away the leased or rented property is guilty of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. The provisions
of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and rental agreements
including, but not limited to, contracts which provide the consumer
options to buy the leased or rented personal property, lease-purchase
agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the purpose of determining
if a violation of this Section has occurred, leasing contracts which
provide options to buy the merchandise are owned by the owner of the
property until such time as the owner endorses the sale and transfer of
ownership of the leased property to the lessee.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the offense of failing to return leased
or rented property when a person who has leased or rented personal
property of another willfully fails to return or make arrangements
acceptable with the lessor to return the personal property to its owner
at the owner's place of business within ten (10) days after proper notice
following the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, except that if
the motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. Where the
leased or rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not
been returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the
lease or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law
enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor
vehicle, and the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor
vehicle to be put into any appropriate State and local computer system
listing stolen motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops
such a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor
that he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and
its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes.
Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such
property has not been returned within the ten (10) day period
prescribed in this Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the
failure to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and
such law enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person
who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this
Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
C. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
Section
205.410
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.410
AO:120
Section 205.415. Passing Bad Checks.30
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
D. Proper notice by the lessor shall consist of a written demand addressed
and mailed by certified or registered mail to the lessee at the address
given at the time of making the lease or rental agreement. The notice
shall contain a statement that the failure to return the property may
subject the lessee to criminal prosecution.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner shall be
guilty of property damage pursuant to Section 205.300 in addition to
being in violation of this Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when:
1. With purpose to defraud, the person makes, issues or passes a
check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. The person makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight
order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission
of account information for the payment of money, knowing that
there are insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for
the payment of such check, sight order or other form of
presentment involving the transmission of account information in
full and all other checks, sight orders or other forms of
presentment involving the transmission of account information
upon such funds then outstanding, or that there is no such account
or no drawee and fails to pay the check or sight order or other form
of presentment involving the transmission of account information
within ten (10) days after receiving actual notice in writing that it
has not been paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the
drawee or because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (A) of this Section, "actual
notice in writing" means notice of the non-payment which is actually
received by the defendant. Such notice may include the service of
summons or warrant upon the defendant for the initiation of the
prosecution of the check or checks which are the subject matter of the
prosecution if the summons or warrant contains information of the ten
30.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.415
AO:121
Section 205.420. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect By Merchant
— Liability Presumption.
(10) day period during which the instrument may be paid and that
payment of the instrument within such ten (10) day period will result
in dismissal of the charges. The requirement of notice shall also be
satisfied for written communications which are tendered to the
defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
Section
205.415
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.422
AO:122
Section 205.422. Possession of Prohibited Theft Devices.
It shall be unlawful to possess any theft detection shielding device, theft
detection device remover or other tool, instrument, article, box or bag
adapted, modified, constructed, designed or commonly used for committing
or facilitating offenses involving theft or shoplifting, with the intent to use
such item in committing a theft, stealing or shoplifting, or with knowledge
that some person has the intent to use the same in committing a theft,
stealing or shoplifting.
Section 205.423. Riding Motorcycles or Horses On Private Property.
[R.O. 2006 §225.090; Ord. No. 393 §§1 — 3, 10-20-1975; Ord. No.
2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
Section 205.425. Concealing Dangerous Object in Food Stuffs
Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §225.100; Ord. No. 644 §1, 5-16-1983; Ord.
No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
No person shall place or insert razor blades, fishhooks, or any foreign object
that could be detrimental to the person consuming or utilizing food stuffs,
or similar dangerous objects in food stuffs or in any objects resembling
edible objects, within the access of any person not aware of such insertion,
or any person that might be endangered by such insertion. No person
shall knowingly distribute, offer for distribution or possess with intent to
distribute any food stuffs or apparently edible articles with such insertions.
Section 205.427. Regulations of Pawnbrokers. [R.O. 2006 §225.120;
Ord. No. 1600 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1947 §1, 3-18-1996; Ord. No.
2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
A. No person shall operate a motorcycle or mini-bike on private property
without the written consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
B. No person shall ride or in any manner use a horse on private property
without the written consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
A. Every pawnshop or person who operates as a pawnbroker in the City of
Fenton, Missouri, shall install a proper camera and shall use the camera
to photograph every person and every pawn ticket given to such person
in connection with all loans and purchases of articles affected or made
by him/her, and to make such photographs available to any Law
Enforcement Officer upon request. No pawnbroker shall purchase or
accept any article of property as collateral or security unless he/she
shall make a photograph of the person from whom such article of
property is being received, along with a receipt or pawn ticket given to
such person; nor shall any pawnbroker refuse to deliver such
photograph to any Law Enforcement Officer upon request in connection
with a specific item of stolen property, within one (1) year following the
date such photograph was taken.
Section
205.422
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.427
AO:123
B. Every pawnshop or person who operates as a pawnbroker in the City of
Fenton shall require two (2) forms of identification to be shown to them
by each person pledging or pawning any goods, articles or other things
to the pawnbroker. One (1) of the two (2) forms of identification must
include the residence address of the person so pawning. The two (2)
forms of identification shall be two (2) of the following: driver's license,
social security card, utility bill, employee or student identification card,
credit card, birth certificate or a civic, union or professional association
membership card.
C. The Police Department of the City shall provide a form to the
pawnbroker in which there shall be recorded in the English language, a
description of all pledged goods bearing a serial number or
identification number if reasonably available. The serial number or
identification number shall be properly and legibly recorded on the
form provided. The form shall include identifying information as
provided for in Subsection (B) of this Section.
D. As authorized in Chapter 367, Section 031, Subsection 1, Subdivision 2,
RSMo., every pawnshop or person who operates as a pawnbroker in the
City of Fenton shall be required to furnish to the City's Police
Department copies of the information contained in Subsection (C) of
this Section.
E. Any person convicted of violating this Section will be punished as set
out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
F. Any person offering false identification to a pawnbroker as required by
this Section shall be in violation of this Section and if convicted of
offering false information shall be punished as set out in Section
100.060 of this Code.
Section
205.427
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.427
AO:124
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution and Morals
Section 205.430. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION — A person patronizes prostitution if:
PROSTITUTION — A person commits prostitution if he/she engages or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return
for something of value to be received by the person or by a third (3rd)
person.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Occurs when there is:
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Money or property or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 205.440. Prostitution.31
A person commits the offense of prostitution if the person performs an act
of prostitution.
Section 205.450. Patronizing Prostitution.32
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he/she gives something of value to
another person as compensation for that person or a third (3rd) person
having engaged in sexual conduct with him/her or with another;
1.
He/she gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on
an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third (3rd)
person will engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another; or
2.
He/she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with him/her or with another, or to secure a third (3rd) person to
engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another, in return for
something of value.
3.
Sexual intercourse. Any penetration, however slight, of the female sex
organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
1.
Deviate sexual intercourse. Any sexual act involving the genitals of one
(1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of another person.
2.
Sexual contact. Any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or
genitals of one (1) person by another done for the purpose of arousing
or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
3.
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he/she
patronizes prostitution.
31.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
32.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.450
AO:125
Section 205.460. Prostitution and Patronizing Prostitution — Sex of
Parties No Defense, When.
Section 205.465. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
B. It shall not be an affirmative defense that the defendant believed that
the person he/she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
A. In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of
the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged
in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:
1. Both persons were of the same sex; or
2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something
of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered
to give something of value was a female.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact
for pay as defined in Section 205.430 or any unlawful prostitution
activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all other sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that
the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to
believe that the premises were being used regularly for sexual contact
for pay or unlawful prostitution activity, the court may order that the
premises shall not be occupied or used for such period as the court may
determine, not to exceed one (1) year.
C. All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or
employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made
defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined
from engaging in any sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution
activity anywhere within the jurisdiction of the court.
D. Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil
actions.
Section
205.450
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.465
AO:126
ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 205.470. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue, or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the male or female sex
organ or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
Section 205.475. Indecent Exposure (Sexual Misconduct).
Section 205.480. Sexual Misconduct — First Degree.33
A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without
that person's consent.
Section 205.485. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of School Property, Exception — Permission Required
For Parents or Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure.
A. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure (sexual misconduct)
if such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third (3rd) person or
persons under circumstances in which he/she knows that such
conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third (3rd) person.
33.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.485
AO:127
Section 205.487. Prohibited Sexual Conduct. [R.O. 2006 §230.060;
Ord. No. 2139 §2, 4-20-1998; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
A. Any person who has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of Subsection (2) of Section
568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045, RSMo., Endangering The
Welfare Of A Child In The 1st Degree; Subsection (2) of Section
568.080, RSMo., Use Of A Child In A Sexual Performance; Section
568.090, RSMo., Promoting A Sexual Performance By A Child; Section
573.023, RSMo., Sexual Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025,
RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo.,
Furnishing Pornographic Material To Minors; shall not be present in or
loiter within five hundred (500) feet of any school building, on real
property comprising any school, or in any conveyance owned, leased, or
contracted by a school to transport students to or from school or a
school-related activity when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are
present in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless
the offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student
present in the building and has met the conditions set forth in
Subsection (B) of this Section.
B. No parent, legal guardian, or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (A) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian, or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
School Board or in the case of a private school from the Principal. In the
case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent or
School Board President must inform the Principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, School Board, or in the case of a private school from
the Principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events, however, the parent, legal guardian, or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he/she wishes to attend for which he/she
has not yet had permission granted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in public view, to engage in
human sexual intercourse; sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
masturbation, urination or defecation; exhibition of the genitals, pubic
areas, or buttocks of the human male or female; or exhibition of the
breasts of a female.
B. This Section shall not apply to artistic or dramatic performances which
are otherwise lawful and not prohibited as obscene, nor to exposure
Section
205.485
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.487
AO:128
necessarily incident to breast-feeding an infant, or to exposure of the
breasts of a prepubescent female.
Section
205.487
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.487
AO:129

ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 205.490. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication.
"Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates,
stored computer data, and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
NUDITY — The showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance is obscene if, taken as a whole:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance is
pornographic for minors if the following apply:
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex;
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
A reasonable person would find the material lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors;
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
Section
205.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.490
AO:131
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 205.500. Promoting Pornography For Minors or
Obscenity.34
Section 205.510. Furnishing Pornographic Materials To Minors.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if, knowing its content or character, he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain;
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain;
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if, knowing its content and character, he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
34.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.490
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.510
AO:132
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
Section
205.510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.510
AO:133

ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Alcohol and Drugs
Section 205.520. Possession of Marijuana Or Synthetic
Cannabinoid.35 [Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 3962,
7-25-201936]
It is unlawful for any person to possess or have under his/her control
Marijuana or Synthetic Cannabinoid except and only to the extent as
authorized by Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution including
any and all rules and regulations promulgated by the Missouri Department
of Health and Senior Services relating to legalized Medical Marijuana, and
except as authorized by Chapter 579, RSMo., or Chapter 195, RSMo.
Section 205.530. Possession or Control of a Controlled Substance.37
[Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 3962, 7-25-2019]
It is unlawful for any person to possess or have under his/ her control a
controlled substance except and only to the extent as authorized by Article
XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution including any and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services relating to legalized Medical Marijuana, and except as authorized
by Chapter 195, RSMo., or Chapter 579, RSMo.
Section 205.535. Limitations on the Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs. [Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014]
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. Any person holding a retail sales license pursuant to Chapter 144,
RSMo., who knowingly violates Subsection (A) of this Section is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
C. Any person who is considered the general owner or operator of the
outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine
products are available for sale who violates Subsection (A) of this
Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this Section if such person
35.Note: — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
36.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 3962 also changed the title of this Section from "Possession of
Marijuana" to "Possession of Marijuana Or Synthetic Cannabinoid."
37.Note: — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
205.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.535
AO:135
Section 205.540. Unlawful Use Or Possession Of Drug
Paraphernalia.38 [Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 3962,
7-25-201939]
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, administer, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation
controlled substance except and only to the extent as authorized by Article
XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution including any and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services relating to legalized Medical Marijuana.
Section 205.542. Unlawful Delivery or Manufacture of Drug
Paraphernalia. [Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 3962,
7-25-2019]
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture, with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, administer, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance
except and only to the extent as authorized by Article XIV, Section 1
of the Missouri Constitution including any and all rules and regulations
promulgated by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services
relating to Medical Marijuana.
Section 205.550. Inhalation or Inducing Others to Inhale Solvent
Fumes to Cause Certain Reactions Prohibited — Exceptions. [Ord.
No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014]
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, or induce any other person to do so for the purpose
of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation,
euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis,
stupefaction, or dulling of senses or nervous system, or for the purpose of,
in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental
processes; except that this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
documents that an employee training program was in place to provide
the employee with information on the State and Federal regulations
regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine.
38.Note: — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
39.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 3962 also changed the title of this Section from "Unlawful Use of
Drug Paraphernalia" to "
Section
205.535
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.560
AO:136
Section 205.560. Inducing, or Possession With Intent to Induce,
Symptoms by Use of Solvents Prohibited. [Ord. No. 3421 §1,
5-22-2014]
Section 205.562. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3421 §1, 5-22-2014]
The following words and phrases as used in this Article XI of Chapter 205,
unless the context otherwise requires, mean:
AGENT — An authorized person who acts on behalf of or at the direction
of a manufacturer, distributor, or dispenser. The term does not include
a common or contract carrier, public warehouseman, or employee of the
carrier or warehouseman while acting in the usual and lawful course of the
carrier's or warehouseman's business.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate precursor
in Schedules I through V listed in Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., or
this Article XI of Chapter 205.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE — A substance the chemical
structure of which is substantially similar to the chemical structure of a
controlled substance in Schedule I or II and:
A. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use of any solvent, particularly toluol.
B. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
for the purpose of using it in the manner prohibited by Section 205.550
and this Section.
Which has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system substantially similar to the stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a
controlled substance included in Schedule I or II; or
1.
With respect to a particular individual, which that individual represents
or intends to have a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system substantially similar to the stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of
a controlled substance included in Schedule I or II. The term does not
include a controlled substance; any substance for which there is an
approved new drug application; any substance for which an exemption
is in effect for investigational use, for a particular person, under Section
505 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) to
the extent conduct with respect to the substance is pursuant to the
exemption; or any substance to the extent not intended for human
consumption before such an exemption takes effect with respect to the
substance.
2.
Section
205.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.562
AO:137
DELIVER or DELIVERY — The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer
from one (1) person to another of drug paraphernalia or of a controlled
substance, or an imitation controlled substance, whether or not there is an
agency relationship, and includes a sale.
DEPRESSANT OR STIMULANT SUBSTANCE —
DISPENSE — To deliver a narcotic or controlled dangerous drug to an
ultimate user or research subject by or pursuant to the lawful order of a
practitioner, including the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling,
or compounding necessary to prepare the substance for such delivery.
DISPENSER — A practitioner who dispenses.
DISTRIBUTOR — A person who distributes.
DRUG —
A drug containing any quantity of barbituric acid or any of the salts
of barbituric acid or any derivative of barbituric acid which has been
designated by the United States Secretary of Health and Human
Services as habit-forming under 21 U.S.C. 352(d);
1.
A drug containing any quantity of:
a. Amphetamine or any of its isomers;
Any salt of amphetamine or any salt of an isomer of amphetamine;
or
b.
Any substance the United States Attorney General, after
investigation, has found to be, and by regulation designated as,
habit-forming because of its stimulant effect on the central nervous
system;
c.
2.
3. Lysergic acid diethylamide; or
Any drug containing any quantity of a substance that the United States
Attorney General, after investigation, has found to have, and by
regulation designated as having, a potential for abuse because of its
depressant or stimulant effect on the central nervous system or its
hallucinogenic effect.
4.
Substances recognized as drugs in the official United States
Pharmacopoeia, Official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United
States, or Official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of
them;
1.
Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of disease in humans or animals;
2.
Substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any
function of the body of humans or animals; and
3.
Section
205.562
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.562
AO:138
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products, substances and
materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use,
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation
controlled substance in violation of Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., or
this Article XI of Chapter 205. It includes, but is not limited to:
Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified in
this subdivision. It does not include devices or their components, parts
or accessories.
4.
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant
which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;
1.
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances or imitation controlled substances;
2.
Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or an imitation controlled substance;
3.
Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances or imitation controlled substances;
4.
Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances or imitation controlled
substances;
5.
Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances or imitation controlled substances;
6.
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
7.
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or
imitation controlled substances;
8.
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances or imitation controlled substances;
9.
Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances or imitation controlled
substances;
10.
Section
205.562
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.562
AO:139
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances or
imitation controlled substances into the human body;
11.
Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;
a.
b. Water pipes;
c. Carburetion tubes and devices;
d. Smoking and carburetion masks;
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand;
e.
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
g. Chamber pipes;
h. Carburetor pipes;
i. Electric pipes;
j. Air-driven pipes;
k. Chillums;
l. Bongs;
m. Ice pipes or chillers;
12.
Substances used, intended for use, or designed for use in the
manufacture of a controlled substance; in determining whether an
object, product, substance or material is drug paraphernalia, a court
or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
a.
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance or imitation controlled substance;
b.
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., or this Article XI of Chapter
205;
c.
13.
Section
205.562
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.562
AO:140
HOSPITAL — A place devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation
of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care, for not less than twentyfour
(24) hours in any week, of three (3) or more non-related individuals
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical
conditions; or a place devoted primarily to provide, for not less than twentyfour
(24) consecutive hours in any week, medical or nursing care for three
(3) or more non-related individuals. The term "hospital" does not include
convalescent, nursing, shelter or boarding homes as defined in Chapter 198.
IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A substance that is not a
controlled substance, which by dosage unit appearance (including color,
shape, size and markings), or by representations made, would lead a
The proximity of the object to controlled substances or imitation
controlled substances;
d.
The existence of any residue of controlled substances or imitation
controlled substances on the object;
e.
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who
he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., or this
Article XI of Chapter 205; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object, as to direct violation of Sections 195.005 to
195.425, RSMo., or this Article XI of Chapter 205, shall not prevent
a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as
drug paraphernalia;
f.
Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
g.
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
h.
i. National or local advertising concerning its use;
j. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such
as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
k.
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
to the total sales of the business enterprise;
l.
The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
m.
n. Expert testimony concerning its use;
The quantity, form or packaging of the product, substance or
material in relation to the quantity, form or packaging associated
with any legitimate use for the product, substance or material.
o.
Section
205.562
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.562
AO:141
reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance.
In determining whether the substance is an imitation controlled substance
the court or authority concerned should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
IMMEDIATE PRECURSOR — A substance which:
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding or processing of drug paraphernalia or of a controlled
substance, or an imitation controlled substance, either directly or by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means
of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of the substance
or labeling or relabeling of its container. This term does not include the
preparation or compounding of a controlled substance or an imitation
Whether the substance was approved by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration for over-the-counter (non-prescription or non-legend)
sales and was sold in the Federal Food and Drug Administration
approved package, with the Federal Food and Drug Administration
approved labeling information;
1.
Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the
substance concerning the nature of the substance, or its use or effect;
2.
Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for illicit
controlled substances;
3.
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the object,
under State or Federal law related to controlled substances or fraud;
4.
5. The proximity of the substances to controlled substances;
Whether the consideration tendered in exchange for the non-controlled
substance substantially exceeds the reasonable value of the substance
considering the actual chemical composition of the substance and,
where applicable, the price at which over-the-counter substances of
like chemical composition sell. An imitation controlled substance does
not include a placebo or registered investigational drug either of which
was manufactured, distributed, possessed or delivered in the ordinary
course of professional practice or research.
6.
The State Department of Health and Senior Services has found to be
and by rule designates as being the principal compound commonly
used or produced primarily for use in the manufacture of a controlled
substance;
1.
Is an immediate chemical intermediary used or likely to be used in the
manufacture of a controlled substance; and
2.
The control of which is necessary to prevent, curtail or limit the
manufacture of the controlled substance.
3.
Section
205.562
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.562
AO:142
controlled substance or the preparation, compounding, packaging or
labeling of a narcotic or dangerous drug:
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant genus Cannabis in any species or form
thereof, including, but not limited to Cannabis Sativa L., Cannabis Indica,
Cannabis Americana, Cannabis Ruderalis, and Cannabis Gigantea, whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from
the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination.
METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUG — Any drug containing
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
NARCOTIC DRUG — Any of the following, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction from substances of vegetable origin, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of
extraction and chemical analysis:
OPIATE — Any substance having an addiction-forming or addictionsustaining
liability similar to morphine or being capable of conversion into
a drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability. The term
includes its racemic and levorotatory forms. It does not include, unless
specifically controlled under Section 195.017, RSMo., or this Article XI of
By a practitioner as an incident to his administering or dispensing of a
controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in the course
of his professional practice; or
1.
By a practitioner or his authorized agent under his supervision, for the
purpose of, or as an incident to, research, teaching or chemical analysis
and not for sale.
2.
Opium, opiate, and any derivative of opium or opiate, including their
isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers, esters, and ethers,
whenever the existence of the isomers, esters, ethers, and salts is
possible within the specific chemical designation. The term does not
include the isoquinoline alkaloids of opium;
1.
Coca leaves, but not including extracts of coca leaves from which
cocaine, ecgonine, and derivatives of ecgonine or their salts have been
removed;
2.
3. Cocaine or any salt, isomer, or salt of isomer thereof;
4. Ecgonine, or any derivative, salt, isomer, or salt of isomer thereof;
Any compound, mixture, or preparation containing any quantity of any
substance referred to in Subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.
5.
Section
205.562
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.562
AO:143
Chapter 205, the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-n-methyl-morphinan
and its salts (dextromethorphan).
OVER-THE-COUNTER SALE — A retail sale licensed pursuant to Chapter
144 RSMo., of a drug other than a controlled substance.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, joint
venture, association, or any other legal or commercial entity.
POSSESSED or POSSESSING A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A person,
with the knowledge of the presence and nature of a substance, has actual
or constructive possession of the substance. A person has actual possession
if he has the substance on his person or within easy reach and convenient
control. A person who, although not in actual possession, has the power
and the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or control over
the substance either directly or through another person or persons is in
constructive possession of it. Possession may also be sole or joint. If one
person alone has possession of a substance, possession is sole. If two or
more persons share possession of a substance, possession is joint.
PRACTITIONER — A physician, dentist, optometrist, podiatrist,
veterinarian, scientific investigator, pharmacy, hospital or other person
licensed, registered or otherwise permitted by the State of Missouri to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer or to
use in teaching or chemical analysis, a controlled substance in the course
of professional practice or research in the State of Missouri, or a pharmacy,
hospital or other institution licensed, registered, or otherwise permitted
to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a
controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research.
PRODUCTION — Includes the manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing,
or harvesting of drug paraphernalia or of a controlled substance or an
imitation controlled substance.
REGISTRY NUMBER — The number assigned to each person registered
under the Federal controlled substances laws.
SALE — Includes barter, exchange, or gift, or offer therefor, and each such
transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.
STATE — When applied to a part of the United States, includes any state,
district, commonwealth, territory, insular possession thereof, and any area
subject to the legal authority of the United States of America.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID — Includes unless specifically excepted or
unless listed in another schedule, any natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any quantity of a
substance that is a cannabinoid receptor agonist, including but not limited
to any substance listed in paragraph (II) of subdivision (4) of subsection 2 of
Section 195.017, RSMo., and any analogues, homologues; isomers, whether
optical, positional, or geometric; esters; ethers; salts; and salts of isomers,
esters, and ethers, whenever the existence of the isomers, esters, ethers, or
Section
205.562
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.562
AO:144
salts is possible within the specific chemical designation, however, it shall
not include any approved pharmaceutical authorized by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.
WHOLESALER — A person who supplies drug paraphernalia or controlled
substances or imitation controlled substances that he himself has not
produced or prepared, on official written orders, but not on prescriptions.
Section
205.562
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.562
AO:145

ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Minors
Section 205.570. Article Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases are defined
as follows:
GUARDIAN — Guardian appointed by court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR — Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
PARENT — The natural or adoptive father or mother, legal guardian or any
other person having the care or custody of a minor child.
PARENTAL NEGLECT — Any act or omission by which a parent fails to
exercise customary and effective control over a minor so as to contribute to,
cause or tend to cause a minor to commit any offense.
Section 205.580. Curfew For Minors. [R.O. 2006 §215.060; Ord. No.
135 §1, 11-4-1963]
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks, or other
public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised
places, between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. of the following
day, official City time, except on Fridays and Saturdays, when the hours
shall be 12:00 Midnight to 6:00 A.M.; provided however, that the
provisions of this Section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person, having the care and
custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of
the provisions of this Section shall constitute a separate offense.
B. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of seventeen (17)
years to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or
play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, wharves, docks, or other public grounds, public places
and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant
lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and
6:00 A.M. of the following day, official City time, except on Fridays and
Saturdays, when the hours shall be 12:00 Midnight to 6:00 A.M.;
provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply
when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the
minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by
his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
Section
205.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.580
AO:147
Section 205.590. Parental Neglect Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §230.070;
Ord. No. 2726 §1, 3-21-2005]
Section 205.595. Parents To Ensure That Minors Wear Protective
Headgear While Bicycling. [Ord. No. 3142 §1, 6-24-2010]
custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this Section
shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any Police Officer finding a child violating the provisions of this Section
shall warn the child to desist immediately from such violation and shall
promptly report the violation to his/her superior officer who shall cause
a written notice to be served upon the parent, guardian, or person in
charge of such child, setting forth the manner in which this Section has
been violated. No parent, guardian, or person in charge of such child
shall knowingly permit such child again to violate the provisions of this
Section after receiving notice of the first violation.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following words and
phrases are defined as follows:
CRIMINAL ACT — An act which violates the Statutes of the United
States, the Statutes of the State of Missouri or the ordinances of the
City of Fenton, Missouri, including moving traffic violations.
MINOR — Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
PARENT — Mother, father, legal guardian or any person having the care
or custody of a minor.
B. No parent shall knowingly permit, encourage, aid or cause a minor to
commit a criminal act, nor shall a parent engage in any conduct which
could be injurious to the minor's morals or health. No parent shall fail to
exercise customary and effective control over a minor so as to
contribute to, cause or tend to cause a minor to commit a criminal act.
C. Notification Of Responsibility.
1. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission
of any criminal act within the City of Fenton, Missouri, the Police
Department shall immediately notify in writing the minor's parent
of the arrest or detention and shall advise the parent of his or her
responsibility under this Section.
2. A record of said notifications shall be kept by the Police
Department.
D. Written parental notice as defined in Subsection (C) of this Section shall
be prima facie evidence of parental neglect if the minor commits a
second (2nd) or successive violation of any criminal act. Each violation
of the provisions of this Section shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
205.580
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.595
AO:148
A. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child of at least
one (1) year of age and who has not reached the age of seventeen (17)
to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle, a scooter, roller skates, roller
blades or a skateboard unless the child shall wear protective headgear
which properly fits and is fastened securely upon the head of the
operator or passenger. The headgear shall meet or exceed the impact
standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the U.S. Consumer
Products Safety Commission, the American National Standards
Institute, the Snell Memorial Foundation or the American Society of
Testing and Materials.
B. Every person reasonably believed by a Law Enforcement Officer to have
violated the provisions of this Section shall be issued a notice of
violation. The notice of violation shall advise persons to whom it is
issued of the items set out in Subsection (A) hereof and of the dangers
to children under the age of seventeen (17) associated with operating
bicycles without protective headgear. The Chief of Police shall keep and
maintain records of all persons issued a notice of violation under this
Section. Any person receiving more than two (2) notices of violation in a
twelve (12) month period shall be subject to prosecution in Municipal
Court.
C. Every person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished
by a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.00).
Section
205.595
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.595
AO:149

ARTICLE XIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco
Section 205.600. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product distributed to members of the general public
at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product samples.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VAPORIZING PRODUCTS — Any non-combustible product containing
nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or
other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form.
Vaporizing products includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.[Ord.
No. 3468 §§1, 3, 9-25-2014]
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.
Section 205.610. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products
To Minors — Vending Machine Requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products shall be located
within the unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of
an adult responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18)
years of age from purchasing any tobacco product from such machine
or shall be equipped with a lock-out device to prevent the machines
Section
205.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.610
AO:151
from being operated until the person responsible for monitoring sales
from the machines disables the lock. Such locking device shall be of
a design that prevents it from being left in an unlocked condition
and which will allow only a single sale when activated. A locking
device shall not be required on machines that are located in areas
where persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are not permitted
or prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose vending
machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this Subsection
shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (E) of this
Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a local
law enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if located in
a factory, private club or other location not generally accessible to the
general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product
or rolling papers to any minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any
person in this State. This Subsection shall not apply to the distribution
by family members on property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 205.640 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first (1st) offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second (2nd) offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third (3rd) and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products are available
for sale who violates Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be
penalized pursuant to this Section if such person documents the
following:
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding tobacco sales to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
Section
205.610
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.610
AO:152
Section 205.620. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession of
Tobacco — Misrepresentation of Age.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one (1) year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 205.640, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a
company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an
offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco product
to any individual less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of
Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section shall conclusively be
presumed to have reasonably relied on proof of age of the purchaser or
recipient, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation if
such person raises and proves as an affirmative defense that:
1. Such individual presented a driver's license or other governmentissued
photo identification purporting to establish that such
individual was eighteen (18) years of age or older.
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes or other tobacco products unless such
person is an employee of a seller of cigarettes or tobacco products and
is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment or an
employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control for
enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section 407.934,
RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes or tobacco products.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
Section
205.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.620
AO:153
Section 205.625. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Vaporizing Products
to Minors; Minor in Possession. [Ord. No. 3468 §§2—3, 9-25-2014]
Section 205.630. Retail Sales Tax License Required For Sale of
Tobacco Products.
No person shall sell cigarettes or tobacco products unless the person has a
retail sales tax license.
Section 205.640. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law To
Sell Tobacco To Minors Under Age Eighteen — Display of Sign
Required Where.
1. For the first (1st) violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and
shall have any cigarettes or tobacco products confiscated;
2. For a second (2nd) violation and any subsequent violations, the
person is guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes or
tobacco products confiscated and shall complete a tobacco
education or smoking cessation program, if available.
A. No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a
vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's
establishment, shall sell, offer to sell, give or furnish any vaporizing
products or any component thereof to a minor.
B. Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing any vaporizing
products to another person, the person selling, offering for sale, giving
or furnishing the vaporizing products shall verify that the person is not
a minor by examining from any person that appears to be under 27
years of age a Government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age; or
C. No minor shall possess or buy any vaporizing products or in the
furtherance or facilitation of obtaining any vaporizing products shall
display or use a false or forged identification card, or transfer, alter, or
deface an identification card.
D. It is not a violation of this Section for a minor to purchase or possess
vaporizing products if the minor purchases or is given the vaporizing
products from a retail seller of vaporizing products or an employee of
the retail seller pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or
otherwise conduct a sting operation or enforcement action against a
retail seller of any vaporizing products or a person employed by a retail
seller of vaporizing products or on any premises authorized to sell
vaporizing products to determine if vaporizing products are being sold
or given to minors, if the sting operation or enforcement action is
approved by an authorized Law Enforcement Agency.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling
papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be
Section
205.620
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.640
AO:154
Section 205.650. Restrictions On Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
Section 205.660. Proof of Age Required, When Defense To Action
For Violation Is Reasonable Reliance On Proof — Liability.
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from
which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where
tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (½) inch high on a white
background the following:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES OR OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED
TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS"; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18".
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products or rolling papers or
distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would
conclude on the basis of appearance that such prospective purchaser or
recipient may be under the age of eighteen (18).
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner or
employee of an establishment that sells tobacco for the purpose of
aiding the registrant, agent or employee to determine whether or not
the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age when such person
desires to purchase or possess tobacco products procured from a
registrant. Upon such presentation, the owner or employee of the
Section
205.640
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.660
AO:155
Section 205.670. Use/Consumption of Tobacco Prohibited. [R.O.
2006 §230.020; Ord. No. 1240 §1, 5-15-1989, Ord. No. 1558 §1,
1-22-1992; Ord. No. 1598 §1, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1671 §1,
4-19-1993; Ord. No. 1722 §1, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 2166 §1,
7-20-1998]
establishment shall compare the photograph and physical
characteristics noted on the license, identification card or passport
with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the license,
identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 205.610 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 205.610 on any single day.
A. The use/consumption of tobacco products is prohibited at all times in all
City owned and leased facilities and other City-designated outdoor
areas with the exception of the Maintenance Facility's one-bay area.
This prohibition includes the foyer and hallway areas of all these
buildings.
B. Persons found guilty of violation of this Section shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per incident.
Section
205.660
FENTON CITY CODE Section
205.670
AO:156
ARTICLE XIV
Miscellaneous Offenses
Section 205.680. Restaurants To Display Grade Notice. [R.O. 2006
§610.020; Ord. No. 81 §3, 3-20-1961]
Every restaurant shall display at all times in a place designated by the
St. Louis County Health Commissioner, a notice approved by the St. Louis
County Health Commissioner stating the grade of the establishment.
Section
205.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.680
AO:157
Chapter 210
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Section 210.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §240.010; Ord. No. 1022
§1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 3459 §§3 — 4, 8-28-201440]
The words "dog" and "cat," as used in this Chapter, shall be intended to
mean both male and female, singular and plural. The words "permitted
fowl" as used in this Chapter shall mean domesticated ducks and chicken
hens only (and not including roosters or geese). The word "owners" shall be
intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog, cat or permitted fowl. The words "at
large" shall be intended to mean off the premises of the owner, and not
under the control of the owner or a person who has custody of said dog,
cat or permitted fowl with the owner's consent, either by leash, cord, chain
or otherwise not exceeding eight (8) feet in length, so as to effectively
prevent the dog, cat or permitted fowl from biting, molesting, being with
or approaching any other animal or person. When "animal" is used in this
Chapter, it shall be deemed to include permitted fowl.
Section 210.020. Running At Large Prohibited. [R.O. 2006
§240.020; Ord. No. 1022 §1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 3459 §§3 — 4,
8-28-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in his/her custody any
dog, cat, or permitted fowl to permit the same to go at large, whether such
dog or cat is licensed or unlicensed, nor shall such dog, cat, or permitted
fowl be allowed to be or go at large upon the streets or other public ways
of the City and such action is declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the
public health and safety.
Section 210.030. Rabies Inoculation — Annual. [R.O. 2006
§240.030; Ord. No. 1022 §1, 9-21-1987]
Every person residing within the City who owns, controls, manages or has
part interest in any dog or cat at any time during the year or who permits
such animal to come upon, on or in and to remain in and about his/her home,
place of business or other premises within the City shall have such dog or
cat inoculated by a competent veterinarian against hydrophobia or rabies at
least once every twelve (12) months provided however that if such animal is
inoculated with an approved three (3) year inoculation such animal need be
inoculated only every three (3) years.
40.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance also amended the title of this Chapter, which
was formerly Dog and Cat Regulations.
Section
205.680
FENTON CITY CODE Section
210.040
AO:158
Section 210.040. Dangerous Animal — Defined. [R.O. 2006
§240.050; Ord. No. 1022 §1, 9-21-1987]
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal that constitutes a physical threat
to human beings or other animals; that has a disposition or propensity
to attack or bite any person or other animal without provocation; that is
wild by nature and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or other
characteristics, constitutes a danger to human life, physical well-being or
property; or that has been known to bite or attack a human being or
domestic animal, without provocation one (1) or more times.
Section 210.050. Controlling and Keeping Dangerous Animals.
[R.O. 2006 §240.060; Ord. No. 1022 §1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 1912 §1,
11-20-1995]
If it is determined by a Police Officer that an animal is a dangerous animal,
the Police Officer shall notify the property owner to immediately securely
confine such dangerous animal indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked
pen. If the property owner fails to comply, or if the property owner is not
available and it is determined that such animal is endangering the wellbeing
of others, such animal may be removed from the property by the
Police Officer and impounded.
Section 210.060. Limitation of Number of Dogs and Permitted Fowl.
[R.O. 2006 §240.070; Ord. No. 1031 §1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 3459
§§3 — 4, 8-28-2014]
Except for dog kennels as regulated by the Zoning Ordinance of the City,
no owner shall own, keep or harbor more than three (3) dogs over the age
of four (4) months. There is no limit on the number of permitted fowl for
property being used for a single-family dwelling, as defined by Code Section
400.030, as long as such permitted fowl do not cause a nuisance, except
on any property being used for a single-family dwelling in the R-3 and R-4
Districts, no more than a total of six (6) permitted fowl shall be permitted.
Section 210.070. Keeping of Pit Bulls Prohibited. [R.O. 2006
§240.080; Ord. No. 1022 §1, 9-21-1987]
A. No person shall keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the City,
any pit bull dog, provided that pit bull dogs residing in the City on
September 21, 1987 may be kept within the City subject to the
standards and requirements herein set forth. "Pit bull dog", as used in
this Section, means:
1. The bull terrier breed of dog;
2. The Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;
3. The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
4. The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
Section
210.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.070
AO:159
5. Dogs of mixed breed or of breeds other than those listed in this
Subsection, which breed or mixed breed is known as pit bull, pit
bull dog or pit bull terrier; and
6. Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breed of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier,
American pit bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier or any
other breed commonly known as a pit bull, pit bull dog or pit bull
terrier, or a combination of any of these breeds.
B. Pit bull dogs residing in the City at the time of passage of this Section
may be kept by their owners within the City, subject to the following
standards:
1. Registration. Pit bull dogs residing in the City on September 21,
1987, must be registered with the City by the owners within ten
(10) days of the passage of this Section.
2. Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to go
outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a
leash not longer than four (4) feet in length. No person shall permit
a pit bull dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash
outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of
the leash. Such a dog may not be leashed to inanimate objects such
as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, a pit bull dog on a leash
outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device
sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals.
3. Pens and kennels. All pit bull dogs shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except
when leased and muzzled as provided in Sub-paragraph (B)(2)
hereof. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a
secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine pit
bull dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such
animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a
secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides
of the pen must be embedded in the ground not less than two (2)
feet. All structures erected to house pit bull dogs must comply with
all zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures
must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
4. Confinement indoors. No pit bull may be kept on a porch or patio or
in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit
such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may
be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when
screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing
the dog from exiting the structure.
5. Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of pit bull dogs within the
City shall, within ten (10) days of September 21. 1987, display in a
prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the
Section
210.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
210.070
AO:160
public using the words "Beware of Dog-Pit Bull". In addition, a
similar sign shall be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
6. Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of pit bull dogs within
the City shall, within ten (10) days of September 21, 1987, provide
proof to the City of public liability insurance in a single incident
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury to or
death of any person or for damage to property owned by any person
which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of
such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no
cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten (10) days written
notice is first given to the City.
7. Photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit
bull dogs shall, within ten (10) days of September 21, 1987, provide
to the Deputy Clerk two (2) color photographs (two different poses)
of the animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of the
animal.
8. Reporting requirements. All owners, keepers or harborers of pit
bulldogs shall, within ten (10) days of any incident, report the
following information in writing to the Deputy City Clerk:
a. The removal from the City or death of a pit bull dog;
b. The birth of offspring of a pit bull dog; and
c. The new address of a pit bull owner if the owner moves within
the City limits.
9. Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. No person shall sell,
barter or in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog registered with
the City to any person in the City unless the recipient person
resides permanently in the same household and on the same
premises as the registered owner of such dog, provided that the
registered owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a
pit bull dog or the offspring of such dog to a person who does not
reside in the City.
10. Animals born of pit bull dogs. All offspring born of pit bull dogs
registered with the City must be removed from the City within six
(6) weeks of the birth of such animals.
11. Irrebuttable presumption. There shall be an irrebuttable
presumption that any dog registered with the City as a pit bull dog
or any of those breeds prohibited by this Section is in fact a dog
subject to the requirements of this Section.
12. Failure to comply. No owner, keeper or harborer of a pit bull dog
registered with the City shall fail to comply with the requirements
and conditions set forth in this Section. Any dog found to be the
subject of a violation of this Section shall be subject to immediate
Section
210.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.070
AO:161
Section 210.080. Animal Neglect or Abandonment.
Section 210.090. Animal Abuse.41
seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result
in the revocation of the license of such animal resulting in the
immediate removal of the animal from the City.
A. A person is guilty of animal neglect when he/she has custody or
ownership or both of an animal and fails to provide adequate care or
adequate control which results in substantial harm to the animal.
B. A person is guilty of animal abandonment when he/she has knowingly
abandoned an animal in any place without making provisions for its
adequate care.
C. Animal neglect or animal abandonment are ordinance violations. For a
first (1st) offense of either violation, a term of imprisonment not to
exceed fifteen (15) days, or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. For a
second (2nd) or subsequent violation of either offense, a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. All fines and penalties for a first (1st) conviction of animal
neglect or animal abandonment may be waived by the court provided
that the person found guilty of animal neglect or abandonment shows
that adequate, permanent remedies for the neglect or abandonment
have been made. Reasonable costs incurred for the care and
maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals may not be waived.
D. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court may
order a person found guilty of animal neglect or animal abandonment to
pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
1. The care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals
within the person's custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect or abandonment; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect or abandonment of the animals.
A. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person:
41.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
210.090
AO:162
Section 210.100. Knowingly Releasing An Animal.
Section 210.110. Animal Waste Prohibited On Public and Private
Property — Exception. [R.O. 2006 §205.105; Ord. No. 1508 §§1 — 2,
7-15-1991; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
Any person in physical possession and control of any animal shall remove
excreta or other solid waste deposited by the animal in any public or private
area not designated to receive such wastes, including but not limited to
streets, sidewalks, parking lots, public parks or recreation areas and private
property. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind person.
Section 210.120. Keeping of Animals Causing Loud Noises
Prohibited.
The keeping of a dog or any other animal which emits any barking or
other animal noises which produce actual physical or mental discomfort
to a normal person of ordinary sensibilities, tastes and habits is hereby
prohibited.
Section 210.130. Nauseous Odors Emanating From Animals. [Ord.
No. 3459 §§3 — 4, 8-28-2014]
No person owning or having charge of any animals shall allow or permit the
keeping of such animals to give forth or cause any ill-smelling, nauseous or
obnoxious odors; provided that if such person owning or having charge of
any animals, so causing or creating any such odor, shall cure and entirely
alleviate such odor within five (5) days after service of notice to cure and
entirely alleviate such odor by the City or Police Department. If the person
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control.
A. A person commits the offense of knowingly releasing an animal if that
person, acting without the consent of the owner or custodian of an
animal, intentionally releases any animal that is lawfully confined for
the purpose of companionship or protection of persons or property or
for recreation, exhibition or educational purposes.
B. As used in this Section, "animal" means every living creature,
domesticated or wild, but not including Homo sapiens.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a public servant acting
in the course of such servant's official duties.
Section
210.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.130
AO:163
cures such odor within five (5) days of receiving such notice, no punishment
or fine shall be imposed against the person. Each day such odor exists after
the expiration of the five (5) days from the service of such notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 215
NUISANCES
Section 215.010. Public Nuisance, Defined. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-201942]
A public nuisance shall be defined as non-transitory, persistent, ongoing, or
continued acts or things done or made, permitted or allowed, or continued
where the unreasonable, unlawful use of one's property causes obstruction
or injury to the public, or produces material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort, or interferes with others' use and enjoyment of their property, or
which is injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the City
of Fenton or its residents, or any act or condition so designated by Statute
or ordinance to be a public nuisance. A public nuisance may exist or be
maintained not only by the doing of an act but also by the omission of a duty.
The acts in this Chapter, among others, are declared to be public nuisances
in violation of this Chapter, but such enumeration shall not be exclusive.
Section 215.020. Nuisances Prohibited. [Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
No person shall cause, permit, engage in, keep, or maintain any nuisance,
as defined by the laws of the State of Missouri or provisions of the Municipal
Code of the City of Fenton, Missouri, ("City Code") nor shall any person
contribute to the causing, committing, keeping, or maintaining of any such
nuisance within the City of Fenton or within one-half (1/2) mile thereof as
prescribed by Section 71.780, RSMo. No person shall fail or refuse to abate
or remove a nuisance within the time required by the City as specified in
this Chapter.
Section 215.030. Nuisances — Generally. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-2019]
A. In addition to any other act declared by State Statute, ordinance of the
City of Fenton, or the regulations and policies of the City of Fenton to be
a nuisance, the following are hereby declared to be, but shall not be
limited to, public nuisances affecting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the City of Fenton:
1. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public; or
offered to the public at no charge.
42.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 215, Nuisances, containing Sections 215.010 through
215.030, was repealed 9-26-2019 by Ord. No. 3982.
Section
210.130
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.030
AO:164
2. All diseased animals not properly cared for by the owner(s) of such
animal or allowed to run at large.
3. All ponds or pools of stagnant water, and/or all foul water or liquid
when discharged through any drainpipe, spout, or otherwise upon
any street, alley, thoroughfare, or directed upon a private lot.
4. Carcasses of dead animals not properly disposed of within twentyfour
(24) hours after death.
5. Accumulations, wheresoever they may occur, of debris of any kind,
including, but not limited to, weeds, weed cuttings, cut and fallen
trees, tree limbs, or shrubs; lumber not piled or stacked twelve (12)
inches off the ground; rocks or bricks, tin, steel, derelict cars,
trucks, other motor vehicles, or motor boats, parts of derelict cars,
trucks, other motor vehicles, or motor boats; broken furniture,
appliances, manure, rubbish, garbage, refuse; any flammable
material which may endanger public safety; human and industrial
noxious or offensive waste, except the normal storage on a farm of
manure for agricultural purposes; or any material or condition
which is unhealthy or unsafe.
6. Privy vaults or garbage cans which are not fly-tight, that is, privy
vaults or garbage cans which do not prevent the entry of flies,
insects, and rodents.
7. The pollution of any well, cistern, spring, underground water
stream, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage or industrial
wastes, or other substances harmful to human beings or animals.
8. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities, or the presence of any gas, vapor, fume,
smoke, dust, or any other toxic substance on, in, or emitted from
the equipment of any premises in quantities sufficient to be toxic,
harmful, or injurious to the health of any person or to any premises.
9. Any vehicle used for garbage or rubbish disposal which is not
equipped with a water-tight metal body and provided with a tight
metal cover or covers and so constructed as to prevent any of the
contents from leaking, spilling, falling, or blowing out of such
vehicle at any time, except while being loaded, or not completely
secured and covered so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom, or exposing any part of the contents at any time.
10. Any and all infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats,
mice, fly maggots, mosquito larvae, and hookworm larvae.
11. The keeping, possession, display, or offer for sale of any animal or
fowl within the City not zoned for such purpose, except and only to
the extent as permitted in Chapter 210 of the City Code.
Section
215.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.030
AO:165
12. Unlicensed dumps, and licensed dumps not operated or maintained
in compliance with the regulations and policies of the City of
Fenton, the laws and regulations of St. Louis County, or of the
Statutes of the State of Missouri.
13. The discharge into a stormwater system of any waste materials,
liquids, vapor, fat, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, oil or petroleum
product, mud, straw, lawn clippings, tree limbs or branches, metal
or plastic objects, rags, garbage, or any other substance which is
capable of causing an obstruction to the flow of a storm system or
interfere with the proper operation of the system, or which will
pollute the natural creeks or waterways.
14. Perforated, punctured, ruptured, broken, cracked, or leaking
sanitary sewer lateral lines.
15. The burning of garbage, refuse, waste, leaves, straw, or other
combustible materials in any ash pit, stove, or incinerator, or in any
street, alley, or any private property, except and only to the extent
when the burning of garbage, refuse, waste, leaves, straw, or other
combustible materials is allowed by an authorized representative
of the City under applicable City ordinance, and is consistent with
State and local laws and fire regulations.
16. The keeping or storage of any dirt gathered in the cleaning of
yards, waste from industrial or business establishments, or any
damaged merchandise, wet, broken, or leaking barrels, casks, or
boxes, or any materials which are offensive, or tend by decay to
become putrid, or to render the atmosphere impure or
unwholesome.
17. All substances which emit or cause foul, obnoxious, unhealthy, or
disagreeable odors or effluvia in the neighborhood where they
exist, or where any such odors are not properly controlled or
maintained in violation of the regulations and policies of the City, or
State laws and regulations relating to odor mitigation.
18. Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment, including,
but not limited to, automobiles, motorboats, other motor vehicles,
furniture, and household appliances.
19. The drainage of water from downspouts, sump pumps, etc., not
discharged to daylight (i.e., to the surface) at a minimum of ten (10)
feet inside the property line of the subject lot.
20. The production, maintenance, or allowance of unnecessary or
unreasonable loud noise.
21. All other acts, practices, conduct, businesses, occupations,
callings, trades, uses of property, and all other things detrimental
or which could be detrimental to the health, safety, and general
Section
215.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.030
AO:166
Section 215.040. Authority To Abate — Generally. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-2019]
The City of Fenton is authorized to provide for the abatement of a condition
of any lot or land that has the presence of a nuisance as provided in this
Chapter, including, but not limited to any nuisance which may endanger
or negatively impact the public health, safety, or general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City, or which is unhealthy or unsafe and declared to be a
public nuisance.
Section 215.050. Authority To Abate — Emergency Cases. [Ord. No.
3982, 9-26-2019]
In cases where it reasonably appears there is an immediate danger to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public due to the existence
of a nuisance, the City Administrator or his/her designee shall have the
authority to order the immediate abatement of the nuisance in an
appropriate manner or the immediate vacation of the vicinity in which the
nuisance causing the emergency is ongoing.
Section 215.060. Nuisance Abatement Procedure — Generally,
Public Nuisance Declaration, Notice, Nuisance Abatement Hearing,
City May Abate, City To Recoup Associated Costs. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-2019]
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Fenton and surrounding
areas.
22. Any ongoing, non-transient condition in violation of the regulations
and policies of the City pertaining to the maintenance and
condition of real property.
A. Declaration Of Public Nuisance And Notice. If the City Planner, his/her
designee, or Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, has reason
to believe that a nuisance is being maintained upon a property within
the limits of the City of Fenton or within one-half (1/2) mile thereof, the
City may declare such property to be a public nuisance, and if so
declared, the City shall notify the owner(s), and if the property is not
owner-occupied, any occupant of the property to forthwith remove,
terminate, or abate such nuisance. Such notices shall be given either
personally, by First Class United States Mail, or by United States
Certified Mail return-receipt requested to the owner or owners at the
last known address of the owner(s) and to the occupant of the property
at the property address, if different from the owner, or the owner's
agent(s) where the City has actual notice of such agency. Such notice
may also be posted on the premises. Any such notice of public nuisance
shall include a statement of the condition constituting a public nuisance
and those actions necessary to remove, terminate, or abate the
nuisance. Such notice shall also include a reasonable time within which
the City demands such owner(s) or person(s) in care and control of the
Section
215.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.060
AO:167
property to abate the nuisance condition, which shall be at least ten
(10) days, but may be more in the sole discretion of the City, absent
an emergency which may be abated by the City as described in Section
215.050. Such notice shall also state that upon failure to abate the
condition causing the nuisance within the given time, the City may,
in addition to any other available legal remedies, call a nuisance
abatement hearing where all parties may be heard and present
evidence to the Hearing Officer of the City as to whether the condition
on the property constitutes a nuisance, and, if so, how same shall be
abated.
B. Nuisance Abatement Hearing. If the owner(s) of a property or occupant
of the property, if different, which has been declared a public nuisance,
fails to abate the nuisance cited in the notice described in Section
215.060(A) herein within the time provided by such notice, the City will
call a nuisance abatement hearing where all parties may be heard by
and present evidence to the Hearing Officer of the City as to whether
the condition on the property constitutes a nuisance pursuant to the
City Code and, if so, how such nuisance shall be abated.
1. The City shall provide notice of such nuisance abatement hearing
to the owner(s) at the last known address of the owner(s) and the
occupant of the property at the property address, if different from
the owner(s), or the owner's agent(s) where the City has actual
notice of such agency by First Class United States Mail, or by
United States Certified Mail return-receipt requested. Such notice
may also be posted upon the premises.
2. The notice shall include a date, time, and place of the scheduled
hearing, no sooner than ten (10) days after such notice except
where the sole nuisance existent at the property is a nuisance
under Section 215.090 of the City Code, in which case the hearing
shall be at least four (4) days after such notice.
3. The hearing may be canceled, at the sole discretion of the City, if
the property owner abates the conditions described in the notice
and provides satisfactory proof of such abatement to the City
Planner, his/her designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/
her designee, prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.
4. The nuisance abatement hearing shall take place before the City's
Hearing Officer, who, for purposes of this Chapter shall be the City
Administrator for the City of Fenton or his/her designee
(hereinafter "Hearing Officer"), be under oath, with such oath
being given by the Hearing Officer, or court reporter should one be
present. Such hearing shall be recorded either by a court reporter
or an audio recording device capable of recording all testimony and
preserving same in the event of an appeal.
5. The City and all parties to the nuisance abatement hearing shall
have an opportunity to be heard and present evidence as to
Section
215.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.060
AO:168
whether the procedures of this Chapter were substantially
complied with, whether the condition maintained on the property
constitutes a nuisance, and whether an order should be entered
directing the owner and/or occupant of the property to abate the
nuisance.
6. Any party to a nuisance abatement hearing may be represented by
counsel at such hearing.
7. If, after hearing all of the evidence of the City and the interested
parties, the Hearing Officer finds a nuisance is being maintained in
violation of this Chapter, he/she may issue a nuisance abatement
order directing the nuisance be abated within a reasonable time
based upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case, but
which time shall be at least ten (10) days from the nuisance
abatement order, except where the sole nuisance existent at the
property is a nuisance under Section 215.090 of the City Code, in
which case the abatement time given shall be at least five (5)
business days. The Hearing Officer may further order any legal
remedy, which in his/her determination would abate the public
nuisance including, but not limited to establishing terms and
conditions which must be followed by the nuisance property
owner(s). The nuisance abatement order, if one (1) shall be issued,
shall be in writing, specifying the grounds for the order, the time by
which the nuisance must be abated by the owner(s) and/or the
person(s) in care and control of the property, and the means by
which they shall be abated. The nuisance abatement order shall be
delivered to the owner(s) and occupant of the property, if different,
either personally, by First Class United States Mail, or by United
States Certified Mail return-receipt requested. Such order may also
be posted on the property.
C. City Abatement. For any public nuisance in this Chapter, upon failure of
the owner(s) or person(s) in care and control of the property to comply
with the Hearing Officer's nuisance abatement order to abate the
nuisance within the time given by such order, the City Administrator,
his/her designee, or Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, may
cause the same to be promptly removed, terminated, or abated by the
City or a contractor hired by the City for such purpose, either of whom,
with appropriate legal authority, may come onto the property for
purposes of removing, terminating, or abating the nuisance, and
thereafter certify the cost of such corrective action to the City Clerk
who shall cause a special tax bill to be issued in the amount herein
described against the property from which the nuisance was removed,
terminated, or abated, the same to be collected with and in the same
manner as other taxes assessed against the property. The special tax
bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt
against the owner(s) and shall be a first lien against the property until
paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals thereof and of its
validity. No mere clerical error or informality in such lien or in the
Section
215.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.060
AO:169
Section 215.070. Civil Cause Of Action Authorized. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-2019]
In addition to any other remedies or penalties established and authorized
by law, the City Attorney may, on behalf of the City and after approval by
the Board of Aldermen, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such
legal or equitable relief as may be necessary to require the abatement of
any nuisance defined by this Chapter. In such action the court may grant
such legal or equitable relief, including, but not limited to, mandatory or
prohibitory injunctive relief, as the facts may warrant. Upon the successful
prosecution of any such action, the City may be awarded by the court
reasonable attorneys' fees in accordance with Section 79.383, RSMo.
Section 215.080. Dangerous Structures Deemed A Public Nuisance.
[Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
All "Dangerous Structures" within the City of Fenton, as defined by Section
505.010 of the City Code are hereby declared to be public nuisances
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City, and
shall be ordered to be repaired, vacated, or demolished within a reasonable
time as provided in Chapter 505 of the City Code and as allowed by Section
67.400, RSMo. The provisions and procedures provided by Chapter 505 of
proceedings leading to its issuance shall be a defense thereto. The
certified costs associated with the removal, termination, or abatement
of such nuisance shall include all expenses incurred by the City in
the removal of the nuisance, including, but not limited to, the actual
cost of inspecting the land or lot, the actual cost of service of notice
as provided herein, and the actual cost of the issuing and recording
the tax bill. Such certified costs shall also include the actual cost of
abatement of the nuisance condition, and attorneys' fees pursuant to
Section 100.065. Each special tax bill shall be issued by the City Clerk
and delivered to the St. Louis County Collector to be collected in the
manner provided by law. Such tax bill, if not paid when due, shall bear
interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum or the Statutory
rate, whichever is higher.
D. Right To Appeal Decision Of Hearing Officer. Any person(s) alleged to
be aggrieved by the decision and ensuing nuisance abatement order of
the Hearing Officer may appeal such order in the manner provided in
Chapter 160, the Administrative Procedure for Review of Certain
Actions, of the City Code. No appeal to the Board of Administrative
Review, or the Circuit Court shall stay the abatement by the City and/or
any contractor hired on their behalf for such purpose and the issuance
of a special tax bill hereunder, absent a court order staying such actions
and the posting of an appropriate bond by the appellant as required by
the Circuit Court, in which case the City and/or any contractor hired on
their behalf shall honor the stay issued by the Circuit Court pursuant to
such an appeal upon receipt of actual notice of such stay from the
Court.
Section
215.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.080
AO:170
the City Code shall govern all proceedings related to "Dangerous Structure"
public nuisances. Nothing in Chapter 505, nor this Chapter 215, shall
prevent the City from combining actions provided for in said respective
Chapters where conditions deemed to be public nuisances upon the same
property arise out of both such Chapters.
Section 215.090. Grass, Weeds, Rank Vegetation, And Accumulated
Trash Deemed A Public Nuisance, When. [Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
A. Accumulated Trash, Overgrown Grass, Weeds, Rank Vegetation
Declared A Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance for any person to cause or permit accumulated
trash, or permit any grass, weeds, or rank vegetation growth to attain a
height in excess of nine (9) inches upon any property located within the
City. Any property upon which any owner(s) or person(s) in care and
control of such property, who shall cause or permit accumulated trash,
or permit any grass, weeds, or rank vegetation growth to attain a height
in excess of nine (9) inches shall be deemed a public nuisance.
Whenever private property abuts a public right-of-way or easement
belonging to the City, or any public entity, and there exists in such rightof-
way or easement a tree lawn or grassy area between the private
property line and the midline of said right-of-way or easement, then
such tree lawn or grassy area shall be considered, for purposes of this
Section requiring cutting of grass, weeds, or rank vegetation, to be a
part of the private lot which abuts the right-of-way or easement, and it
shall be the duty of those responsible under this Section for the
maintenance of the private lot to equally maintain the tree lawn or
grassy area within the abutting right-of-way or easement, and all of the
provisions of this Section shall apply with equal force and effect to said
tree lawn or grassy area. "Grass, weeds, or rank vegetation" shall not
be deemed to include any genuine agricultural product or crop that is
grown for agricultural purposes.
B. Notice, Hearing, City May Abate, City To Recoup Associated Costs.
1. Should the City deem any property within the City of Fenton to be
in violation of this Section, and therefore to be a public nuisance,
the City shall give a hearing after at least four (4) days' notice, such
notice being delivered either personally or by United States Mail to
the owner or owners, or the owner's agent, or by posting on the
premises.
2. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with, governed by,
and follow the same procedures described in Section 215.060(B).
3. If such grass, weeds, or rank vegetation are not cut down and
removed or such trash not removed within the time allowed in the
nuisance abatement order, the City Planner, his/her designee, or
Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, may have such
trash removed or such grass, weeds, or rank vegetation growth cut
down and removed immediately thereafter by having a City
Section
215.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.090
AO:171
Section 215.100. Dead And Decaying Trees Deemed A Public
Nuisance. [Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
employee or someone contracted on behalf of the City for such
purpose come onto the property, cut down and remove same, and
certify the costs of such cutting and removal to the City Clerk, who
shall cause a special tax bill to be issued for such costs against the
property, which shall be collected in the same manner as described
in Section 215.060(C) and as authorized by law.
C. Appeal. Any person(s), alleged to be aggrieved by the decision and
ensuing nuisance abatement order of the Hearing Officer may appeal
such order in the same manner as described in Section 215.060(D).
D. Exceptions.
1. With respect to any undeveloped property in excess of three (3)
acres, the provisions of this Section relating to grass, weeds, and
rank vegetation in excess of nine (9) inches shall apply only to the
portions of such property which are located within one hundred
(100) feet of any street right-of-way or within one hundred (100)
feet of any adjoining property.
2. Industrial Park Zoning District. Undeveloped and unused portions
of property in the Industrial Park District zoning may be exempted
in whole or in part from such portions of this Chapter relating to
grass, weeds, and rank vegetation by the Board of Aldermen upon
written petition if the Board of Aldermen determines that the
maintenance of grass, weeds, and rank vegetation in excess of nine
(9) inches on such portions of the property would not be a hazard to
public safety, cause a harm to nearby property owners, or
contribute to the decline of property values. The visibility from the
rights-of-way and proximity to residences shall be a factor
considered in reviewing an exemption request. This exemption
shall not apply to any property within five (5) feet of any sidewalk
or other public improvement and shall be personal to the property
owner(s) receiving it and shall not run with the land.
E. Repeat Violations. If weeds are allowed to grow, or if trash is allowed to
accumulate, on the same property in violation of this Section more than
once during the same growing season in the case of weeds, or more
than once during a calendar year in the case of trash, the Community
Development Director, his/her designee, or the Code Enforcement
Officer, or his/her designee, may, without further notification, have the
weeds or trash removed and the cost of the same shall be billed in the
manner described in Section 215.060(C) and as authorized by law,
including Section 71.285, RSMo.
A. Declared Public Nuisance. All dead or decaying trees, and all trees
infected by a disease that are not promptly pruned, removed, or treated
or that are not remediable, and which, the Public Works Director, his/
Section
215.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.100
AO:172
Section 215.110. Smoke Deemed A Public Nuisance, When. [Ord.
No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
her designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee,
reasonably believe, due to their proximity to any public sidewalk,
street, right-of-way, alley, or public or private structure, constitute a
danger to the safety, health, and general welfare of the public, or which
constitute an immediate threat to a public or private structure within
the fall zone of said trees, or which otherwise constitute a danger to
the health, safety, or welfare of the general public are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and shall be promptly pruned, treated, or taken
down and removed from the premises as dictated by the facts of the
specific situation by the owner(s) of any tract of land on which the same
is situated. The stump shall also be removed down to ground level if
being taken down and removed.
B. Notice And Hearing. Notice of such public nuisance along with demand
to abate same by pruning, treating, or removing such tree(s) within a
reasonable time, not to be less than ten (10) days, shall be given by the
City Planner, his/her designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/
her designee, in the same manner as provided in Section 215.060(A).
The City shall perform the same duties, have the same powers and
rights, and give the same notices and conduct the same hearings as are
provided for in Sections 215.060(A) and 215.060(B), respectively,
absent an emergency which may be abated by the City as described in
Section 215.050. Should the City be forced to abate the nuisance, it
shall proceed as provided in 215.060(C).
C. Appeal. Any person(s), alleged to be aggrieved by the decision and
ensuing nuisance abatement order of the Hearing Officer may appeal
such order in the same manner as described in Section 215.060(D).
A. Declared Public Nuisance. The emission or discharge into the open air
of dense smoke within the limits of the City of Fenton is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance. The owners, lessees, occupants, managers, or
agents of any building, establishment, or premises from which dense
smoke is so emitted or discharged shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, shall pay a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each and every day such
smoke shall be emitted or discharged shall constitute a separate
offense; provided, however, that in any suit or proceeding under this
Section, it shall be a good defense if the person charged with a violation
thereof shall show to the satisfaction of the court trying the facts that
there is no known practicable device, appliance, means or method by
application of which to his or her building, establishment or premises
the emission or discharge of the dense smoke complained of in that
proceeding could have been prevented.
B. Notice And Hearing. Notice of such public nuisance along with demand
to abate same by reducing or eliminating the emission or discharge into
Section
215.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.110
AO:173
Section 215.120. Obstructing View Of Vehicular Traffic Deemed A
Public Nuisance. [Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
the open air of such dense smoke within a reasonable time, not to
be less than ten (10) days, shall be given by the City Planner, his/her
designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, in the
same manner as provided in Section 215.060(A). The City shall perform
the same duties, have the same powers and rights, and give the same
notices and conduct the same hearings as are provided for in Sections
215.060(A) and 215.060(B), respectively, absent an emergency which
may be abated by the City as described in Section 215.050. Should the
City be forced to abate the nuisance, it shall proceed as provided in
215.060(C).
C. Appeal. Any person(s), alleged to be aggrieved by the decision and
ensuing nuisance abatement order of the Hearing Officer may appeal
such order in the same manner as described in Section 215.060(D).
A. Corner Lot Obstruction Declared Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful,
and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, to maintain any tree,
shrub, other vegetation growth, or structure of any kind upon any
corner lot in the City of Fenton in which the lot lines of the property
adjoining two (2) intersecting streets in such a manner that the view of
vehicular traffic in either direction at said intersection is obstructed.
Any tree, shrub, other vegetation growth, or structure of any kind so
situated, located, and maintained on any such lot so as to obstruct the
view of a motor vehicle on either intersecting street for a distance of
forty (40) feet in each direction from the point of intersection of the
curblines of such intersecting streets shall be, and is hereby deemed to
be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of and visitors to the City of Fenton and as such is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Notice And Hearing. Notice of such public nuisance along with demand
to abate same by pruning, trimming, or removing such tree, shrub,
other vegetation growth, or structure within a reasonable time, not to
be less than ten (10) days, shall be given by the City Planner, his/her
designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, in the
same manner as provided in Section 215.060(A). The City shall perform
the same duties, have the same powers and rights, and give the same
notices and conduct the same hearings as are provided for in Sections
215.060(A) and 215.060(B), respectively, absent an emergency which
may be abated by the City as described in Section 215.050. Should the
City be forced to abate the nuisance, it shall proceed as provided in
215.060(C).
C. Appeal. Any person(s), alleged to be aggrieved by the decision and
ensuing nuisance abatement order of the Hearing Officer may appeal
such order in the same manner as described in Section 215.060(D).
Section
215.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
215.130
AO:174
Section 215.130. Violations. [Ord. No. 3982, 9-26-2019]
Section 215.140. All Legal Remedies Available. [Ord. No. 3982,
9-26-2019]
Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of the City to seek any other
remedy in the Municipal Court of the City of Fenton, the Circuit Court of St.
Louis County, Missouri, or any other remedy available or allowed by law in
addition to or in lieu of any remedy specified in this Chapter.
Chapter 217
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to maximum charges for towing and storage,
§385.050; as to sale of abandoned property by city, §385.060; as to crime
inquiry and inspection reports required by state law, §385.040.
Section 217.010. Definitions.43
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
A. Penalty. Any person, firm, or other legal entity violating any provision(s)
of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished in the manner and to
the degree as provided in Section 100.060(E) of the City Code.
B. Each Day An Offense. Each day any violation of this Chapter continues
unabated after notice has been given and the reasonable time to abate
given has elapsed shall constitute a separate offense as described in
Section 100.060(B) of the City Code.
C. Charge Of Failure To Abate A Nuisance. The City, or other law
enforcement authority on the City's behalf, may issue a summons for
any person, firm, or other legal entity in care and control of a property
who fails to remove or abate a public nuisance after such notice to
abate has been provided and the reasonable time to abate given has
elapsed with the nuisance unabated and such failure shall be a separate
offense in violation of this Code. Jurisdiction of the case shall proceed in
all respects as in other cases of ordinance violations.
D. Charge Of Engaging In A Nuisance. The City, or other law enforcement
authority on the City's behalf, may issue a summons to any owneroccupant,
tenant, or person who engages in, encourages, permits, or
otherwise impedes abatement of a nuisance after notice of a public
nuisance has been provided and the reasonable time to abate given has
elapsed and such action shall be a separate offense in violation of this
Code. Jurisdiction of the case shall proceed in all respects as in other
cases of ordinance violations.
43.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.001, RSMo.
Section
215.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.010
AO:175
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended or unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject
to removal from public or private property as provided in this Chapter,
whether or not operational. For any vehicle towed from the scene of an
accident at the request of law enforcement and not retrieved by the
vehicle's owner within five (5) days of the accident, the agency requesting
the tow shall be required to write an abandoned property report or a
criminal inquiry and inspection report.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
Section 217.020. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.44
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on any private real
property owned by another without his/her consent.
Section 217.030. Open Storage of Inoperable Vehicles or Public
Safety Hazards Prohibited.45
The open storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other vehicles
deemed by the City to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed
within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent
public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a
business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so
long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and
the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances.
Section 217.040. Towing of Abandoned Property On Private Real
Property.46
A. Generally. The City, including the City Police Department, may tow
motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety
hazard pursuant to Section 217.030 or are derelict, junk, scrapped,
disassembled or otherwise harmful to the public health. The City shall
perform such tow pursuant to the terms of Section 217.050. When a
City agency other than the Police Department authorizes a tow under
this Subsection, it shall report the tow to the Police Department within
two (2) hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report.
44.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
45.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.159, RSMo.
46.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.157.1 — 2, 304.157.4 — 9, 304.158.2
— 4, 304.158.8 — 9, RSMo.
Section
217.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:176
B. Towing Authorized By City Police Department. If a person abandons
property on any real property owned by another without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of
the person in possession of the real property, any City Police Officer
may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property
from the property in the following circumstances:
1. The abandoned property is left unattended for more than fortyeight
(48) hours; or
2. In the judgment of a Police Officer, the abandoned property
constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use
of the real property by the person in possession.
C. Towing Authorized By Real Property Owner, Lessee Or Property Or
Security Manager.
1. The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real
property or the property or security manager of the real property
may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or
property parked in a restricted or assigned area without
authorization by a Law Enforcement Officer only when the owner,
lessee or property or security manager of the real property is
present. A property or security manager must be a full-time
employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to
this Subsection may be made only under any of the following
circumstances:
a. Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the
property, a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two
(22) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in
height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that
unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a
restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's
expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related to
towing and storage, and containing the telephone number of
the local traffic law enforcement agency where information can
be obtained or a twenty-four (24) hour staffed emergency
information telephone number by which the owner of the
abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or
assigned area may call to receive information regarding the
location of such owner's property.
b. Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The
abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied
residential property with four (4) residential units or less and
the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful
possession has notified the City Police Department, and ten
(10) hours have elapsed since that notification.
c. Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned
property is left unattended on private real property and the
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:177
owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession
of real property has notified the City Police Department, and
ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since that notification.
2. Pursuant to this Section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession
of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned
property without authorization from a City Police Officer shall at
that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be
considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant
to Section 575.060, RSMo. The report shall be in the form
designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of
Revenue and shall contain the following:
a. The year, model, make and abandoned property identification
number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if
known;
b. A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted
by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession
of the real property;
c. The license plate or registration number and the State of
issuance, if available;
d. The physical location of the property and the reason for
requesting the property to be towed;
e. The date the report is completed;
f. The printed name, address and telephone number of the
owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of
the real property;
g. The towing company's name and address;
h. The signature of the towing operator;
i. The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security
manager attesting to the facts that the property has been
abandoned for the time required by this Section and that all
statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the
person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to
the penalties for making false statements;
j. Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of
the towing of the abandoned property and for the signature of
the Law Enforcement Official receiving the report; and
k. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue
deems appropriate.
3. Any towing company which tows abandoned property without
authorization from the City Police Department pursuant to
Section
217.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:178
Subsection (B) of this Section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned
property report to the City Police Department. The copy may be
produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which
produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required,
but only if the City Police Department has the technological
capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing
company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two
(2) hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to
Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this Section, otherwise the report shall be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours.
4. The City Police Department, after receiving such abandoned
property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned
property report is filed with the Police Department and shall
promptly make an inquiry into the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement
computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been
reported as stolen. The Police Department shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system and a Police Officer shall sign the
abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a
signed copy.
5. The City Police Department, after receiving notification that
abandoned property has been towed by a towing company, shall
search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and
provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder
information on the abandoned property, and if the tower has online
access to the Department of Revenue's records, the tower shall
comply with the requirements of Section 304.155, RSMo. If the
abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days,
the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property
report signed by a Law Enforcement Officer to the Department of
Revenue.
6. No owner, lessee or property or security manager of real property
shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in
violation of this Section.
7. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of
abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds
for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the
registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company
that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property
with the written authorization of the property owner or the
property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall
not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of
the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned
property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for:
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:179
Section 217.050. General Provisions and Procedures.47
a. Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in
the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and
b. The removal of property other than the property specified by
the owner of the private real property from which the
abandoned property was removed.
D. Damage To Property. The owner of abandoned property removed from
private real property may recover for any damage to the property
resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or
removing, the abandoned property.
E. Real Property Owner Liability. Any owner of any private real property
causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is
liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or
towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
F. Written Authorization Required — Delegation Of Authority To Tow.
1. Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the
City Police Department pursuant to this Section, a towing company
shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property
from private real property without first obtaining written
authorization from the real property owner. All written
authorizations shall be maintained for at least one (1) year by the
towing company.
2. General authorization to remove or commence removal of
abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not
be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case
of abandoned property unlawfully parked within fifteen (15) feet of
a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a Fire Department or
the State Fire Marshal.
G. Towing Company Liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a
towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned
property from private property without first obtaining written
authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or
agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement
of the removal, except as permitted in Subsection (F) of this Section, is
liable to the owner of the property for four (4) times the amount of the
towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance
violation penalty, for a violation of this Section.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
47.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6 (2004), 304.155.11 — 12,
304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
217.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:180
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. As to Crime Inquiry and
Inspection Reports required by State Law, see Chapter 385 of this
Code, Section 385.040.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
Section
217.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:181
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
Section
217.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:182
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility,
a copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the
facility. The notice provided for in this Section shall include
the amount of mileage if available shown on the abandoned
property at the time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
Section
217.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:183
Chapter 220
PUBLIC PARKS
Section 220.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §235.010; Ord. No. 527 §1,
10-20-1980; Ord. No. 1975 §1, 7-15-1996]
The following words, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be construed as
defined in this Section:
BOARD — The Park, Beautification and Recreation Committee of the City of
Fenton, also known as the "Park Board".
CITY — The City of Fenton.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
area of the City, owned or used by the City, and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PERMITS — A permit for exclusive use of parks or portion thereof, or
buildings, or portion thereof, as provided for and defined in this Chapter.
PERSONS — Includes persons, associations, partnerships, firms and
corporations, or any company or organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size,
kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles of
the City.
Section 220.020. Prohibited Acts. [R.O. 2006 §235.020; Ord. No.
527 §2, 10-20-1980, Ord. No. 685 §1, 1-16-1984; Ord. No. 1975 §2,
7-15-1996]
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain
a junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
A. No person in a City park shall:
1. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, paving or paving materials, water lines or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
Section
217.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
220.020
AO:184
Section 220.030. Fishing Permit Required/Limits and Size Applied.
[R.O. 2006 §235.035; Ord. No. 2262 §1, 7-27-1999]
Section 220.040. Traffic. [R.O. 2006 §235.040; Ord. No. 527 §4,
10-20-1980]
No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
fifteen miles per hour (15 m.p.h.) nor shall they at any time drive any vehicle
placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes,
posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities, or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
2. Dig, or remove any soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants,
down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency, except in
designated areas.
3. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, or upon or across such lands, except on
special written permit.
4. Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any trees or plants or
injure the bark, pick flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant; or attach
any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant; or dig in or
otherwise disturb grassy areas, nor in any way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
5. Hunt, molest, harm, trap, kill, shoot at any animal, reptile or bird;
or remove the eggs or nest or young of any bird.
6. Give or offer to give any animal or bird any noxious substance.
7. Use, possess, or bring in to any City park any glass bottle or
container.
A. No person shall fish in any City Park Lake without having first obtained
a fishing permit from the State of Missouri Conservation Department, if
they have reached the age of sixteen (16) or have not reached the age of
sixty-five (65). The permit must be in his or her possession while fishing.
No person shall keep in his or her possession or about his or her person
more than six (6) fish total of any variety per day. The following size and
limit restrictions apply:
1. One (1) bass per day (eighteen (18) inch minimum length),
2. Three (3) catfish per day.
B. No person shall violate any size requirement, rule or restriction as
listed by the Missouri State Conservation Department. This Section
applies to each lake unless otherwise posted.
Section
220.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.040
AO:185
on any area except the paved park roads, or parking areas, or other such
areas as may on occasion be designated as temporary parking areas by the
Board; or park a vehicle in other than established or designated parking
areas. Exception: Park personnel in performance of their duties.
Section 220.050. Parking in Designated Areas Only. [R.O. 2006
§235.050; Ord. No. 527 §7, 10-20-1980]
No person in a park may park or cause to be parked any vehicle on grassy
areas except by special permit issued by the Board. Vehicles must be parked
in areas designated for such use. Exception: City vehicles as required in
course of work or as excepted.
Section 220.060. Trucks and Buses. [R.O. 2006 §235.060; Ord. No.
527 §8, 10-20-1980]
No trucks or buses exceeding an unloaded weight of eight thousand (8,000)
pounds may enter any City park unless specific permission in writing is
obtained from the Board. This does not include vehicles delivering to or
coming from the parks, or vehicles engaged in work for the City.
Section 220.070. Swimming Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §235.070; Ord.
No. 527 §5, 10-20-1980]
No person in any park shall swim, dive, or wade in any lake, pond, or stream
within any park; except places that are provided therefor.
Section 220.080. Location of Fires. [R.O. 2006 §235.080; Ord. No.
527 §9, 10-20-1980]
Fires may be built in receptacles and facilities intended therefore, unless
permission is secured in writing from the Board; patrons may use their
own portable "bar-b-que" braziers in areas designated by the Board and so
posted. No person who has built any such fire shall leave the area where
the fire was built without first extinguishing the fire. No person shall drop,
throw, or scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco,
papers, or other flammable material within any park area. Fires may be
prohibited entirely by the posting of special notices.
Section 220.090. Camping Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §235.090; Ord.
No. 527 §10, 10-20-1980]
Camping is prohibited in all City parks, except by written permission from
the Board.
Section 220.100. Domestic Animals. [R.O. 2006 §235.100; Ord. No.
527 §11, 10-20-1980]
A. Domestic animals are allowed in City parks only if the following
conditions are met:
Section
220.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
220.100
AO:186
Section 220.105. Equestrian Usage in City Parks. [R.O. 2006
§235.105; Ord. No. 2593 §1, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2783 §1,
2-22-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to ride a
horse or pony or allow to run at large a horse, pony or other similar animal
with the exception of pony rides for City sponsored events and other special
events as approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation or by his/her
designee. Requirements shall be dictated by City policy.
Section 220.110. Sanitation — Prohibited Acts. [R.O. 2006
§235.110; Ord. No. 527 §12, 10-20-1980]
Section 220.120. Solicitations Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §235.120;
Ord. No. 527 §13, 10-20-1980]
No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose whatsoever,
whether public or private within any of the parks, except by written
permission of the Board, when such solicitations are of direct benefit to the
City parks and recreational programs.
1. No leash on which a dog or cat is tethered may be longer than six
(6) feet in length, and held by a competent person.
2. No person shall permit a domestic animal to run loose.
3. No vicious animal of any kind shall be brought into the park at any
time even though restrained as described above.
4. No animal shall be tethered to any bush, tree, shrub or to any park
structure. Neither shall any person run any animal behind any
motor vehicle or bicycle or any other vehicle, whether on a leash or
not.
A. No person in a City park shall:
1. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, storm sewer, or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in pollution of such waters.
2. Litter, or cause to be littered any of the grounds, driveways,
buildings or other structures of the parks, by scattering, dumping
or leaving, paper, garbage, cans, broken glass, bottles, ashes,
rubbish, waste, or other trash. All such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
3. Use park trash receptacles for deposit of garbage or other rubbish
brought from their place of residence or work.
Section
220.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.130
AO:187
Section 220.130. Model Airplanes and Toys. [R.O. 2006 §235.130;
Ord. No. 527 §14, 10-20-1980]
No person shall operate any motor-driven model airplane, car or toy in a
park not designated for such use.
Section 220.140. Golf. [R.O. 2006 §235.140; Ord. No. 527 §15,
10-20-1980]
No person shall play or practice golf in any area of a park not designated
for such use.
Section 220.150. Bicycles and Skateboards. [R.O. 2006 §235.150;
Ord. No. 527 §16, 10-20-1980; Ord. No. 3355 §1, 9-26-2013]
Section 220.160. Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs. [R.O. 2006
§235.160; Ord. No. 527 §17, 10-20-1980; Ord. No. 1975 §3,
7-15-1996; Ord. No. 2016 §1, 1-22-1997]
A. No person in a park shall:
1. Operate a skateboard or ride a bicycle on other than a paved road
or path designated for that purpose, except a bicyclist may wheel
or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or
on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
2. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided.
3. Fail to comply with all local and State regulations regarding bicycle
safety.
4. Operate a skateboard or bicycle in any City park after dark or
before 6:00 A.M. the following day.
A. No person in a public park shall:
1. No drugs of any kind or description will be tolerated in any City
park at any time; exception is made for prescription drugs easily
identified as such.
2. No minor shall possess or consume any intoxicating beverages of
any kind or description including beer otherwise known as three
and two-tenths percent (3.2%).
3. Be allowed to possess alcoholic beverages during league or
tournament play within five hundred (500) feet of Diamonds 1, 2 or
3 near the concession stand in Fenton City Park, unless beverages
have been purchased at the park concession stand.
Section
220.130
FENTON CITY CODE Section
220.170
AO:188
Section 220.170. Permits For Use of Specific Areas — How
Obtained. [R.O. 2006 §235.170; Ord. No. 527 §18, 10-20-1980; Ord.
No. 2498 §1, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 3818, 6-28-2018]
Permits for use of specific areas in a City park must be obtained by
submitting an application in writing at least fourteen (14) days in advance
of such use. These areas include softball fields 1 — 7 and soccer fields
1 — 8. All groups, associations, or assemblies comprised of fifty (50) or
more persons must obtain a certification of liability insurance naming the
"City of Fenton" as an additional insured in an amount no less than the
individual and combined sovereign immunity limits established by Section
537.610, RSMo., for political subdivisions. Nothing in this requirement or
the insurance shall be deemed a waiver of the City's sovereign immunity.
Upon a written request, the Board may waive or modify these insurance
requirements upon good cause shown. The City of Fenton has the right to
refuse field usage at any time to any person, based on field conditions and
weekly scheduled field work, without a permit.
Section 220.180. Consideration of Park or Recreational Activities
Ordinances. [R.O. 2006 §235.180; Ord. No. 527 §19, 10-20-1980]
No ordinance pertaining to the parks or recreational activities of the City
shall be considered by the Board of Aldermen without first referring the
same to the Park Board and after receiving its recommendations with
reference thereto; but if no recommendation is received within a period of
thirty (30) days after the matter is referred to the Board, then the Board of
Aldermen may take action without such recommendation.
Section 220.190. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2006 §235.190; Ord. No.
527 §20, 10-20-1980; Ord. No. 1975 §4, 7-15-1996; Ord. No. 3356 §1,
9-26-2013]
Section 220.200. Provisions Not Applicable To Employees. [R.O.
2006 §235.210; Ord. No. 527 §22, 10-20-1980]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to City park
employees while actually engaged in their official duties, nor shall the
provisions of this Chapter apply to Board members or City Officials while
attending to City business.
A. Fenton City Park will open at 6:00 A.M. and close at 11:00 P.M. daily.
B. Employees operating the concession stand in Fenton City Park shall be
allowed to remain in the park until 12:30 A.M.
C. All other City-owned parks will be open from 8:00 A.M. to dusk daily.
D. The Olde Towne Pavilion will operate from 8:00 A.M. to dusk or until
11:00 P.M. by approved permit daily.
Section
220.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.210
AO:189
Section 220.210. Special Rules By The Board. [R.O. 2006 §235.220;
Ord. No. 527 §23, 10-20-1980]
When, in the opinion of the Board, special rules and regulations are needed
to properly develop, construct, maintain, and operate any particular work,
special rules may be adopted by the Board, and shall be effective when
posted within said park areas. Such rules and regulations to be confirmed
at the next Board of Aldermen meeting.
Section 220.220. Operational Responsibility and Funding For
Concession Stands in City Parks. [R.O. 2006 §235.230; Ord. No. 563
§1, 1-18-1982]
Section 220.230. Protection of Heroes Memorial. [R.O. 2006
§235.245; Ord. No. 2752 §1, 8-31-2005]
A. The overall responsibility of the operation of any and all concession
stands within the City parks shall be part of the duties of the Park
Director. The Park Director is hereby authorized to hire appropriate
staff and to do all things necessary to reasonably and appropriately
operate concession stands within the City subject to the following:
1. Operation plan. Before any concession stand or stands shall be set
up and operated by the City of Fenton, Missouri, the Park Director
shall develop a plan of operations that shall include a listing of
needed personnel and an organization of their responsibilities, an
operational budget and such other things as are necessary to open
said concession stand or stands including a listing and accounting
of equipment needed. Before the plan may be instituted it shall be
approved by the Board of Aldermen, except that day-to-day
operations within the confines of budgeted amounts shall be under
the authority of the Park Director and City Clerk. Any personnel
needed shall be hired only with the approval of the Personnel
Committee of the Board of Aldermen.
2. Inclusion in budget. There shall be established in the budget of the
City of Fenton, Missouri, a special account for the operation of the
concession stand or stands which shall contain funds to provide for
the purchase of capital, for salaries and the provisions of other
operational funds in conformance with the plan of operations
submitted and approved as above set out.
3. Cash flow to general fund. All monies so received in excess of the
operational funds necessary as set out in said plan shall be
submitted to the Park Director who shall place the bookkeeping
entries so as to credit said to the concession stand. Then at the end
of each season in which any concession stand shall be open, a
report shall be submitted by the Park Director to the Mayor and the
Board of Aldermen establishing and setting out the profit and/or
loss, cash flow and expenditures as well as revenue of the
concession stand.
Section
220.210
FENTON CITY CODE Section
220.230
AO:190
Chapter 225
SOLID WASTE
Section 225.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §245.010; Ord. No. 501 §1,
7-16-1979; Ord. No. 1905 §1, 11-20-1995]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meaning indicated below:
APPROVED INCINERATOR — An incinerator which complies with all
current regulations of the Missouri Air Conservation Commission.
BULKY RUBBISH — Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible
and/or non-combustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial,
industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishments which are either too
large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste
collection vehicles by solid waste collectors with the equipment available
therefore.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
CENTERPIECE — The sculpture at the center of the Heroes Memorial
consisting of a granite globe.
HEROES MEMORIAL — The memorial located in Fenton City Park
designated as a memorial to the heroes and victims of September 11,
2001, and to other heroes that have served our community, State and
nation.
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY — Includes the following:
Riding or operating any wheeled vehicle or device, including
skateboards, scooters, bikes, roller skates or rollerblades, within a
fifty (50) foot radius from the centerpiece of the Heroes Memorial,
but in no event shall the riding or operation of any wheelchair
or other wheeled vehicle necessary to assist the physically
handicapped be deemed a prohibited activity;
1.
Walking any pet or domestic animal within a fifty (50) foot radius
from the centerpiece of the Heroes Memorial or allowing any pet
or domestic animal to enter the area within a fifty (50) foot radius
from the centerpiece of the Heroes Memorial, but in no event
shall the use of a guide dog necessary to assist the physically
handicapped be deemed a prohibited activity; or
2.
3. Damaging or defacing the Heroes Memorial.
B. No Prohibited Activities Allowed Within A Fifty Foot Radius Of
Centerpiece Of Heroes Memorial. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit a prohibited activity within a fifty (50) foot radius of the
centerpiece of the Heroes Memorial.
Section
220.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.010
AO:191
CITY — The City of Fenton, Missouri.
COLLECTION — Removal and transportation of solid waste from its place
of storage to its place of processing or disposal.
COMMERCIAL UNIT — A place where a business is conducted by a person,
persons, firm, or corporation in the normal pursuit of gainful profit.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures.
DIRECTOR — The City Administrator or his/her designee delegated to
administer the program.
DISPOSABLE YARD WASTES CONTAINER — Disposable paper sacks with
a capacity of twenty (20) to thirty (30) gallons primarily designated for
disposal of grass clippings and yard wastes.[Ord. No. 3606 § 1,
6-23-2016]
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure,
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Including but not limited to: pathological wastes,
explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive
materials.
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY — A housing facility containing more than
one (1) dwelling unit under one (1) roof.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved
real property, either as owner or as a tenant.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, City, County, other political subdivision, authority, State agency
or institution, or federal agency or institution.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are
modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
REFUSE — Solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semi-solid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in Sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Receptacle used by any person to store solid
waste during the interval between solid waste collections.
Section
225.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
225.010
AO:192
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire process of managing solid
waste in a manner which minimizes the generation and subsequent disposal
of solid waste, including waste reduction, source separation, collection,
storage, transportation, recycling, resource recovery, volume minimization,
processing, market development, and disposal of solid wastes.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN — Sections 260.220 and 260.325,
RSMo., require cities to have an approved Solid Waste Management Plan.
The City of Fenton's plan was prepared by the St. Louis-Jefferson Solid
Waste Management District and adopted by the City of Fenton, by
resolution, on November 20, 1995. This plan is designed to establish policy
guidelines for local efforts to help achieve Missouri's forty percent (40%)
waste reduction goal.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste or yard wastes
from the time of its production until the time of its collection.[Ord. No.
3606 § 1, 6-23-2016]
YARD WASTES — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden vegetation and
Christmas trees. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with
intact root balls.
Section 225.020. Solid Waste Storage. [R.O. 2006 §245.020; Ord.
No. 501 §2, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 3174 §1, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 3606 §
2, 6-23-2016]
A. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institution commercial
or business, industrial or agricultural establishment producing solid
waste within the corporate limits of the City, shall provide sufficient and
adequate containers for the storage of all solid waste except bulky
rubbish and demolition and construction waste to serve each such
dwelling unit and/or establishment; and to maintain such solid waste
containers at all times in good repair.
B. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institution
commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall
place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste container
except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid
waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times.
C. Residential solid waste shall be stored in containers approved or
supplied by the City. Containers shall be leakproof, waterproof, and
fitted with a fly-tight lid and shall be properly covered at all times
except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof.
The weight of any additional individual container and contents shall not
exceed fifty (50) pounds. Galvanized metal containers, rubber or
fiberglass containers, and plastic containers which do not become
brittle in cold weather, may be used. Disposable solid waste containers
with suitable frames or containers as approved by the Director may also
be used for storage of residential solid waste.
Section
225.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:193
Section 225.030. Collection of Solid Wastes. [R.O. 2006 §245.030;
Ord. No. 501 §3, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 3174 §2, 3-24-2011; Ord. No.
3196 §1, 5-26-2011]
D. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential
premises within an enclosed structure or behind the front elevation of
the residential structure or where the container is not visible from the
street. For the purpose of this Section, the front elevation of the
structure is any elevation that is parallel with a street, alley or
thoroughfare adjoining the lot.
E. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private
commercial property, unless the owner shall have been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The
storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection
equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel.
Commercial solid waste containers shall be screened as set forth in
Section 462.020(B)(3) of the Zoning Code or as required by any
approved site plan.
F. Tree limbs less than four (4) inches in diameter and brush shall be
securely tied in bundles not larger than forty-eight (48) inches long and
eighteen (18) inches in diameter. Tree limbs for collection shall be
stored within an enclosed structure or behind the front elevation of the
residential structure or where it is not visible from the street. For the
purpose of this Section, the front elevation of the structure is any
elevation that is parallel with a street, alley or thoroughfare adjoining
the lot. The weight of any individual bundle shall not exceed fifty (50)
pounds. All bundles must be tied with twine or similar material however
metal or metallic ties shall not be used.
G. Yard wastes shall be in biodegradable bags with a City sticker adhered
to them and maintained as to prevent the dispersal of wastes placed
therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or upon
adjacent public rights-of-way. Yard wastes for collection shall be stored
within an enclosed structure or behind the front elevation of the
residential structure or where it is not visible from the street. For the
purpose of this Section, the front elevation of the structure is any
elevation that is parallel with a street, alley or thoroughfare adjoining
the lot. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not
exceed fifty (50) pounds.
H. Solid waste containers which are not approved will be collected
together with their contents and disposed of.
A. The City shall provide for the collection of solid waste as follows:
1. The City shall provide for the collection of all residential solid waste
in the City, provided however, that the City may provide the
collection service by contracting with a person, County, or other
Section
225.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
225.030
AO:194
City or a combination thereof, for the entire City or portions thereof
as deemed to be in the best interests of the City.
2. All solid waste collected shall, upon being loaded into collection
equipment, become the property of the collection agency.
3. Tree limbs and yard wastes, as described in Subsections (E) and (F)
of Section 225.020 respectively, shall be placed at the curb for
collection. Solid waste containers as required by this Chapter for
the storage of other residential solid waste shall be placed at the
curb for collection. No solid waste containers, tree limbs, yard
wastes, or other solid wastes shall be placed on the street or in the
gutter or drainage ditch. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs,
yard wastes or other solid waste permitted by this Chapter to be
placed at the curb for collection shall not be so placed until the
regularly scheduled collection day.
4. Bulky rubbish shall be picked up by the contractor upon request by
the owner. Charges for same to be as mutually agreed to by the
owner and the collector. The City shall provide pickup of bulky
rubbish twice yearly, the first week of May and the first week of
October.
5. Solid waste collectors, employed by the City or a solid waste
collection agency operating under contract with the City, are
hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of
collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this Chapter. Solid
waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste.
6. The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of
solid waste within the City.
All residential solid waste, other than bulky rubbish, shall
be collected at least once weekly. At least sixty-four (64)
hours shall intervene between collections. All commercial
solid waste shall be collected once weekly, and shall be
collected at such lesser intervals as may be fixed by the
Director upon a determination that such lesser intervals
are necessary for the preservation of the health and/or
safety of the public.
7. Reserved.
8. All collection vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition and shall be so constructed, maintained and
operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All
vehicles to be used for collection of solid waste shall be constructed
with water-tight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral
part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material
with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the
vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting
Section
225.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.030
AO:195
Section 225.040. Disposal of Solid Waste. [R.O. 2006 §245.040; Ord.
No. 501 §4, 7-16-1979]
Section 225.045. Bulk Waste Disposal — Prohibitions. [R.O. 2006
§225.130; Ord. No. 2298 §1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 2463 §3,
4-15-2002]
solid waste, or, as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall be
enclosed, with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall
be transported in the loading hoppers.
9. Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities,
however, all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles,
trucks or receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of
the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-ofway.
10. Transportation and disposal of demolition and construction wastes
shall be in accordance with Sections 225.040 and other provisions
of this Chapter.
11. Reserved.
A. Solid wastes shall be disposed of at a processing facility or disposal
area approved by the City and complying with all requirements of the
Missouri Division of Health.
B. The Director may classify certain wastes as hazardous wastes which
will require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner
acceptable to the Director and which will meet all local, State and
Federal regulations.
A. No person, firm, association or corporation shall bring and deposit, on
private or public property, any garbage, trash, refuse, appliances or any
other waste matter into the City of Fenton for the purpose of avoiding
the normal cost of disposing of the materials.
B. Residents of the City of Fenton shall not knowingly allow any person,
firm, association or corporation to deposit any garbage, trash, refuse,
appliances or any other waste matter onto their property during
biannual bulk waste pickup periods for the purpose of allowing another
person to avoid the normal cost of disposing of the materials.
C. No person shall scavenge, rummage or scour residential neighborhoods
in the City of Fenton, during biannual bulk waste pickup periods for the
purposes of locating or removing items placed at the curb for pickup.
D. Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of violating this
Section will be punished as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
Section
225.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
225.050
AO:196
Section 225.050. Permits. [R.O. 2006 §245.050; Ord. No. 501 §5,
7-16-1979; Ord. No. 1905 §2, 11-20-1995]
A. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the
City, without first obtaining an annual permit therefor from the City.
B. No such permit shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor,
in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain
with the Director evidence of a satisfactory public liability insurance
policy, covering all operations of such applicant pertaining to such
business and all vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof as
follows: Worker's Compensation/Coverage A — Statutory, Employer's
Liability/Coverage B — $500,000.00; Commercial General Liability
including contractual liability, bodily injury and property damage —
$2,000,000.00 each claim, $2,000,000.00 in aggregate; Comprehensive
Automobile Liability including bodily injury and property damage —
$2,000,000.00 each occurrence, $2,000,000.00 in aggregate; and
General Commercial Property Insurance — $2,000,000.00 each
occurrence, $2,000,000.00 in aggregate. Should any such policy be
canceled, the Director shall be notified of such cancellation by the
insurance carrier in writing not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of such cancellation, and provisions to that effect shall be
incorporated in such policy, which shall also place upon the company
writing such policy the duty to give such notice.
C. If the application shows that the applicant will collect, transport,
process or dispose of solid wastes without hazard to the public health or
damage to the environment and in conformity with the laws of the State
of Missouri and this Chapter, the Director shall issue the permit
authorized by this Chapter. The permit shall be issued for a period of
one (1) year, and each applicant shall pay therefore a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) for each solid waste processing or disposal facility to be
operated and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each collection vehicle to
be used. If, in the opinion of the Director, modifications can be made to
the application regarding service, equipment, or mode of operation, so
as to bring the application within the intent of this Chapter, the Director
shall notify the applicant in writing setting forth the modification to be
made and the time in which it shall be done.
D. If the applicant does not make the modifications pursuant to the notice
in Subsection (C) within the time limit specified therein or if the
application does not clearly show that the collection, transportation,
processing or disposal of solid wastes will create no public health
hazard or be without harmful effects on the environment, the
application shall be denied and the applicant notified by the Director, in
writing, stating the reason for such denial. Nothing in this Section shall
prejudice the right of the applicant to reapply after the rejection of his/
her application provided that all aspects of the reapplication comply
with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
225.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.050
AO:197
Section 225.060. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2006 §245.060; Ord.
No. 501 §6, 7-16-1979]
E. The annual permit may be renewed simply upon payment of the fee or
fees as designated herein if the business has not been modified. If
modifications have been made, the applicant shall reapply for a permit
as set forth in Subsections (B) and (C) hereof. No permit authorized by
this Chapter shall be transferable from person to person.
F. In order to insure compliance with the laws of this State, this Chapter
and the rules and regulations authorized herein the Director is
authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the
City of Fenton. No inspection shall be made in any residential unit
unless authorized by the occupant or by due process of law. In all
instances where such inspections reveal violation of this Chapter, the
rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the
State of Missouri, the Director shall issue notice for each such violation
stating therein the violation or violations found, the time and date and
the corrective measure to be taken, together with the time in which
such corrections shall be made.
G. In all cases, when the corrective measures have not been taken within
the time specified, the Director shall suspend or revoke the permit or
permits involved in the violation, however, in those cases where an
extension of time will permit correction and there is no public health
hazard created by the delay, one (1) extension of time not to exceed the
original time period may be given.
H. Any person who feels aggrieved by any notice of violation or order
issued pursuant thereto of the Director may, within ten (10) days of the
act for which redress is sought appeal directly to the Court of Fenton in
writing, setting forth in a concise statement the act being appealed and
the grounds for its reversal.
A. The Director shall make, amend, revoke, and enforce reasonable and
necessary rules and regulations, governing, but not limited to:
1. Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid
waste containers.
2. Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type
composition, equipment, size and shape thereof.
3. Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any.
4. Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste
containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size
limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste
containers.
Section
225.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
225.060
AO:198
Section 225.070. Prohibited Practices. [R.O. 2006 §245.070; Ord.
No. 501 §7, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 1408 §1, 8-20-1990; Ord. No. 2967
§1, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 3196 §2, 5-26-2011]
5. Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers.
6. Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste
containers.
7. Schedules of and routes for collection of solid waste.
8. Collection points of solid waste containers.
9. Collection and disposal of solid waste.
10. Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof.
11. Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof.
12. Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing and/
or disposal facilities.
13. Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludge, ashes,
agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils,
greases, etc.
14. Haulers vehicle weights; utilizing private driveways to turn around;
keeping vehicles on pavement or road surfaces.
B. The Director or such other City Official who is responsible for preparing
utility and other service charge billings for the City, is hereby
authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection and/or
disposal service charges, as hereinafter provided for.
C. A copy of and all rules and regulations made and promulgated under
the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk of the
City of Fenton.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his/her
own, without the written consent of the owner of such container
and/or, with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge
hereinafter provided for solid waste collection and disposal.
2. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment, or
with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties
as such, whether such equipment or collectors shall be those of the
City, or those of a solid waste collection agency operating under
contract with the City.
Section
225.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.070
AO:199
Chapter 230
YARD BY-PRODUCT COMPOSTING FACILITIES
Section 230.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §206.010; Ord. No. 2374
§1, 4-16-2001]
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
3. Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or
unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air
pollution control agency.
4. Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the City and Missouri Division of Health.
5. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or
disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the City
without a permit from the City or operate under an expired permit,
or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked.
6. Place a dead animal in a waste container for the purpose of
disposal.
7. Take any materials, to include but not be limited to newsprint,
cardboard, aluminum cans, glass bottles, and plastic milk and soda
bottles set out for curbside recycling collection other than the
collector authorized by the City.
8. Contaminate any materials, to include but not be limited to
newsprint, cardboard, aluminum cans, glass bottles, and plastic
milk and soda bottles set out for curbside recycling collection or to
set out contaminated materials for curbside recycling collection.
9. Operation of vehicles collecting solid waste in the City of Fenton
shall be governed by the following:
a. Collection or disposing of rubbish, garbage or waste material
for any person, firm or corporation from the premises in any
residential district, or commercial district which abuts or
adjoins a residential district in the City, is prohibited between
the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. of the following day.
b. Except as otherwise referenced in this Section, collection or
disposing of rubbish, garbage or waste material for any person,
firm or corporation from any premises south of South Highway
Drive is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 6:00
A.M. of the following day unless authorized by the City
Administrator for emergency purposes.
Section
225.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.010
AO:200
COMPOST — The biological decomposition of organic constituents under
controlled conditions.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Community Development.
YARD BY-PRODUCT — The source separated leaves, grass clippings, tree
trimmings and limbs, yard and garden vegetation and Christmas trees.
YARD BY-PRODUCT COMPOST FACILITY — A non-residential premise
which collects and/or accepts recovered yard by-product generated off-site
for the purpose of controlled biological decomposition.
Section 230.020. Yard By-Product Compost Facility. [R.O. 2006
§206.020; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.030. License To Operate Yard By-Product Compost
Facility. [R.O. 2006 §206.030; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
No person shall construct or operate a yard by-product compost facility
without a current and valid license for the construction and operation
thereof.
Section 230.040. License — How Acquired — Application Fees. [R.O.
2006 §206.040; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
A. All yard by-product compost facilities regulated by a municipality shall
at least once per year file a statement with the Director registering the
yard by-product compost facility. The statement shall contain the
information as follows:
1. Volumes of yard by-product in cubic yards received by the facility
during the previous year.
2. Volume of end-use product produced.
A. An initial license (as opposed to the annual renewal license) for the
construction and operation or expansion of a yard by-product compost
facility may be issued by the Director following the procedures declared
in this Chapter. An applicant for a license shall file three (3) copies of an
application addressed to the Director and filed with the Director. The
application shall consist of:
1. A request for issuance of a license; and
2. A materials facility plan as described below.
B. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee based upon
the following schedule:
Facility Fee
Yard by-product compost facility $200.00
Not-for-profit yard by-product
compost facility
$1.00
Section
230.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.040
AO:201
Section 230.050. Application For Yard By-Product Compost Facility
License. [R.O. 2006 §206.050; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
C. The Director shall not process an application which is not accompanied
by the application fee set forth in this Section.
A. An application to the Director for a license to construct and operate a
yard by-product compost facility shall contain a written request for the
issuance of a license for the construction and operation of a yard byproduct
compost facility and shall include a facility plan for the
construction/operation and closure of the facility, which facility plan
shall be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter pertaining to
construction and operation of a yard by-product compost facility and
shall include the following:
1. A legal description and outboundary survey of the property on
which the facility is to be located.
2. A plan for the construction and operation of the yard by-product
compost facility which includes:
a. A description of the type of materials the yard by-product
compost facility will accept.
b. The maximum storage capacity of material which will allow for
proper management of the material.
c. The technology utilized to process and store the materials.
d. Drawings detailing the operation of the yard by-product
compost facility.
e. Location of the nearest available water source.
f. A description of windrow construction (or other approved
methodology) to achieve a marketable finished compost
product.
g. A description of construction of processing and storage bases.
Bases shall be designed to shed stormwater and maintain
integrity through continued use of heavy equipment.
3. Closure plan for the facility.
4. A schedule for the construction and completion of the facility stated
with respect to the time of the issuance of a license for construction
and operation of the facility.
5. Local zoning authorizations including a copy of an approved
conditional use or special use permit as the case may be (if
applicable).
Section
230.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.050
AO:202
Section 230.060. Initial Determination of Sufficiency of Application.
[R.O. 2006 §206.060; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The Director shall notify an applicant who has submitted an application and
application fee for a license to operate a yard by-product compost facility
in writing either that the application is certified as meeting all pertinent
requirements regarding the form of the application or that the application
is deficient with respect to its form and specifically in what manner the
application does not comply with minimum application requirements. The
Director shall determine whether the representation made in the materials
facility plan regarding application for zoning approval has been met. If the
application has been determined not to comply with minimum application
requirements or the representation concerning application for zoning
approval is determined to be false, the applicant so notified shall be
required to submit additional information or otherwise correct any noted
deficiencies within ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of the Director's
letter. If the deficiencies are not corrected within the ninety (90) day period,
the Director shall return the application and the application fee to the
applicant, unless the applicant and the Director agree that the applicant
may have longer than ninety (90) days to respond.
Section 230.070. Investigation By Director. [R.O. 2006 §206.070;
Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.080. Modification of Materials Facility Plan. [R.O. 2006
§206.080; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
6. Multi-locations of the same organization shall file separate
information for each location. Application and annual license fees
shall apply to each separate location
7. Other information as the Director may require to assess suitability
of the proposed yard by-product compost facility.
A. The Director shall examine the premises and the application and shall
perform such tests and direct the preparation of such studies as will
assist him/her in determining:
1. Whether the facts contained in the application are accurate.
2. Whether the criteria set forth below regarding the standards of
issuance of a license are satisfied to the benefit of the residents of
Fenton.
A. The Director may require that the applicant modify the materials
facility plan for the purposes of:
1. Bring the application into compliance with law, although issuance
of a license, with or without modifications, is not evidence that the
application complies with the requirements of any jurisdiction.
Section
230.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.080
AO:203
Section 230.090. Standards For Approval of Materials Facility Plan.
[R.O. 2006 §206.090; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.100. Issuance of License By Director. [R.O. 2006
§206.100; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
If a materials facility plan is finally approved by the Director, a license
shall be issued by the Director upon payment to the Director of the annual
licensing fee described in Section 230.200 and a showing satisfactory to the
2. Ensuring that the construction and operation of the yard byproduct
compost facility is consistent with the health and welfare of
the residents of Fenton.
B. Prior to final approval or denial of the license, the Director shall notify
the applicant of problems or changes which must be addressed by the
applicant prior to approval of the materials facility plan. Within ten (10)
days, or such additional time as the Director may grant, the applicant
shall submit modifications to address the problems which the Director
has indicated. At the discretion of the Director, the Director may
continue to require additional changes to be made by applicant. In the
event that the Director determines that there are no modifications
which can be made to the application which will make it satisfactory, or
the Director determines that the modifications or responses made by
the applicant do not substantially further the application process, the
Director shall notify the applicant and permit ten (10) days for response
by the applicant. Thereupon, the Director may terminate consideration
of the materials facility for failure to pursue submission of an
acceptable materials facility plan.
A. The Director shall approve the materials facility plan, with or without
modifications, or disapprove the materials facility plan based on the
following criteria:
1. The possible environmental effect on the properties nearby the
proposed facility.
2. Whether the approval of the materials facility plan would in any
way create a hazard or menace to the public health, and whether it
would create a nuisance.
3. Whether the approval of the materials facility plan would violate
the provisions of this Chapter, other laws, or other ordinances or
regulations of St. Louis County.
B. Any materials facility plan submitted which does not satisfy the above
criteria shall not be approved by the Director.
C. The Director shall notify the applicant of his/her decision by certified
mail, whether approving the materials facility plan or disapproving the
materials facility plan.
Section
230.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.100
AO:204
Director that the insurance requirement of Section 230.270 and the bonding
requirement of Section 230.280 have all been met.
Section 230.110. License Personal To Applicant — How Transferred.
[R.O. 2006 §206.110; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The license issued by the Director shall be personal to the applicant and
may only be transferred by compliance with Section 230.210.
Section 230.120. Term of License. [R.O. 2006 §206.120; Ord. No.
2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The license issued by the Director shall be for a fixed number of years equal
to the estimated life of the facility as contained in the approved materials
facility plan. Notwithstanding the issuance of a license for a fixed number of
years, the materials facility plan and the license must be reviewed annually
subject to the provisions of Section 230.180, et seq., and the modifications
requested by the operator in the annual application may include a request
that the term of the license be changed.
Section 230.130. Cooperation With Other City Departments
Permitted. [R.O. 2006 §206.130; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
In the event that City of Fenton ordinances require the Planning
Commission or the Director of Community Development to hold a hearing
regarding the issuance of a conditional use permit (C.U.P.) or regarding a
rezoning which must be affected before the materials facility plan may be
lawfully implemented on a site, the Planning Commission and the Director
of Community Development may develop and implement a procedure
whereby the application submitted to the Director, and the verified
application for a conditional use permit or the petition for change of zoning,
as the case may be, be consolidated into a single application for the
convenience of the applicant, the City and the public.
Section 230.140. Cooperative Agreements Authorized. [R.O. 2006
§206.140; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
A. The Director is authorized to cooperate with the Missouri Department
of Natural Resources, and any other relevant jurisdiction, individually
or in combination for the purposes of:
1. Developing and implementing a procedure or procedures whereby
the application submitted to the Director and an application
concerning the same development submitted in another
jurisdiction be consolidated into a single application for the
convenience of the applicant, the City and the other jurisdiction or
jurisdictions.
2. Dividing responsibility for investigation and verification of the
information contained in an application, and the impact of
implementation of the materials facility plan on the City and the
Section
230.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.140
AO:205
Section 230.150. Applicant Becomes Operator Upon Receipt of
License. [R.O. 2006 §206.150; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Upon receipt of a license issued by the Director, the applicant becomes the
operator of the facility for which the license was issued.
Section 230.160. Existing Yard By-Product Compost Facilities. [R.O.
2006 §206.160; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Yard by-product compost facilities which operated or were licensed to
construct or operate pursuant to ordinances and rules in effect prior to
the effective date of this Chapter are exempted from the requirement of
presenting an initial materials facility plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
however, the first (1st) renewal application made by the operator of such
an existing facility shall contain a plan for closure in compliance with the
closure requirements of this Chapter imposed upon applications for new
facilities.
Section 230.170. License To Be Renewed Annually. [R.O. 2006
§206.170; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.180. Contents of Report Filed With Application For
Annual Renewal License For A Yard By-Product Compost Facility.
[R.O. 2006 §206.180; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
environment, all with the purpose of avoiding duplication of effort
by various jurisdictions.
A. Despite the approval of a materials facility plan for a yard by-product
compost facility for a fixed number of years, and the issuance of a
license for the construction and operation of the facility, the operator of
each facility shall apply to renew such license annually for each year
beginning with each anniversary date of the issuance of such initial
license, whether the construction of the facility is completed or not. The
renewal application as set forth in the schedule in Subsection (2) of this
Section shall be addressed and delivered to the Director at least thirty
(30) days prior to each anniversary date of the initial license, and shall
contain:
1. A request that a renewal license be issued for a period of one (1)
year; and
2. A report containing the information required in Section 230.180.
A. Every application for a renewal license for a yard by-product compost
facility shall contain the following information:
1. Any changes in the materials facility plan which must be made to
reflect actual usage or conditions.
2. Volumes of yard by-product in cubic yards received by the facility
during the previous year.
Section
230.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.180
AO:206
Section 230.190. Issuance of Renewal License By Director. [R.O.
2006 §206.190; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Upon receipt of the renewal application described in Sections 230.170 and
230.180, and the payment of the basic annual licensing fee as set forth in
Section 230.200, the Director shall issue a renewal license for the compost
facility. The Director shall not issue the renewal license if the license to
operate the facility has been revoked pursuant to this Chapter.
Section 230.200. Annual Licensing Fee. [R.O. 2006 §206.200; Ord.
No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The basic annual licensing fee shall be as follows:
Facility Fee
Yard by-product compost facility $200.00
Not-for-profit yard by-product
compost facility
$50.00
Section 230.210. Modification of Materials Facility Plan During
Effective Period of License Upon Request of Operator — Transfer of
License To Another. [R.O. 2006 §206.210; Ord. No. 2374 §1,
4-16-2001]
3. Volume of end-use product produced.
4. A listing of operating problems encountered and solution pursued.
A. If the operator believes that an error has been made in the materials
facility plan, such that the materials facility plan cannot be effectuated
without injury to the public health or welfare, or that the materials
facility plan can better be implemented by changes in provisions
approved by the Director, the operator may submit a request to the
Director containing the reasons for such a belief and the information
required in Section 230.180 for a renewal application. The Director
shall consider such a request and may modify the materials facility plan
to reflect such changes if he/she determines that such changes are
necessary to make or continue to make the facility comply with this
Chapter or other laws, rules, regulations or ordinances, or to make or
continue to make such facility operate in a manner that protects the
public health or welfare.
B. If the operator wishes to transfer his/her license to operate a yard byproduct
compost facility to another, and another person wishes to
accept the transfer of the license, the operator shall file a statement
with the Director so stating that the operator wishes to make such
transfer. The person wishing to operate the facility shall file an
application containing the information required by Section 230.180
along with a statement that such person desires to assume the rights,
duties and obligations of operation of the facility. The application shall
Section
230.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.210
AO:207
Section 230.220. License Suspended or Revoked — When — How.
[R.O. 2006 §206.220; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.230. Procedure For Suspension or Revocation Hearing.
[R.O. 2006 §206.230; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The Director shall provide at least ten (10) calendar days' notice to the
operator of the hearing to be held to consider the suspension or revocation
of the license of the operator to operate a yard by-product compost facility.
The hearing shall be open to the public.
Section 230.240. Construction To Conform To Requirements of
Materials Facility Plan and This Chapter. [R.O. 2006 §206.240; Ord.
No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
No person shall construct a yard by-product compost facility in a manner
that does not comply with the materials facility plan approved by the
Director of such facility or with the requirements of this Chapter.
be processed as an application under Subsection (A) of this Section.
Upon issuance of the license with modifications, which modifications
shall include an indication that the license is transferred to the person
desiring to take over operation of the facility, such person shall become
the operator of the facility; however, nothing herein shall relieve the
prior operator of any liability connected with events occurring during
the period in which the prior operator operated or was licensed to
operate such facility.
A. A license for operation of a yard by-product compost facility may be
suspended or revoked, following hearing before the Director, for any
one (1) or more of the following reasons:
1. Failure to comply with the provisions of the materials facility plan.
2. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter applicable to
the facility.
3. Failure to operate the facility in a manner consistent with the
public health and welfare and the health and welfare of persons
operating and using the facility.
B. For a violation of any of the above, the Director shall suspend the
license of the operator to operate the facility during the period such
violation continues to exist; or, if the violation can only exist during
operation, the suspension shall be until such time as the operator
establishes a procedure satisfactory to the Director which remedies the
violation.
C. For a willful misstatement of facts contained in any application or
renewal application, the Director may revoke the license or renewal
license.
Section
230.210
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.250
AO:208
Section 230.250. Inspections During Construction. [R.O. 2006
§206.250; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
During any period of construction (initial, expansion or modification) of a
yard by-product compost facility, the Director shall be permitted access to
the facility at reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether the
construction of the facility conforms to the materials facility plan.
Section 230.260. Final Approval of Director Required Prior To
Operation of Facility. [R.O. 2006 §206.260; Ord. No. 2374 §1,
4-16-2001]
Notwithstanding the final approval of a materials facility plan and issuance
of a license to construct and operate a yard by-product compost facility, the
facility shall not begin to operate and accept material until there is final
approval in writing by the Director indicating that a final inspection of the
facility following construction has been completed and that the facts then
in possession of the Director indicate that the facility has been constructed
according to the materials facility plan. Final approval in writing by the
Director is also required for final construction of facility modification prior
to the continued operation in an area affected by the construction.
Section 230.270. Operators of Yard By-Product Compost Facility To
Have Insurance. [R.O. 2006 §206.270; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
A. No license for the construction and operation of a yard by-product
compost facility shall be issued nor shall such a facility be operated
until and unless the applicant acquires public liability insurance
approved by the Director governing all proposed operations of the
applicant pertaining to the business of constructing and operating a
yard by-product compost facility. The insurance shall be with an insurer
acceptable to the Director and shall include coverage in one (1) policy
or multiple polices for any contractors or subcontractors engaged by
the insured for such business. Evidence of such insurance shall be filed
with the Director.
B. No license for the construction and operation of yard by-product
compost facility shall be issued nor shall such a facility be operated
until and unless the applicant provides insurance with Workers'
Compensation insurance, with minimum limits as set by law. The
insurance must be approved by the Director and shall be with an
insurer acceptable to the Director and shall include coverage in one (1)
policy or multiple policies for any contractors or subcontractors
engaged by the insured for such business.
C. No insurance policy required by this Section shall be approved by the
Director unless it provides that notice will be given by the insurer in the
event the policy is terminated or canceled.
D. The insured shall give notice to the Director if any policy required by
this Section is terminated or canceled.
Section
230.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.280
AO:209
Section 230.280. Closure Bond. [R.O. 2006 §206.280; Ord. No. 2374
§1, 4-16-2001]
No person shall construct or operate a yard by-product compost facility
without providing a bond required for closure as provided by this Section
for closure. The bond provided pursuant to this Section shall be in an
amount, based upon the active composting area of the facility during the
following twelve (12) months and modified by the renewal license process,
which assures that the facility will be properly closed if events occur within
the two (2) year period following the beginning of the most recent licensing
or renewal period which require that the facility be closed. The bond may
be a cash or corporate bond. If a cash bond is offered, the cash shall be
deposited with the City of Fenton, who shall give a receipt therefor. If a
cash bond is offered, the interest may be used to fulfill the bond obligation
if necessary; however, to the extent such interest remains unused at the
expiration of the bond, it shall be returned to the person providing the bond.
If a corporate bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty
company qualified to transact business in the State of Missouri and filed
with the City of Fenton. The bond must be approved by the City Attorney.
Section 230.290. Facility's Operation To Comply With Materials
Facility Plan. [R.O. 2006 §206.290; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
Section 230.300. Additional Standards For Operation of A Yard By-
Product Compost Facility. [R.O. 2006 §206.300; Ord. No. 2374 §1,
4-16-2001]
A. No person shall operate a yard by-product compost facility in a manner
that does not comply with the materials facility plan approved by the
Director for such facility and which does not comply with the
requirements of this Chapter pertaining to operation of such facility.
Failure to comply with the materials facility plan or operation of a yard
by-product compost facility shall be a violation by the person in whose
name the license is issued, as well as every agent, employee or
contractor assigned to construct or operate the facility who:
1. Does acts precluded by the materials facility plan or this Chapter,
or
2. Fails to do acts required by the materials facility plan or this
Chapter, or
3. Fails to maintain conditions required by the materials facility plan
or this Chapter, or
4. Maintains conditions prohibited by the materials facility plan or
this Chapter.
A. Yard by-product compost facilities shall adhere to the following
requirements:
Section
230.280
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.300
AO:210
Section 230.310. Signs Required At Entrances To Yard By-Product
Compost Facility. [R.O. 2006 §206.310; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
There shall be displayed at each entrance to each yard by-product compost
facility a sign containing the following information in letters at least two (2)
inches high and one-half (½) inch wide, the words "The following materials
will be accepted at this facility:" followed by a list of materials which will
not be accepted at the facility.
1. A sign listing materials accepted and not accepted must be visible
at the entrance of the facility.
2. A facility shall not accept material beyond that which can be
properly managed.
3. Materials for composting shall be stored in a manner that will
minimize the generation of odor and aesthetic problems, prevent
spontaneous combustion and the harborage of vectors, and does
not create a public health nuisance.
4. Vector control programs shall be implemented to prevent or rectify
vector problems.
5. Surface watercourses and runoff shall be diverted to storm sewers,
detention ponds or other approved collection methods.
6. Materials easily moved by wind shall be stored in such a manner so
as to prevent such material from becoming airborne and scattered.
7. Fire extinguishers shall be provided and accessible.
8. Persons not authorized shall not be permitted to remove or
scavenge in the materials deposited at the facility.
9. Facility must meet all zoning restrictions.
10. Records shall be maintained on site covering the following matters:
a. Major problems and complaints.
b. Vector control efforts.
c. Records on litter control efforts.
d. Records on quantity (volume/tons) of materials received.
e. Records on quantity (volume/tons) of end product distributed.
11. Compliance with handling, storage and disposal requirements for
materials regulated under Federal, State and/or local jurisdictions
shall be met.
Section
230.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.320
AO:211
Section 230.320. Right-Of-Entry For Inspection and To Remedy
Dangerous Conditions. [R.O. 2006 §206.320; Ord. No. 2374 §1,
4-16-2001]
A. The Director is authorized, with or without probable cause to believe
that a specific violation exists, to enter and inspect yard by-product
compost premises at any time to ensure that the facility is being
operated consistently with the materials facility plan, this Chapter, and
in the interests of the health and welfare of the residents of the City of
Fenton. Routine inspections shall be made during normal operational
hours of the facility. Where there is a suspected hazard, entry may be
made at any time.
B. If the Director is or becomes aware of a violation of the provisions of the
materials facility plan pertaining to the construction or operation of a
yard by-product compost facility or is or becomes aware of a violation of
a provision of this Chapter pertaining to construction or operation of
such a facility or is or becomes aware of a condition which threatens the
health and welfare of the residents of the County, he/she may make a
reasonable attempt to notify the operator, or owner of the premises or
person in possession if there is no license, and direct such person to
correct the violation within twenty-four (24) hours. In the event the
operator or owner or person in possession cannot be found or refuses to
correct or address the violation within twenty-four (24) hours after
notice in writing by the Director, the Director may, if he/she deems it
necessary in the interest of public health, enter upon the premises of
the facility and, either with the equipment and employees of the
operator or owner or person in possession, or with City-owned or leased
equipment and City employees, do such work as is necessary to correct
any condition so noticed.
C. Upon completion of such work, the Director shall cause the total cost of
such work to be determined and certify the same to Finance Director,
the report, with the approval of the Finance Director endorsed thereon,
shall be transmitted to the City Clerk, who shall assess the same as a
special tax against each lot or parcel of ground chargeable therewith in
the name or names of the owner or owners thereof.
D. All such special tax bills issued for such work shall be collectible by suit
brought by the City Attorney in the name of the City. Such special tax
bills and any action thereon shall be prima facie evidence on the
regularity or the proceedings for such special assessment, the validity
of the bill, the doing of the work, and of the furnishing of the materials
charged for, and of the liability of the property to the charge stated in
the bill, including the costs of bringing the action as a part of the cost
doing the work. Each said special tax bill shall include a charge of three
dollars ($3.00) for inspecting the same and giving the notice and
further charge of one dollar ($1.00) for issuing and recording the tax
bill. Such tax bills if not paid within thirty (30) days after issuance shall
bear interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum.
Section
230.320
FENTON CITY CODE Section
230.330
AO:212
Section 230.330. Closure of Yard By-Product Compost Facilities.
[R.O. 2006 §206.330; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
A yard by-product compost facility shall be closed in accordance with the
methods and procedures shown in the materials facility plan.
Section 230.340. Notification of Intent To Close Yard By-Product
Compost Facility. [R.O. 2006 §206.340; Ord. No. 2374 §1, 4-16-2001]
The operator shall notify the Director three (3) months prior to permanent
or planned closure of his/her intent to close a yard by-product compost
facility.
Chapter 235
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section 235.010. Establishment.
There is hereby created within and for the City of Fenton an emergency
management organization to be known as the Fenton Emergency
Management Organization, which is responsible for the preparation and
implementation of emergency functions required to prevent injury and
minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include emergency
management of resources and administration of such economic controls as
may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and emergency
activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements
thereto, and the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder.
Section 235.020. Organization.
This agency shall consist of a Director and other members appointed by
the Fenton Emergency Management Organization to conform to the State
organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as
outlined in the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan.
Section 235.030. Functions.
The organization shall perform emergency management functions within
the City of Fenton and may conduct these functions outside the territorial
limits as directed by the Governor during the time of emergency pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements thereto.
Section 235.040. Director.
A. The Director will be appointed by the Mayor.
B. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of local emergency management
Section
230.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.040
AO:213
Section 235.050. Scope of Operation.
Section 235.060. Mutual-Aid Agreements.
The City may enter into mutual-aid arrangements or agreements with other
public and private agencies within and without the State for reciprocal
emergency aid as authorized in Section 44.090, RSMo.
Section 235.070. City May Accept Services, Etc..
The City may, with the consent of the Governor, accept services, materials,
equipment, supplies or funds gifted, granted or loaned by the Federal
Government or an officer or agency thereof for emergency management
purposes, subject to the terms of the offer.
Section 235.080. Oath.
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the Fenton
Emergency Management Organization who advocates or has advocated a
change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the Government of
the United States or in this State or the overthrow of any Government in
the United States by force or violence, or has been convicted of or is under
indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United
States. Each person who is appointed to serve in the Fenton Emergency
Management Organization shall, before entering upon his/her duties, take
an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in this
State, which oath shall be substantially as follows:
operations, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor or Board
of Aldermen.
C. The Director shall be responsible for maintaining records and
accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed
under the jurisdiction of the Fenton Emergency Management
Organization.
A. The City of Fenton in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., may:
1. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency
management purposes; provide for the health and safety of
persons, the safety of property; and direct and coordinate the
development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the
policies and plans of the Federal and State Governments.
2. Appoint, provide or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and Police
personnel and other emergency operation teams, units or
personnel who may serve without compensation.
Section
235.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
235.080
AO:214
"I, ______________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Missouri against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well
and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And
I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence;
and that during such a time as I am a member of the Fenton Emergency
Management Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
Chapter 240
FALSE ALARMS
Section 240.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §265.010; Ord. No. 1688
§1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 1914 §1, 11-20-1995]
The following words, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ALARM USER — A person who uses an alarm system to protect any
building, structure, facility or premises.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
to be actuated manually or automatically upon the detection of an
unauthorized entry, intrusion, or other emergency in or on any building,
structure, facility, or premises through the emission of a sound or
transmission of a signal or message.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system intentionally or by
inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act to which the City responds,
including activation caused by the malfunction of the alarm system. The
following shall not be considered false alarms:
When a Police Officer determines that an alarm has been caused by the
malfunction of the indicator at the City.
1.
When a Police Officer determines that an alarm has been caused by
damage, testing or repair of telephone equipment or lines by the
telephone company or severe weather provided that such incidents are
promptly reported to the telephone company.
2.
When an alarm is caused by an attempted and unauthorized or illegal
entry, of which there is visible evidence.
3.
When an alarm is intentionally caused by the Alarm User acting under
a reasonable belief that need exists to call the City.
4.
Section
235.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:215
Section 240.020. False Alarm Service Charges. [R.O. 2006 §265.020;
Ord. No. 1688 §1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 2311 §1, 6-19-2000]
Chapter 245
HUMAN RIGHTS
When an alarm is followed by a call to the City canceling the alarm by
giving proper information, prior to the arrival of the City at the source
of the alarm.
5.
A. All false alarms to which the City responds shall result in the following
service charge to the alarm user:
1. A warning for the first (1st) false alarm in any calendar year.
2. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service charge for the second (2nd)
and any subsequent false alarm in any calendar year.
B. Upon determination by the City that a false alarm has occurred and a
service charge is due, the City shall send a notice to the alarm user of
the determination and directing payment within thirty (30) days.
C. The City shall cancel any notice or service charge upon satisfactory
proof by the alarm user that a particular alarm falls within the
exceptions enumerated in Section 240.010.
D. Willful refusal to pay any such service charge within thirty (30) days of
the notice shall constitute a violation of this Chapter, but in any
prosecution under Section 240.010 Subsection titled "False Alarm", for
violation of this provision, the City shall prove, in addition to the willful
refusal to pay, that the service charge was properly imposed.
Section
240.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
240.020
AO:216
ARTICLE I
Discriminatory Practices
Section 245.010. Unlawful Housing Practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial
status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, disability or familial status, or an intention to make
any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in
fact so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or
familial status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
a. That person;
Section
245.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.010
AO:217
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 245.010, 245.020 and 245.030, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability.
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs.
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
Section
245.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
245.010
AO:218
Section 245.020. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status
to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against
him/her in fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status of
such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 245.030. Discrimination in Selling or Renting By Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
Section 245.040. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions.
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1", suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of Fenton are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this State of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
213.010, RSMo., and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate
Section
245.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.040
AO:219
Section 245.050. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices.
Section 245.060. Exemptions.
against any such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 213.010, RSMo., and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, age, as it relates to employment,
disability or familial status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 245.010, 245.020 and 245.030:
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
Section
245.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
245.060
AO:220
Section 245.070. Reasonable Accommodation Policy and Procedure.
[Ord. No. 3549 §5, 10-22-2015]
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined
by Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 245.010,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
A. Purpose.
1. This Section implements the policy of the City of Fenton on
requests for reasonable accommodation in its rules, policies and
procedures for persons with disabilities as required by the Fair
Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Section 3604(f)(3)(B) and Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 12132.
Section
245.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.070
AO:221
The policy of the City of Fenton is to comply fully with the
provisions of the Fair Housing Act and Title II of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
2. Any person with disabilities and eligible under the Fair Housing Act
or Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act may request a
reasonable accommodation with respect to the various land use or
zoning laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City
as provided by the Fair Housing Act and Title II of the Americans
with Disabilities Act pursuant to the procedures set out in this
Section.
3. Nothing in this Section requires persons with disabilities or
operators of group homes for persons with disabilities acting or
operating in accordance with applicable zoning, licensing or land
use laws or practices to seek reasonable accommodation under this
Section.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms should have
these prescribed meanings:
ACTS — Collectively, the FHA and the ADA.
ADA — Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Section
12131 et seq., and its implementing regulations, 28 C.F.R. Part 35.
APPLICANT — An individual, group or entity making a request for
reasonable accommodation pursuant to this Section.
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department of the City
of Fenton.
DISABLED PERSON — Any person who is "handicapped" within the
meaning of 42 U.S.C. Section 3602(h) or a "qualified individual with a
disability" within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. Section 12131(2).
DWELLING — A "dwelling" as defined in 42 U.S.C. Section 3602(b).
FHA — The Fair Housing Act, Title III of the Civil Rights Act of 1968,
as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C.
Sections 3601 et seq., as may be amended.
C. Notice To The Public Of Availability Of Accommodation Process. The
Department shall prominently display a notice at the counter in the
Department advising those with disabilities or their representatives
that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with
the procedures established in this Section.
D. Requesting Reasonable Accommodation. In order to make specific
housing available to one (1) or more individuals with disabilities, a
disabled person or a person acting on his or her behalf at his or her
request (collectively, the applicant) may request a reasonable
accommodation relating to the various land use or zoning rules,
policies, practices and/or procedure of the City applicable to such
housing.
Section
245.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
245.070
AO:222
1. A request by an applicant for reasonable accommodation relating
to land use or zoning rules, policies, practices and/or procedures
shall be made orally or in writing on a reasonable accommodation
request form provided by the Department. The form shall contain:
a. The current zoning for the property;
b. The name, phone number and address of the owner of the fee
interest of the property (if other than the applicant);
c. The nature of the disability that requires the reasonable
accommodation. In the event that the specific individuals who
are expected to reside at the property are not known to the
applicant in advance of making the application, the applicant
shall not be precluded from filing the application, but shall
submit details describing the range of disabilities that
prospective residents are expected to have to qualify for the
housing. The applicant shall notify the Department, in the
event the residents at the location are not within the range
described. The Department shall then determine if an amended
application and subsequent determination of reasonable
accommodation is appropriate;
d. The specific type of accommodation requested by the
applicant. To the extent practicable, this portion should include
information concerning the impact of the reasonable
accommodation on the adjoining properties and area, the
number of people who are expected to be availing themselves
of the reasonable accommodation, the estimated number of
people in an average week who will be necessary to provide
services to the person(s) with disabilities at the property on an
on-going basis, whether or not this type of reasonable
accommodation is required to obtain a license from any State
or County authority to operate, and any other information the
applicant thinks would assist in determining the
reasonableness of the accommodation;
e. The applicant should also note, if known, whether this
accommodation requires any additional licensure from the
City; and
f. Whether the accommodation requested may be necessary to
afford one (1) or more disabled persons equal opportunity to
use and enjoy a specific dwelling.
Section
245.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.070
AO:223
The Department will assist the applicant with furnishing the
Department all information necessary for processing the
reasonable accommodation request, including that
information which the Department deems necessary to
complete a reasonable accommodation request form. Upon
the City's receipt of the necessary information to process
the applicant's request for reasonable accommodation, the
Department shall use the information to complete a
reasonable accommodation request form.
2. The Department will provide the assistance necessary to an
applicant in making a request for reasonable accommodation. The
Department will provide the assistance necessary to any applicant
wishing to appeal a denial of a request for reasonable
accommodation to ensure the process is accessible to the
applicant. The applicant is entitled to be represented at all stages
of the proceedings identified in this Section by a person designated
by the applicant.
3. Should the information provided by the applicant to the
Department include medical information or records of the
applicant, including records indicating the medical condition,
diagnosis or medical history of the applicant, the applicant may, at
the time of submitting such medical information, request that the
Department, to the extent allowed by law, treat such medical
information as confidential information of the applicant.
4. The Department shall provide written notice to the applicant, and
any person designated by the applicant to represent the applicant
in the application proceeding, of any request received by the
Department for disclosure of the medical information or
documentation which the applicant has previously requested be
treated as confidential by the Department. The Department will
cooperate with the applicant, to the extent allowed by law, in
actions initiated by the applicant to oppose the disclosure of such
medical information or documentation.
E. Jurisdiction.
1. Director/designee. The director of the Department, or their
designee (director/designee), shall have the authority to consider
and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. When a
request for reasonable accommodation is filed with the
Department, it will be referred to the director/designee for review
and consideration. The director/designee shall issue a written
determination within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a
completed application and may:
a. Grant the accommodation request, or
Section
245.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
245.070
AO:224
b. Deny the request, in accordance with Federal law. Any such
denial shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefor.
All written determinations shall give notice of the right to
appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation in
the appeals process. The notice of determination shall be sent
to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
by regular mail.
2. If reasonably necessary to reach a determination on the request for
reasonable accommodation, the director/designee may, prior to the
end of said thirty-day period, request additional information from
the applicant, specifying in detail what information is required. The
applicant shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of the request
for additional information to provide the requested information. In
the event a request for additional information is made, the thirtyday
period to issue a written determination shall be stayed. The
director shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days
after receipt of the additional information. If the applicant fails to
provide the requested additional information within said fifteen-day
period, the director shall issue a written determination within
thirty (30) days after expiration of said fifteen-day period.
F. Findings For Reasonable Accommodation. The following findings, while
not exhaustive of all considerations and findings that may be relevant,
must be made before any action is taken to approve or deny a request
for reasonable accommodation and must be incorporated into the
record relating to such approval or denial:
1. Whether the accommodation requested may be necessary to afford
one (1) or more persons with disabilities equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a specific dwelling;
2. Whether the requested accommodation would require a
fundamental alteration to the City's zoning scheme; and
3. Whether the requested accommodation would impose undue
financial or administrative burdens on the City.
A request for a reasonable accommodation shall not be denied for
reasons which violate the provisions of the Acts. This Section does
not obligate the City to grant any accommodation request unless
required by the provisions of the Acts or applicable Missouri State
law.
G. Appeals.
1. Within thirty (30) days after the date the director/designee mails a
written adverse determination, under Subsection (E) of this
Section, to the applicant, the applicant requesting reasonable
accommodation may appeal the adverse determination.
2. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.
Section
245.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.070
AO:225
3. If an individual applicant needs assistance in appealing a
determination, the Department will provide the assistance
necessary to ensure that the appeal process is accessible to the
applicant. All applicants are entitled to be represented at all stages
of the appeal proceeding by a person designated by the applicant.
4. Appeals shall be to the Board of Adjustment who shall hear the
matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably
practicable, but in no event later than forty-five (45) days after an
appeal has been filed. All determinations on appeal shall address
and be based upon the findings identified in Subsection (F) of this
Section and shall be consistent with the Acts.
5. An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the
procedure by which an appeal will be conducted.
H. Fee. The City shall not impose any additional fees or costs in connection
with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of
this Section or an appeal of a denial of such request by the director/
designee. Nothing in this Section obligates the City to pay an
applicant's attorney fees.
I. Stay Of Enforcement. While an application for reasonable
accommodation or appeal of a denial of said application is pending
before the City, the City will not enforce the subject zoning ordinance
against the applicant.
J. Recordkeeping. The City shall maintain records of all oral and written
requests submitted under the provisions of this Section, and the City's
responses thereto, as required by State law.
Section
245.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
245.070
AO:226
Chapter 250
RESIDENTIAL YARD SALES
Section 250.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §280.010; Ord. No. 948 §1,
10-20-1986]
As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DRIVEWAY — An area surfaced with asphaltic, concrete or Portland cement
concrete connecting a carport or private garage with a street or alley.
FRONT YARD — A yard, excluding a driveway, extending across the front of
a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the street lines and the main building or any projection thereof
other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches.
SIDE YARD — A yard, excluding a driveway, between the main building and
the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot
line.
Section 250.020. Sales in Residential Areas Restricted. [R.O. 2006
§280.020; Ord. No. 948 §1, 10-20-1986; Ord. No. 2638 §1,
3-15-2004]
A. It shall be unlawful to conduct any sale in the front yard or side yard of
any property zoned for or occupied as a residence. In addition, any
other lawful sale shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:
1. No personal property of any type belonging to anyone not living in
the residence, or which the person living in such residence has not
owned for at least six (6) months, shall be brought upon the
premises for the purpose of being sold.
2. The property owner may install on the residential lot on which such
sale is to be held one (1) sign not larger than two (2) feet by three
(3) feet advertising such sale. Not more than four (4) other such
signs may be placed in lawful places. The signs shall be erected not
sooner than one (1) day prior to the date of the sale and shall be
removed at the end of the last day upon which the sale is held. Each
sign shall contain the property address of the yard sale.
3. Not more than six (6) such sales per annum shall be held at the
premises if occupied by the same family or any member of such
family.
4. Any sale conducted pursuant to this Chapter shall be confined to
the period between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any day and shall not
extend in excess of two (2) days.
5. Any sale conducted pursuant to this Chapter shall require a permit
issued by the City Clerk stating the person conducting the sale, the
address at which the sale is to be conducted and the dates of the
Section
245.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
250.020
AO:227
Section 250.030. Display and Sale of Motor Vehicles Owned By
Occupants. [R.O. 2006 §280.040; Ord. No. 1174 §1, 12-19-1988]
Traffic Code
Title IV Notes
Ord. no. 2897, adopted June 18, 2007, established an operation and
maintenance program for the prevention and reduction of pollution in
stormwater runoff for the City of Fenton, Missouri. These provisions are on
file in the City offices.
Addendum A - Fee Schedules, is included as an attachment to this Title.
sale. The City Clerk shall not require a fee for the issuance of
the permit, but shall determine if the sale is authorized under this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to apply to the display for
sale of a motor vehicle, as defined in Section 300.010 of the Traffic
Code. The display for sale of a motor vehicle within areas residentially
zoned or areas used residentially is limited to the following conditions:
1. A motor vehicle displayed for sale must be titled and owned by a
resident of the household from which it is displayed for sale.
2. Vehicular sales can only be conducted with the properly approved
vehicle sales permit. This permit can be obtained by applying at the
office of the City Clerk, Fenton City Hall, weekdays between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
The applicant shall be required to show proof of ownership and title
status of the vehicle.
The City Clerk shall not require a fee for the issuance of the permit,
but shall determine if the sale is authorized under this Chapter.
3. A vehicle sales permit shall be displayed in either the window of the
vehicle or in the front window of the residence visible from the
street.
4. Each vehicle sales permit issued will expire sixty (60) days from the
date of issuance.
5. Vehicle sales permits shall be limited to two (2) per household per
year.
6. Vehicles displayed for sale may use a "for sale" sign if such sign is
not larger than twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches in size.
7. A vehicle displayed for sale must be parked on the driveway of the
residence of the owner of the vehicle.
Section
250.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
250.030
AO:228

Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 300.010. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Title, mean:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on
one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area described by City ordinance as such.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
CONSTRUCTION ZONE — Any area or "work zone" upon or around any
highway as defined in Section 302.010, RSMo., which is visibly marked
by the Department of Highways and Transportation as an area where
construction, maintenance, or other work is temporarily occurring.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK —
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway.
1.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
300:1
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Is a vehicle of any of the following types:
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
A vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, the State Water Patrol,
the Missouri Capitol Police, or a State Park Ranger, those vehicles
operated by enforcement personnel of the State Highways and
Transportation Commission, Police or Fire Department, Sheriff,
Constable or Deputy Sheriff, Federal Law Enforcement Officer
authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the
laws of the United States, Traffic Officer or Coroner or by a privately
owned emergency vehicle company;
1.
A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section
307.175, RSMo.;
3.
Any wrecker, or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a
public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency
service;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle;
5.
Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil
defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.;
6.
Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the Department of
Corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding
to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical
situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death,
responding to mutual aid call from another criminal justice agency, or
in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a
medical facility;
7.
Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency
functions established pursuant to the provisions of Sections 260.500 to
260.550, RSMo.
8.
Section
300.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
300.010
300:2
INTERSECTION —
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MINOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION — A Municipal Traffic Code violation
prosecuted that does not involve an accident or injury, that does not involve
the operation of a commercial motor vehicle, and for which no points are
assessed by the Department of Revenue or the Missouri Department of
Revenue is authorized to assess one (1) to four (4) points to a person's
driving record upon conviction. Minor traffic violation shall include
amended charges for any minor traffic violation. Minor traffic violation shall
exclude a violation for exceeding the speed limit by more than nineteen (19)
miles per hour or a violation occurring within a construction zone or school
zone.[Ord. No. 3558 §1, 11-19-2015; Ord. No. 3629 § 1, 9-22-2016]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having
an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground.
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION — A Municipal Code violation
prosecuted for which penalties are authorized by Statute under Sections
67.398, 71.285, 89.120, and 89.490 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri.
The term municipal ordinance violation shall include amended charges for
municipal ordinance violations.[Ord. No. 3629 § 1, 9-22-2016]
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; or
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
300:3
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the municipal Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway",
as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
Section
300.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
300.010
300:4
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. "State highway", a highway maintained by
the State of Missouri as a part of the State highway system.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected as provided in
this Title.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels designed primarily for use or
used on highways, except motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or drawn
by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails or
tracks, cotton trailers, or motorized wheelchairs operated by handicapped
persons.
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section 305.010. Emergency and Experimental Regulations. [R.O.
2006 §305.010; Ord. No. 497 §2, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 1915 §1,
11-20-1995]
A. The City Administrator and/or the Chief of Police or his/her designated
representative are hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City. The
City's Police Department shall enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more
than ninety (90) days.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
305.010
300:5
Section 305.020. Police Department To Investigate Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
Section 305.030. Traffic Accident Reports.
The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the City Traffic Engineer.
Section 305.040. City Traffic Engineer. [R.O. 2006 §§315.140 —
315.150; Ord. No. 497 §§27 — 28, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 1915 §§6 — 7,
11-20-1995; Ord. No. 3278 §1, 7-26-2012]
B. The Police Department may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Traffic
Engineer, as designated by the City Administrator, shall exercise the
powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
C. Designations Of Crosswalks And The Establishment Of Safety Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen,
is hereby authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
in his/her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway, and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary;
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
D. Authorized crosswalks and safety zones are set forth in Schedule I.
E. Traffic Lanes. The City Traffic Engineer, by and with the approval of the
Board of Aldermen is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
Section
305.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
305.040
300:6
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Section 310.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
Section 310.020. Persons Propelling Pushcarts or Riding Animals
To Obey Traffic Regulations.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no application.
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic
is necessary.
F. Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lanes except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
G. Restricted Turn Signs. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event
the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed
when such turns are permitted.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all traffic laws
of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to traffic in the
City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an incident, may
direct or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
Section
305.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.030
300:7
Section 310.030. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the City.
Section 310.040. Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County
or City and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
Section 310.050. Emergency Vehicle Defined — Use of Lights and
Sirens — Right-Of-Way — Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue light
authorized by Section 307.175, RSMo., the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled portion of
the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position until such
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police or traffic officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Exemptions Granted To Emergency Vehicles.
1. The driver of any vehicle referred to in Subsection (C) of this
Section shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
Section
310.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
310.050
300:8
Section 310.060. Sirens and Flashing Lights Emergency Use —
Persons Authorized — Violation — Penalty.
Motor vehicles and equipment, not otherwise defined in this Title as an
authorized emergency vehicle, which are operated by any member of an
organized Fire Department, ambulance association or rescue squad,
whether paid or volunteer, may be operated on streets and highways in
this City as an emergency vehicle under the provisions of Section 304.022,
RSMo., while responding to a fire call or ambulance call or at the scene of a
fire call or ambulance call and while using or sounding a warning siren and
using or displaying thereon fixed, flashing or rotating blue lights, but sirens
and blue lights shall be used only in bona fide emergencies. Permits for the
operation of such vehicles equipped with sirens or blue lights shall be in
writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the Chief of an organized
Fire Department, organized ambulance association or rescue squad and no
person shall use or display a siren or rotating blue lights on a motor vehicle,
fire, ambulance or rescue equipment without a valid permit authorizing the
use. Permit to use a siren or lights as heretofore set out does not relieve
the operator of the vehicle so equipped with complying with all other traffic
laws and regulations. Violation of this Section constitutes an ordinance
violation.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subdivision (2) of this Subsection shall apply only when the driver
of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
E. Violation of this Section shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
Section
310.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.070
300:9
Section 310.070. Immediate Notice of Accident Within City.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the City resulting in
injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent
extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1) person shall give
or cause to be given notice of such accident to the Police Department as
soon as reasonably possible.
Section 310.080. Written Report of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1)
person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of this
Section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at
the scene by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 310.090. When Driver Unable To Report.
Section 310.100. Leaving The Scene of A Motor Vehicle Accident.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 310.070 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 310.080 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall, within five (5) days after the accident, make such report
not made by the driver.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility within the City generally open for
use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
Section
310.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
310.100
300:10
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 315.010. Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices.
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
the City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications For Traffic Control
Devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission or those adopted by the Board of Aldermen of the City. All
signs or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Title shall be official traffic control devices.
Section 315.030. Obedience To Traffic Control Devices.
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required For
Enforcement Purposes.
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
A. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or Police
Officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this Title.
B. When a traffic control signal is not operating due to mechanical failure
or other reasons, all traffic shall come to a complete stop before
proceeding through the intersection at which the non-operating signal
is stationed.
Section
310.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.050
300:11
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality.
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend — Right Turn On
Red Light — When.
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1)
at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend,
and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
Section
315.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
315.060
300:12
Section 315.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
315.070, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection.
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking,
the stop shall be made at the signal.
Section
315.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.070
300:13
Section 315.080. Flashing Signals.
Section 315.090. Lane Direction Control Signals.
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
Section 315.100. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings.
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" or appropriate symbols are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "WAIT" or "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is
showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
B. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 335.090 of this Title.
Section
315.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
315.110
300:14
Section 315.110. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
or Railroad Signs or Signals.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof.
Section 315.120. Authority To Establish Play Streets. [R.O. 2006
§315.130; Ord. No. 497 §26, 6-26-1979]
Section 315.130. Vehicles On Pedestrian/Bicycle Paths. [R.O. 2006
§315.135; Ord. No. 954 §1, 11-17-1986]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon any pedestrian/bicycle path or portion thereof.
Section 315.140. Temporary No Parking Zones. [Ord. No. 3822,
6-28-2018]
When an event is held at a school that is expected to attract a significant
influx of motor vehicles, the City Administrator and/or the Board of
Aldermen may, for the safety and convenience of Fenton residents,
designate "Temporary No Parking Zones" within five hundred (500) feet of
a school for the time period surrounding the event. Upon such designation,
the Traffic Engineer, the City Administrator, or their designee shall cause
signs or other devices to be erected prior to the event to notify persons
of such Temporary No Parking Zone designation and cause such signs or
devices to be subsequently removed thereafter. Whenever authorized signs
are erected indicating a Temporary No Parking Zone, no person shall park
a vehicle in such designated zone.
Chapter 320
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 320.010. State Speed Laws Applicable.
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall have authority to declare any street or
part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in
the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or
whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver
shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or
portion thereof.
A. The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable upon all streets within the City, except that the City may by
Section
315.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
320.010
300:15
Section 320.020. Regulation of Speed By Traffic Signals.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
Section 320.030. General Speed Limit On City Streets. [R.O. 2006
§320.040]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle on
any street or highway within the City of Fenton at a rate of speed in excess
of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except as otherwise provided by the laws
and ordinances of the City of Fenton.
Section 320.040. Slow Speed — Regulations.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace
Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and
refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver is an ordinance violation.
Section 320.050. Use and Results of Speed Meters Prima Facie
Evidence. [R.O. 2006 §320.060; Ord. No. 497 §108, 6-26-1979]
The use of, and results determined by any speed measuring devices shall be
acceptable as evidence where driving in excess of posted speed limits is the
cause of action; except the use thereof shall not be construed to exclude any
competent evidence accrued by any other manner or means.
Section 320.055. School Speed Zones. [Ord. No. 2841 §1,
10-16-2006]
The City has declared and determined and duly authorized by ordinance
that certain areas within the vicinity of elementary schools within the limits
of the City of Fenton, Missouri, be declared school speed zones. The school
ordinance declare that certain speed regulations shall be applicable
upon specified streets or in certain areas to be set forth in Schedule II
of this Title, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are
in place giving notice thereof.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon those portions of the
roadways which are set forth and described in Schedule II at a rate of
speed in excess of that speed limit set for such portions of the roadways
by said Schedule.
Section
320.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
320.055
300:16
speed zones will be in effect from 6:30 A.M. — 6:30 P.M. with a speed
limit of twenty (20) miles per hour in said zone. The Commanding Officer
of the City's Police Department and/or the City Administrator is authorized
to designate specific area(s), post and install such signs provided that the
school zone lengths and signs are consistent with the current edition of
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle in violation of this Section when signs are in place
giving notice thereof. The fine for violation of this Section will be two (2)
times the amount normally assessed for speeding violations.
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning At
Intersection.
Section 325.015. Designated Two-Way Left Turn Lanes.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
Section
320.055
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
325.015
300:17
Section 325.020. Authority To Place and Obedience To Turning
Markers.
Section 325.030. Obedience To No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Section 325.040. Limitations On Turning Around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section 330.010. Authority To Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates any one-way street or
alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
A. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in
opposite directions have been indicated by official traffic control
devices:
1. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane;
2. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for
or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing
for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law; and
3. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more than
five hundred (500) feet.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to
be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
Section
325.015
FENTON CITY CODE Section
330.010
300:18
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Section 330.020. One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and
designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
Section 330.030. Authority To Restrict Direction of Movement On
Streets During Certain Periods.
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, RAILROAD CROSSINGS,
ETC.
Section 335.010. Through Streets Designated.
Those streets and parts of streets set forth in Schedule V hereof are
declared to be through streets for the purposes of Sections 335.010 to
335.090.
Section 335.020. Signs Required At Through Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and maintain
a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided however, that at the intersection of
two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and
a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the City Traffic
Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period
and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall
place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other
devices to give notice thereof. The City Traffic Engineer may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this Section.
Section
330.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.030
300:19
Section 335.030. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more
entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such
intersection as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section 335.040 in which
event he/she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where
obedience thereto is required.
Section 335.040. Stop and Yield Signs.
Section 335.050. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection.
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Subsection (B) of Section 335.040 and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered
the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely
on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
Section 335.060. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
Section
335.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
335.070
300:20
Section 335.070. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 335.080. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.090. Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach of Train.
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this Section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not
proceed until he/she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train; or
3. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
C. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing when there
is not sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing.
D. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing unless such
vehicle has sufficient undercarriage clearance necessary to prevent the
undercarriage of the vehicle from contacting the railroad crossing.
E. Every commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 302.700, RSMo.,
shall, upon approaching a railroad grade crossing, be driven at a rate of
speed which will permit said commercial motor vehicle to be stopped
before reaching the nearest rail of such crossing and shall not be driven
upon or over such crossing until due caution has been taken to
Section
335.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.090
300:21
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Section 340.010. Following Emergency Vehicle Prohibited.
No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any
emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer than
five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park within the block where any fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions.
ascertain that the course is clear. This Section does not apply to
vehicles which are required to stop at railroad crossings pursuant to
Section 304.030, RSMo.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE OR LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral
service has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of
final disposition or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed if directed by
a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Driving Rules.
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
2. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
Section
335.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.030
300:22
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
3. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized
funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
emergency vehicle pursuant to the provisions of law or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
4. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and
safe under the conditions.
5. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle
being lighted.
6. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized
funeral procession shall not:
a. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the
flashing emergency lights lighted pursuant to Subsection
(B)(5) above, except when required to do so by a Law
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal;
b. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the rightof-way; or
c. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
7. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted herein, a vehicle not in the organized
funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such
vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
8. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall
prohibit the use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to
escort an organized funeral procession on the highway.
C. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Section
340.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.040
300:23
Section 340.040. Driving in Procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
Section 340.050. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven On A Sidewalk —
Prohibition On Obstruction of Bicycle Lanes — Drivers To Yield To
Bicycles in Designated Bicycle Lanes.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
on a permanent or temporary driveway. A designated bicycle lane shall not
be obstructed by a parked or standing motor vehicle or other stationary
object. A motor vehicle may be driven in a designated bicycle lane only for
the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane or to provide for safe
travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver that requires traveling in
or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the driver of a motor vehicle shall
yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in this Section, the term "designated
bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of the roadway or highway that has been
designated by the Governing Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or
highway by striping with signing or striping with pavement markings for the
preferential or exclusive use of bicycles.
Section 340.060. Limitations On Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 340.070. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.080. Riding On Motorcycles — Additional Passenger —
Requirements.
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the
rear or side of the operator.
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more
than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
Section
340.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.080
300:24
Section 340.090. Riding Bicycle On Sidewalks — Limitations —
Motorized Bicycles Prohibited.
Section 340.100. All-Terrain Vehicles — Prohibited — Exceptions —
Operation Under An Exception — Prohibited Uses — Penalty.
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall ride a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon any streets of this
City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity
for official use; or
2. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on
the day of operation.
B. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle, as defined in Section
304.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this City, except that offroad vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the
boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns, or for
agricultural purposes within the boundaries of land which an off-road
vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon.
C. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway
pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a valid
license issued by a State authorizing such person to operate a motor
vehicle but shall not be required to have passed an examination for the
operation of a motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds
of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street or
highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag, which
extends not less than seven (7) feet above the ground, attached to the
rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape
with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be
dayglow in color.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
Section
340.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.100
300:25
Section 340.110. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates By Attaching
To Another Vehicle, Prohibited — Pulling A Rider Behind Vehicle
Prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle knowingly pull a rider
behind a vehicle.
Section 340.120. Controlled Access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.130. Driving Through Safety Zone Prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.140. Manner of Operation of Motor Vehicles — Careful
and Prudent.
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of this City shall
drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so
as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person
and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
Section 340.150. Driving To The Right.
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed
or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicle, unless the
individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
A. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction pursuant to the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of this
Title;
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair; or
Section
340.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.150
300:26
Section 340.160. Drivers To Maintain Single Lane.
Section 340.170. Passing Regulations.
4. Upon a roadway designated by local ordinance as a one-way street
and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
B. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway which has been
divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical barrier or
by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or other
markings on the roadway except to the right of such barrier or dividing
section or to make any left turn or semi-circular or U-turn on any such
divided highway, except at an intersection or interchange or at any
signed location designated by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to
emergency vehicles, law enforcement vehicles or to vehicles owned by
the Commission on official business.
C. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right and, except when a roadway has been divided into
traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (½) of
the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever possible.
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single
lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway with a center turn lane, a vehicle shall not be driven in
the center lane except in preparation for a left turn, and no driver shall
use a turn lane to overtake a vehicle in a through lane.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lanes of vehicles in each direction; or
Section
340.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.170
300:27
Section 340.180. Hand and Mechanical Signals.
3. Upon a one-way street.
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions when
such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such
movement be made by driving off the paved or main traveled
portion of the roadway. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle from the duty
to drive as closely as practicable to the right-hand edge of the
roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction.
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
Section
340.170
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.180
300:28
Section 340.190. Stopping For School Bus.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far as
mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle
as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
Section
340.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.190
300:29
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
Section
340.190
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.190
300:30
Section 340.200. Right-Of-Way At Intersection — Signs At
Intersections.1
Section 340.210. Distance At Which Vehicle Must Follow.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of such vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would
create a traffic hazard.
E. The City may, on any section of road where construction or major
maintenance operations are being effected, fix a speed limit in such
areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor
vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving and a
violation of Section 340.140.
1. State Law Reference — This Section has additional penalties based on certain
circumstances, §304.351, RSMo.
Section
340.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.220
300:31
Section 340.220. Operation of Motor Vehicles in Parking Lots,
Drive-Ins and Private Ways. [R.O. 2006 §340.210; Ord. No. 497 §132,
6-26-1979]
Section 340.230. Driving On Highways and Streets When Closed For
Construction or Repair. [R.O. 2006 §340.220; Ord. No. 497 §13,
6-26-1979]
It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway, road or street while
closed for repair; or under construction.
Section 340.240. Placing Dangerous Materials On Highways or
Public Ways Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 §340.260; Ord. No. 497 §127,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 1915 §17, 11-20-1995]
Section 340.250. Cut-Through Traffic Prohibited. [R.O. 2006
§340.310; Ord. No. 1355 §1, 2-19-1990; Ord. No. 2296 §2, 2-24-2000;
Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
A. Every person operating a motor vehicle on parking lots, drive-ins and
private ways shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner and
shall exercise ordinary care, and at a rate of speed not in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted, and at such less
speeds when required so as not to endanger the property of another or
the life or limb of any person, taking into consideration the amount of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the visibility and atmospheric
conditions, and the conditions of the pavement.
B. Any and all ordinances of the City of Fenton applicable to motor
vehicles on public streets with respect to signaling, lights, backing,
turning and sounding of horns shall apply to vehicles operated in
parking lots, drive-ins and private ways.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who has purposely, accidentally, or
by reason of an accident, dropped from his/her person or any vehicle,
any tacks, nails, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones, or
other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals, or to the
tires or wheels of vehicles, including motor vehicles, upon any highway
to refuse or fail to make all reasonable efforts to clear the highway of
the substances.
B. No person shall throw or place, or cause to be thrown or placed, any
glass, bottles, wire, nails, tacks, hedge, cans, garbage, paper, trash,
refuse, or rubbish of any kind, nature, or description on the right-of-way
of any public street, road or highway within the City.
A. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon or across any sidewalk,
driveway, curb, parking lot of any private or public property or any
other area that is not a road for the purpose of evading or avoiding an
intersection, congested area or traffic device.
Section
340.220
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.250
300:32
Section 340.260. Aggressive Driving Prohibited. [R.O. 2006
§340.350; Ord. No. 2286 §1, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 2463 §3,
4-15-2002]
Section 340.270. Bridge Weight Limits. [R.O. 2006 §340.360; Ord.
No. 2296 §3, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
Section 340.280. Commercial Vehicle Regulations — Exceptions —
Posting. [R.O. 2006 §365.060; Ord. No. 1228 §1, 4-19-1989]
B. Any person convicted of violating this Section will be punished as set
out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to intentionally
harass or alarm another person who is inside a motor vehicle by
intentionally or knowingly:
1. Increasing or decreasing the speed of his/her vehicle;
2. Changing lanes;
3. Following the other person's vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent under the totality of the circumstances;
4. Impeding or obstructing the operation of the other person's motor
vehicle; or
5. Operating his/her vehicle in a manner that endangers or would be
likely to endanger any person or property.
B. Any person convicted of violating this Section will be punished as set
out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle, trailer or combination thereof,
licensed in excess of the weight limits posted upon any of the bridges as
set forth in Schedule XX.
B. Any person convicted of violating this Section will be punished as set
out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, "commercial vehicle" means
any motor vehicle or trailer which is designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property or which is used primarily
for the transportation of passengers for hire, including, but not limited
to, tow trucks, dump trucks, flat-bed trucks, stake-bed trucks, step
vans, refuse or garbage trucks, buses or any other vehicle or trailer
having a gross vehicle weight rating (GRWR) in excess of 14,000
pounds. [Ord. No. 3300 §1, 12-20-2012]
B. Regulations. Except as provided in Subsection (C) hereof, no person
shall operate, and it shall be unlawful to operate, a commercial vehicle
on, over or upon any of the streets or parts thereof set forth in Schedule
XII enacted herewith or as amended.
Section
340.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.280
300:33
Section 340.290. Certain Vehicles Licensed in Excess of 18,000
Pounds Prohibited From Using Certain Streets When Signs Are
Erected Giving Notice Thereof. [R.O. 2006 §365.070; Ord. No. 1294
§1, 8-21-1989]
No person shall operate a vehicle licensed in excess of eighteen thousand
(18,000) pounds, except as provided under Section 340.280, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets set forth in Schedule XIX.
Section 340.300. Vehicles Prohibited From Using Streets
Designated For Local Traffic Only. [R.O. 2006 §365.090; Ord. No.
933 §1, 8-25-1986]
When signs are erected at the beginning of each block giving notice thereof,
no person shall drive a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
set forth in Schedule XVII designated for local traffic only. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed to apply to emergency vehicles, ambulances,
home moving vans, utility service trucks or vehicles of residents and their
families or friends.
Section 340.310. Regulation of Through Traffic On Certain Roads.
[R.O. 2006 §365.100; Ord. No. 1172 §1, 11-21-1988]
When the proper signs are erected prohibiting such travel, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle directly between the locations specified in
Schedule XVIII at specified times.
C. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to any emergency vehicles,
ambulances, public utility service vehicles or commercial vehicles while
in the process of making a legitimate pickup, delivery or call to a
business or residence located on a street designated in Schedule XII,
provided the operator is traveling to or from the pickup, delivery or call
over the restricted streets by the most direct available route to and
from a non-restricted thoroughfare.
D. Miscellaneous.
1. The City Traffic Engineer shall cause signs to be erected at the
entrance to any street or streets set forth on Schedule XII from any
non-regulated thoroughfare advising that commercial vehicular
traffic is restricted. The failure of any street to be so posted shall
not relieve any operator of liability for a violation of this Section.
2. Failure of an operator of a commercial vehicle on one of the streets
set forth in Schedule XII to disclose to a Police Officer an address
on such restricted street to which a pickup, delivery or call has or
will be made by that operator shall be prima-facie proof that the
exceptions set forth in Subsection (C) hereof shall not apply to that
operator.
Section
340.280
FENTON CITY CODE Section
340.320
300:34
Section 340.320. Additional Fine For Moving Violations in A
Construction Zone. [Ord. No. 1917 §2, 11-20-1995; Ord. No. 2422
§2, 9-17-2001]
Upon conviction or a plea of guilty by any person for a moving violation as
defined in Section 302.010, RSMo., or any offense listed in Section 302.302,
RSMo., the Fenton Municipal Court shall assess a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) in addition to any other fine authorized to be imposed by
law, if the offense occurred within a construction zone or a work zone as
defined in Section 300.010 of the Fenton Municipal Code.
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Section 342.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES OR OPERATING — Physically driving or
operating a motor vehicle.
INTOXICATED CONDITION — A person is in an "intoxicated condition"
when he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or
drug, or any combination thereof.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR ARRESTING OFFICER — Includes the
definition of Law Enforcement Officer in Subdivision (17) of Section
556.061, RSMo., and military Policemen conducting traffic enforcement
operations on a Federal military installation under military jurisdiction in
the State of Missouri.
Section 342.020. Driving While Intoxicated.
A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if he/she
operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition.
No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while
intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence for such
offense, unless such person shall be placed on probation for a minimum of
two (2) years.
Section 342.030. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.
A. A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol
content" if such person operates a motor vehicle in this City with eighthundredths of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood.
B. As used in this Section, "percent by weight of alcohol" in the blood shall
be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of
blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by
Section
340.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
342.030
300:35
Section 342.040. Chemical Test For Alcohol Content — Consent
Implied — Administered — When — How — Videotaping of Chemical
or Field Sobriety Test Admissible Evidence.
chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For
the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood
under this Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
A. This Section and Section 577.021, RSMo., shall be known as the Alan
Woods Law.
B. Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways of
this City shall be deemed to have given consent to, subject to the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo., a chemical test or
tests of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood pursuant
to the following circumstances:
1. If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts which
the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe were
committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition;
2. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving a
motor vehicle with a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (.02%) or more by weight;
3. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has committed
a violation of the traffic laws of the State or any political subdivision
of the State, and such officer has reasonable grounds to believe,
after making such stop, that such person has a blood alcohol
content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or greater;
4. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock, and the Law Enforcement
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has a
blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or
greater;
5. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or a readily
apparent serious physical injury as defined in Section 565.002,
RSMo., and has been arrested as evidenced by the issuance of a
uniform traffic ticket for the violation of any State law or County or
municipal ordinance with the exception of equipment violations
Section
342.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
342.040
300:36
contained in Chapter 307, RSMo., or similar provisions contained
in County or municipal ordinances; or
6. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or serious
physical injury as defined in Section 565.002, RSMo.
The test shall be administered at the direction of the Law
Enforcement Officer whenever the person has been arrested or
stopped for any reason.
C. The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in Subsection
(B) of this Section shall be limited to not more than two (2) such tests
arising from the same arrest, incident or charge.
D. Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine to be
considered valid pursuant to the provisions of Sections 577.020 to
577.041, RSMo., shall be performed according to methods approved by
the State Department of Health by licensed medical personnel or by a
person possessing a valid permit issued by the State Department of
Health for this purpose.
E. The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person at the choosing and
expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition to any
administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. The failure
or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a
Law Enforcement Officer.
F. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information
concerning the test shall be made available to such person. Full
information is limited to the following:
1. The type of test administered and the procedures followed;
2. The time of the collection of the blood or breath sample or urine
analyzed;
3. The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content of
the blood and breath and urine;
4. The type and status of any permit which was held by the person
who performed the test;
5. If the test was administered by means of a breath testing
instrument, the date of performance of the most recent required
maintenance of such instrument.
Section
342.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
342.040
300:37
Section 342.050. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Moving
Motor Vehicle — Prohibited When.
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians Subject To Traffic Control Devices.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 315.060 and 315.070 of this Title, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
Section 345.020. Pedestrians' Right-Of-Way in Crosswalks.
Full information does not include manuals, schematics or
software of the instrument used to test the person or any
other material that is not in the actual possession of the State.
Additionally, full information does not include information in
the possession of the manufacturer of the test instrument.
G. Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped
during any such test at the direction of the Law Enforcement Officer.
Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to
this Subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence
for a violation of any municipal ordinance or any license revocation or
suspension proceeding pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 302,
RSMo.
A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while operating a
moving motor vehicle upon the highways.
B. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section is
guilty of an infraction.
C. Any infraction under this Section shall not reflect on any records with
the Department of Revenue.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
Section
342.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
345.020
300:38
Section 345.030. Pedestrians To Use Right-Half of Crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
Section 345.040. Crossing At Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrian Shall Yield.
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing.
Section 345.070. Obedience of Pedestrians To Bridge and Railroad
Signals.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(B) of Section 345.050.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
Section
345.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
345.070
300:39
Section 345.080. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.
Section 345.090. Drivers To Exercise Highest Degree of Care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Title, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 345.100. Distance To Be Maintained When Overtaking A
Bicycle.
The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same
direction on the roadway, as defined in Section 300.010, shall leave a safe
distance when passing the bicycle, and shall maintain clearance until safely
past the overtaken bicycle.
Chapter 350
METHOD OF PARKING
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close To Curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb.
Section 350.020. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
A. No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.
B. No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge when such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such
angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal-aid or State
highway within the City unless the State Highways and Transportation
Section
345.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
350.020
300:40
Section 350.030. Obedience To Angle Parking Signs or Markers.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the City Traffic
Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
Section 350.040. Permits For Loading or Unloading At An Angle To
The Curb.
Section 350.050. Lamps On Parked Vehicles.
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions
of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to
such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour
before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such
street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked
vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour before sunrise
and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements: At least one (1) lamp shall display
a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one (1) other
lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or
lamps shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of
lamps meeting the requirements of this Section is installed as near as
Section
350.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.050
300:41
Chapter 355
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES
Section 355.010. Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited
practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a Police Officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk;
c. Within an intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of
a safety zone, unless the (traffic authority) indicates a different
length by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
h. Within eight (8) feet of a public or private mailbox;
i. On any railroad tracks; or
j. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway;
b. Within thirty (30) feet of an intersection;
c. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
Section
350.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
355.010
300:42
Section 355.020. Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 355.030. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 355.040. Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited. [R.O.
2006 §355.040; Ord. No. 497 §78, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 1175 §1,
12-19-1988; Ord. No. 1363 §1, 3-19-1990]
d. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
e. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
f. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance (when
properly signposted); or
g. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers:
a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
or
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any public or private roadway or
upon any public or private property for the principal purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale whether signs are displayed or not
indicating that the vehicle is for sale, unless such vehicle sale has
been approved by permit as set out in Section 250.030 of this
Municipal Code or unless such vehicle is displayed on a car sales
lot for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued in
accordance with Title IV of this Municipal Code; or
Section
355.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.040
300:43
Section 355.050. Parking Adjacent To Schools.
Section 355.060. Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets.
Section 355.070. Standing or Parking On One-Way Streets.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side
of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
Section 355.080. Standing or Parking On One-Way Roadways.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The
City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking
may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and
to erect signs giving notice thereof.
Section 355.090. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous
or Congested Places.
2. To repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
twenty (20) feet or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet
in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
to traffic.
Section
355.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
355.090
300:44
Section 355.100. Physically Disabled Parking.
Section 355.110. One Hour Parking For Commercial Vehicles. [R.O.
2006 §355.120; Ord. No. 1032 §1, 11-16-1987; Ord. No. 3300 §2,
12-20-2012]
Unless otherwise provided within this Title, no person shall park, keep, or
leave any commercial vehicle on any street or highway for a period of more
than one (1) hour in any one (1) calendar day.
Section 355.120. Parking of Trailers and Recreational Vehicles/
Equipment. [R.O. 2006 §355.130; Ord. No. 755 §1, 11-19-1984; Ord.
No. 3300 §3, 12-20-2012]
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in any
stall or space designated or reserved for physically disabled persons, as
defined in Section 301.142, RSMo., as amended, whether upon public
or private property open to public use, unless the vehicle bears the
State of Missouri license plate or placard for the disabled as provided
for in Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended. The space
shall be indicated by an upright sign whether on a pole or attached to a
building upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of
accessibility and may also include any appropriate wording to indicate
that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display
a distinguishing license plate or card. The sign described in this
Subsection shall also state, or an additional sign shall be posted below
or adjacent to the sign stating, the following: "$50 to $300 fine".
B. Any vehicle operator who is not physically disabled shall not use the
handicapped parking space unless there is a physically disabled person
in the vehicle or while the vehicle is being used to transport a physically
disabled person.
C. Any person convicted of violating this Section is guilty of an offense and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Every day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
A. For purposes of this Section, "recreational vehicle/equipment" shall
mean a camper trailer, pickup camper (not attached to a truck)
motorized mobile home, boat, houseboat, boat trailer, horse trailer,
dunebuggy, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or any similar equipment
not primarily used for ordinary day-to-day transportation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, leave or store any
recreational vehicle/equipment or any device licensed as a trailer, on
any street or highway except while same is being loaded or unloaded or,
Section
355.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.120
300:45
Section 355.130. Limitations On Vehicles Parking or Standing.
[R.O. 2006 §355.140; Ord. No. 716 §3, 6-18-1984]
No person shall park or stand any vehicle on any street or highway within
the City for seven (7) consecutive days without moving said vehicle.
Section 355.140. Automobile Trespass. [R.O. 2006 §355.100; Ord.
No. 561 §1, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 565 §11, 1-18-1982]
in the case of a non-recreational trailer, being actively used for the
purpose of providing service to a property located adjacent to the street
at the place where same is parked.
A. Unlawful Act.
1. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park, to cause to
be parked, or enter for the purpose of parking any motor vehicle or
other wheeled vehicle on any private parking lot as hereinafter
defined.
2. No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle, whether occupied or
not, in a private driveway, on private or public property, without the
express or implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful
charge of such driveway or property.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE PARKING LOT, PRIVATE PROPERTY
AND PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any driveway, parking lot or property other
than public streets, and includes any other driveway, parking lot or
property, even if owned by a governmental entity.
PRIVATE PARKING LOTS — As used in this Section means any real
estate within the City of Fenton designated as a private parking lot by
the owner thereof and marked by signs conspicuously posted at the
entrances to the parking lot, said signs to be of at least three (3) square
feet in size and to contain the words "Private Parking, "Private Parking
Lot", or words of similar effect sufficient to give notice to the public of
the use of the said real estate as a private parking facility.
UNAUTHORIZED PERSON — As used in this Section means any person
not authorized by the owner of the lot, either by private contract or
by appropriate language on the posted sign referred to above, such
as "Parking Limited to Customers of _____________", or words of similar
effect, except that the offending vehicle shall only be towed if words
such as "Vehicles subject to Tow", or words of similar effect shall be
added to said sign.
C. Written Complaint. Upon written complaint to the Police Department of
the City of Fenton, Missouri, by the owner of the parking lot or by his
agent or by an individual renting a designated space in the private
parking lot, the Police Department of the City of Fenton shall cause the
violating vehicle to be ticketed.
Section
355.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
355.140
300:46
Chapter 360
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Section 360.010. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Curb Loading
Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 360.020. Permits For Curb Loading Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone
upon special request of any person unless such person makes application
for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each
such zone. The City Traffic Engineer upon granting a permit and issuing
such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the City Treasury
a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year.
Section 360.030. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
D. Towing, When. Also upon written complaint to the Police Department of
the City of Fenton, the owner, or other person in charge of the private
driveway, private parking lot, and private property may, upon written
complaint, cause the violating vehicle to be towed. In that case, the
Police Department of the City of Fenton shall call upon the entity with
which the City has a towing contract to perform said service. But,
before any vehicle shall be towed, there shall be additionally affixed to
the sign designating the lot a "Private Parking Lot", the words
"Violators Subject to Tow - Call City of Fenton Police Department", or
words of similar effect. Upon inquiry, the Police Department of the City
of Fenton shall inform the owner of the violating vehicle where the
vehicle is, and the cost for towing.
E. Responsibility for Violation. If any motor vehicle is found in violation of
this Section, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is
registered in the records of any City, County or State shall be held
prima facie responsible for such violation, if the owner thereof is not
present.
Section
355.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
360.030
300:47
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 360.040. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 360.050. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Public Carrier
Stops and Stands.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
number as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 360.060. Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses and
Taxicabs Regulated.
Section 360.070. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section
360.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
360.070
300:48
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
Chapter 365
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Section 365.010. Application of Chapter.
The provisions of this Title prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
official traffic control device.
Section 365.020. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve
any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 365.030. Parking Prohibited At All Times On Certain
Streets and All Fire Lanes. [R.O. 2006 §365.030; Ord. No. 497 §93,
6-26-1979]
Section 365.040. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours On
Certain Streets. [R.O. 2006 §365.040; Ord. No. 497 §94, 6-26-1979]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except
Sunday and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets as
authorized by ordinance and set forth in Schedule XI.
A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or areas set forth in
Schedule VIII.
B. The Fenton Fire Protection District is authorized to designate and have
marked, fire lanes to provide unobstructed access to buildings for Fire
Department and other emergency vehicles at such places on parking
lots as the Chief of the Fire Department may deem necessary for
adequate fire protection. No person shall stop, stand, park or leave a
motor vehicle in any fire lane so designated by the Fire District Chief
and posted with signs reading "No parking - fire lane".
Section
360.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.050
300:49
Section 365.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited —
During Certain Hours On Certain Streets. [R.O. 2006 §365.050; Ord.
No. 497 §95, 6-26-1979]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of
any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any
of the streets as authorized by ordinance and set forth in Schedule XI.
Section 365.060. Parking Signs Required.
Whenever by this Title or any ordinance of the City any parking time limit is
imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the City Traffic Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and
in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 365.070. (Reserved)2
Chapter 370
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
2. Editor’s Note: Former Section 365.070, Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Parking On
Certain Streets, as adopted and amended R.O. 2006 §365.080; Ord. No. 735 §1, 9-17-1984
was repealed 12-20-2012 by Ord. No. 3300 §4.
Section
365.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
365.070
300:50
ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 370.010. When Lights Required.
Section 370.020. Headlamp On Motor Vehicles.
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 370.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement.
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead. Lighted lamps shall also be required any time the weather
conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers to
operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner as defined in
Section 304.012, RSMo. The provisions of this Section shall be
interpreted to require lighted lamps during periods of fog even if usage
of the windshield wipers is not necessary to operate the vehicle in a
careful and prudent manner.
B. When Lights Required — Violation — Penalty.
1. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times
when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or
combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter in this Article required. No person shall use
on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless
the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions
of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 307.120, RSMo., or any
other provision of law, violation of this Section shall be deemed an
infraction and any person who violates this Section as it relates to
violations of the usage of lighted lamps required due to weather
conditions or fog shall only be fined ten dollars ($10.00) and no
court costs shall be assessed.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
Section
370.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.030
300:51
Section 370.040. Dimming of Lights — When.
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no
case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the
prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the
center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the
level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet
ahead.
Section 370.050. Taillamps — Reflectors.
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the highintensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
Section
370.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.050
300:52
Section 370.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 370.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp, except that no such
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 370.080. Spotlamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an infraction.
Section
370.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.090
300:53
Section 370.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights.
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 370.100. Limitations On Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except On Specified Vehicles.
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on emergency vehicles as defined in
Section 300.010 of this Title and on buses owned or operated by churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship and on
commercial passenger transport vehicles or railroad passenger cars that
are stopped to load or unload passengers, but are prohibited on other
motor vehicles, motorcycles and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means
for indicating a right or left turn.
Section 370.110. Limitation On Total of Lamps Lighted At One
Time.
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 370.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted.
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
Section
370.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.120
300:54
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 370.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty.
A. Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven
upon or along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle
whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half
(½) hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear
thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3)
inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such
device shall consist of reflecting buttons, there shall be no less than
seven (7) of such buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three
(3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of
every such device shall be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the
spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the
reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle
approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of
not less than five hundred (500) feet.
B. In addition, any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle
during the hours between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise
shall have at least one (1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any
highway of this City. Such light or lights shall be amber in the front and
red in the back and shall be placed on the left side of the vehicle at a
height of no more than six (6) feet from the ground and shall be visible
from the front and the back of the vehicle at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet.
C. Any person operating an animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise may, in lieu of the
requirements of Subsection (B) of this Section, use lamps or lanterns
complying with the rules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
370.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.130
300:55

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 370.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles.
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated, while such
vehicle is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
370.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.140
300:57
Section 370.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged To Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty.
Section 370.160. Seat Belts.
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided by Section 100.060 of this Code.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that the term "passenger car" shall
Section
370.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.160
300:58
Section 370.170. Transporting Children Under Sixteen Years of Age
— Restraint Systems.
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles and trucks
with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
more.
C. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in the City, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, on a street or highway of this City shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 370.170 of this Chapter, shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their
body, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons
while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural
work-related activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section 370.170
of this Chapter.
D. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 370.170 of this Chapter.
E. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 370.170 of this Chapter,
each person found guilty of violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court
rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed
on any person due to a violation of this Section.
F. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
Section
370.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.170
300:59
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a
Federally approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this City, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
Section
370.170
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.170
300:60
Section 370.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied To Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure.
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than
sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction may be punished
by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any
driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, is guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any driver who violates
Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, shall be subject to the penalty
in Subsection (C) of Section 370.160 of this Chapter. If a driver receives
a citation for violating Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, the charges shall be dismissed or withdrawn if the driver prior
to or at his/her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child
passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to
the Court or the party responsible for prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the issuance of the permit. The permit shall allow
operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative within the second
Section
370.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.180
300:61
Section 370.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles.
Section 370.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 370.210. Restriction On Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles.
degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each
grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child
and grandchild of a person who resides in the household. Except as
provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sun-screening devices
applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an infraction for which a
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be imposed.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to such
violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
Section
370.180
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.210
300:62
Section 370.220. Passengers in Trucks.
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels so as to prevent
such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this prohibition
shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is
known as caterpillar treads when such caterpillar does not contain any
projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon
their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface if the
gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road
surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does
not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
Section
370.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.220
300:63
Section 370.230. Width, Height, Length and Weight Restrictions.
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
A. Width. No vehicle operated upon any street in the City shall have a
width, including load, in excess of ninety-six (96) inches, except
clearance lights, rearview mirrors or other accessories required or
permitted by Federal or State law.
B. Height. No vehicle operated upon the interstate highway system or
upon any route designated by the Chief Engineer of the State Highways
and Transportation Department shall have a height, including load, in
excess of fourteen (14) feet. On all other highways, no vehicle shall
have a height, including load, in excess of thirteen and one-half (13½)
feet, except that any vehicle or combination of vehicles transporting
automobiles or other motor vehicles may have a height, including load,
of not more than fourteen (14) feet.
C. Length. No motor vehicle operated upon any street in the City shall
have a length in excess of that provided for in Section 304.170, RSMo.
Section
370.220
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.230
300:64
Section 370.240. Altering Passenger Motor Vehicle By Raising
Front or Rear of Vehicle Prohibited, When — Bumpers Front and
Rear Required, When Certain Vehicles Exempt.
D. Weight. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or convey upon any
street in the City any vehicle of any kind with a weight in excess of that
provided for in Section 304.180, RSMo.
E. Permits. The Police Chief, with the approval of the Mayor, may issue
permits for the operation of vehicles exceeding the width, height,
length and weight limits prescribed in this Section. Such permits shall
specify the terms and conditions under which such vehicles may be
operated, and designate the streets over which such vehicle may be
operated and the hours of the day between which such operation shall
be permitted. Each applicant for such permit shall first pay to the City
Clerk a fee of five dollars ($5.00), receipt for which shall be presented
to the Police Chief before such permit is issued.
F. Damages. Any person who drives any vehicle exceeding the width,
height, length or weight limits prescribed in Subsections (A), (B), (C)
and (D) of this Section, whether operating under the permit required by
Subsection (E) of this Section or not, shall be liable for the amount of
any damage such vehicle causes to any street, bridge, culvert, sewer or
other public property and any such vehicle shall be subject to a lien for
the full amount of such damage.
A. No person shall operate any passenger motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways of this City, the body of which has been altered in
such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at such an
angle as to obstruct the vision of the operator of the street or highway
in front or to the rear of the vehicle.
B. Every motor vehicle which is licensed in this State and operated upon
the public streets or highways of this City shall be equipped with front
and rear bumpers if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as
standard equipment. This Subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles
designed or modified primarily for off-highway purposes, while such
vehicles are in tow, or to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, or to
motor vehicles registered as historic motor vehicles when the original
design of such vehicles did not include bumpers nor shall the provisions
of this Subsection prohibit the use of drop bumpers. Maximum bumper
heights of both the front and rear bumpers of motor vehicles shall be
determined by weight category of gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
measured from a level surface to the highest point of the bottom of the
bumper when the vehicle is unloaded and the tires are inflated to the
manufacturer's recommended pressure. Maximum bumper heights are
as follows:
Section
370.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.240
300:65
Maximum front
bumper height
Maximum rear
bumper height
Motor vehicles except
commercial motor
vehicles
22 inches 22 inches
Commercial motor
vehicles (GVWR) 4,500
lbs. and under
24 inches 26 inches
4,501 lbs. through
7,500 lbs.
27 inches 29 inches
7,501 lbs. through
9,000 lbs.
28 inches 30 inches
9,001 lbs. through
11,500 lbs.
29 inches 31 inches
Section
370.240
FENTON CITY CODE Section
370.240
300:66
Chapter 375
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Section
370.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.240
300:67

ARTICLE I
Operator's Licenses
Section 375.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.3
A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if such person
operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the laws
of this State or any other State and acts with criminal negligence with
respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving privilege has
been canceled, suspended or revoked.
Section 375.020. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License.4
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 375.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license as required by Chapter 302, RSMo., or a
temporary instruction permit issued in compliance with Section
302.130, RSMo., or an intermediate driver's license issued in
compliance with Section 302.178, RSMo., in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, intermediate
driver's license or license issued to another person;
5. Operate a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of Sections
302.130 and 302.178, RSMo., regarding accompaniment by a
qualified driver or stated hours of operation; or
3. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
4. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
375.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.020
300:69
Section 375.025. Effect of Revocation — Penalty.
Any resident or non-resident whose license, right or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been suspended or revoked as provided
in Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo., shall not operate a motor vehicle
in this State under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by
any other jurisdiction or otherwise during such suspension or after such
revocation until a new license is obtained when and as permitted under
Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo. Violation of any provision of this
Section is a misdemeanor and on conviction therefor a person shall be
punished as prescribed by Section 302.321, RSMo.
Section 375.030. Prohibited Uses of License.
6. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, unless fully licensed in
compliance with Chapter 302, RSMo., except when operating
under an instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720,
RSMo.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
Section
375.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
375.030
300:70
Section 375.040. Exemptions From License Law.
disqualified or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, valid operator's license
while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit or said
license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or any
other duly authorized person for inspection when demand is made
therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or license as
aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person is not a
duly licensed operator.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or country;
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.; or
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows — driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's consent —
may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the correctional
facilities, provided that such offender shall be accompanied by a
Correctional Officer or other staff person in such truck.
Section
375.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.040
300:71

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 375.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 375.053. Motor Vehicle Safety Inspection. [R.O. 2006
§370.210; Ord. No. 497 §149, 6-26-1979]
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on the streets and highways
in the City of Fenton, without a current inspection sticker visible on the
lower left-hand corner of the windshield.
Section 375.055. Registration of Motor Vehicles Operated For First
Time in State.
Application for registration of a motor vehicle not previously registered in
Missouri, operated for the first time on the public highways of this State,
and previously registered in another State shall be made within thirty (30)
days after the owner of such motor vehicle has become a resident of this
State.
Section 375.060. Method of Displaying License Plates.
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue or the State Highways and
Transportation Commission and authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo.
Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle in a manner
so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably clean so
that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License plates shall
be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck tractors or
truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds on the
front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor more than fortyeight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon
right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles, motortricycles and
motor scooters shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicles, with the
letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license plate on buses, other
Section
375.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.060
300:73
than school buses, and on trucks, tractors, truck tractors or truck-tractors
licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be displayed on
the front of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor more than forty-eight
(48) inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon right
side up, or if two (2) plates are issued for the vehicle pursuant to Subsection
(3) of Section 301.130, RSMo., displayed in the same manner on the front
and rear of such vehicles. The license plate or plates authorized by Section
301.140, RSMo., when properly attached, shall be prima facie evidence that
the required fees have been paid.
Section 375.065. In Transit Tags — Display — Fee.
Section 375.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for"
or words of similar import as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
A. Motor vehicles and trailers in the course of delivery from a
manufacturer to a dealer, or from one dealer to another, may be
operated on the highways without number plates being attached
thereto, provided they bear on the front and on the rear, substantially
as provided for number plates, a placard displaying the words "In
Transit" and the number of the certificate issued as herein provided in
letters and figures not less than three (3) inches high with a stroke not
less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch wide; and provided further, that
the operator of each motor vehicle shall carry, and exhibit on request, a
certificate bearing the seal of the Director of Revenue and his/her
facsimile signature, countersigned with the genuine signature of the
manufacturer or dealer selling such motor vehicle, or his/her
authorized agent. Such certificate shall bear a number and shall show
the date and place of issue and the destination of the motor vehicle, and
shall be of such form as the Director of Revenue shall determine.
B. The manufacturer, dealer or authorized agent shall insert the correct
date, place of issue and destination, and mail a duplicate copy of such
certificate to the Director of Revenue at the time the original is issued;
original and duplicate forms of certificates shall be furnished to
manufacturers and dealers, and to no others, in books of ten (10) sets of
certificates each for a fee of five dollars ($5.00), and in books of fifty
(50) sets of certificates each for a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). It
shall be unlawful for any person to display such placard or to use such
certificate except as herein provided.
Section
375.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
375.080
300:74
Section 375.080. License Plates On Vehicles Displayed For Sale.
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said motor
vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
Section 375.090. Certificate of Ownership Required For Registered
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law unless a certificate of
ownership has been issued.
Section 375.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 375.110. Removal of Plates On Transfer of Vehicle — Use By
Purchaser.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
the person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the
same in his/her possession whether in use or not; except that the buyer of a
motor vehicle or trailer who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach
the license plates from the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly
purchased motor vehicle or trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with
such transferred plates shall be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days.
As used in this Section, the term "trade-in motor vehicle or trailer" shall
include any single motor vehicle or trailer sold by the buyer of the newly
purchased vehicle or trailer, as long as the license plates for the trade-in
motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section 375.120. Sale By Dealer.
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days after taking possession thereof if during
such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in
Section
375.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.120
300:75
the manner required by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to
the dealer. Upon application and presentation of satisfactory evidence that
the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such number
plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the dealer shall
require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50), to
be returned to the buyer upon return of the number plates, as a guarantee
that said buyer will return to the dealer such number plates within thirty
(30) days.
Section 375.125. Dealer Plates. [R.O. 2006 §375.070]
The plates issued under Subsection (3) or (6) of Section 301.560, RSMo.,
may be displayed on any motor vehicle owned and held for resale by the
motor vehicle dealer or manufacturer, and used by a customer who is test
driving the motor vehicle, or is used by an employee or officer, but shall not
be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer hired or loaned to others or
upon any regularly used service or wrecker vehicle. Motor vehicle dealers
may display their dealer plates on a tractor, truck or trailer to demonstrate
a vehicle under a loaded condition, such demonstration not to extend more
than one hundred (100) miles from the truck dealer's place of business.
Section 375.130. False Information By Dealer.
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section 375.135. Special Mobile Equipment Exempt — When
Permitted On Highways — Exception. [R.O. 2006 §375.020]
Special mobile equipment may be moved on the highways of this City from
one job location to another or to or from places of storage, delivery or
repair without complying with the provisions of the law relating to titling
and registration and display of license plates but shall comply with all the
other requirements of the law relating to motor vehicles; provided however,
that said equipment except farm equipment shall not be operated on City
maintained roads or highways on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays.
Section
375.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
375.135
300:76
ARTICLE III
Financial Responsibility
Section 375.140. Financial Responsibility Required.
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State or required to be
registered in this State shall operate the vehicle, or authorize any other
person to operate the vehicle registered, or maintain registration of a
motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle upon
the streets or the alleys of this City unless the owner maintains the
financial responsibility as required in this Section which conforms to
the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall
operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the
owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person
has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the
other's vehicle. However, no owner shall be in violation of this
Subsection if he/she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor
vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. A current insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle
insurer or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for
self-insurance. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.
Section
375.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.140
300:77
Section 375.150. Display of False Evidence of Insurance — Penalty
— Confiscation of False Evidence.
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 375.160. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card.
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each and every violation.
Section
375.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
375.160
300:78
Chapter 380
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section 380.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 380.020. Brakes Required.
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 380.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards To Be Met.
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
Section
375.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.030
300:79
Section 380.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders.
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 380.050. Riding To Right — Required For Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path By Bicycles.
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 380.060. Bicycle To Operate On The Shoulder Adjacent To
Roadway, When — Roadway Defined.
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. A person operating a bicycle at less than the posted speed or slower
than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway may operate as
described in Section 380.050 of this Chapter, or may operate on the
shoulder adjacent to the roadway.
B. A bicycle operated on a roadway, or the shoulder adjacent to a roadway,
shall be operated in the same direction as vehicles are required to be
driven upon the roadway.
C. For purposes of this Section, and Section 380.050, "roadway" means
that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Section
380.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
380.070
300:80
Section 380.070. Bicycle Required To Give Hand or Mechanical
Signals.
The operator of a bicycle shall signal as required in Section 340.180 of
this Title, except that a signal by the hand and arm need not be given
continuously if the hand is needed to control or operate the bicycle. An
operator of a bicycle intending to turn the bicycle to the right shall signal as
indicated in Section 340.180 of this Title, or by extending such operator's
right arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in front and
in rear of the vehicle.
Section 380.080. Penalty For Violation.
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17)
years of age violates any provision of this Chapter in the presence of a Police
Officer, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle involved
for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the
child riding it or to its owner.
Section 380.090. Motorized Bicycles — License Required.
Section 380.100. Equipment Required.
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Chapter 385
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section 385.010. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.5
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of
any public road or State highway.
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
5. State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
Section
380.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
385.020
300:81
Section 385.020. Obstructing The Flow of Traffic Prohibited.6
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or State highway shall
make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not
to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 385.030. Towing of Abandoned Property On Public Real
Property.
7
A. Any Law Enforcement Officer, or an official of the City where the City's
real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove
to a place of safety:
1. Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of:
a. Any interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the
City left unattended for ten (10) hours, or immediately if a Law
Enforcement Officer determines that the abandoned property
is a serious hazard to other motorists;
b. Any interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized
area of the City left unattended for forty-eight (48) hours, or
after four (4) hours if a Law Enforcement Officer determines
that the abandoned property is a serious hazard to other
motorists;
c. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
outside of an urbanized area, left unattended for more than
forty-eight (48) hours;
provided that commercial motor vehicles referred to in
Subsections (a — c) not hauling waste designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be removed
under this Section to a place of safety until the owner or
owner's representative has had a reasonable opportunity to
contact a towing company of choice; or
d. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
in an urbanized area, left unattended for more than ten (10)
hours.
2. Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon
any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position
or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement
6. State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.151, RSMo.
7. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.1, 304.155.3, RSMo.
Section
385.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
385.030
300:82
Section 385.040. General Provisions and Procedures.8
of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person
in control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or
removal.
3. Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section
385.010 herein or Section 577.080, RSMo.
4. Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or
taken without consent of the owner.
5. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is
required to take the person into custody and where such person is
unable to arrange for the property's timely removal.
6. Any abandoned property which due to any other State law or City
ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding
traffic or parking violations.
7. Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a State law
or City ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the
law or where the violation causes a safety hazard.
B. When the City Police Department authorizes a tow pursuant to this
Section in which the abandoned property is moved from the immediate
vicinity, it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report.
C. Any City agency other than the City Police Department authorizing a
tow under this Section where property is towed away from the
immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the City Police Department
within two (2) hours of the tow, along with a crime inquiry and
inspection report.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. Upon the towing of any
abandoned property pursuant to Section 385.030 or under authority of
a Law Enforcement Officer or local governmental agency pursuant to
Section 217.040, the City Police Department, where it authorized such
towing or was properly notified by another governmental agency of
such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law
enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property
has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining
8. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6, 304.155.11 — 12,
304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
385.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
385.040
300:83
to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer
system.
If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days
of the towing, the tower who has online access to the Department of
Revenue's records shall make an inquiry to determine the abandoned
property owner and lienholder, if any, of record. In the event that the
records of the Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of
the owner or any lienholder of record, the tower shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection (3) of Section 304.156, RSMo. If the
tower does not have online access, the City Police Department shall
submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri Director
of Revenue. The City Police Department shall also provide one (1) copy
of the report to the storage facility and one (1) copy to the towing
company. A towing company that does not have online access to the
department's records and that is in possession of abandoned property
after ten (10) working days shall report such fact to the City Police
Department. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed
by the Director of Revenue and shall include the following:
1. The year, model, make and property identification number of the
property and the owner and any lienholders, if known;
2. A description of any damage to the property noted by the Law
Enforcement Officer authorizing the tow;
3. The license plate or registration number and the State of issuance,
if available;
4. The storage location of the towed property;
5. The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
6. The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned
property;
7. The date of the inquiry of the National Crime Information Center,
any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any
other similar system which has titling and registration information
to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. This
information shall be entered only by the City Police Department;
8. The signature and printed name of the Law Enforcement Officer
authorizing the tow and the towing operator; and
9. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems
appropriate.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
Section
385.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
385.040
300:84
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and
Section
385.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
385.040
300:85
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
Section
385.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
385.040
300:86
Section 385.050. Maximum Charges.9
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property, may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
385.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
385.050
300:87
Section 385.060. Sale of Abandoned Property By City.
10
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property, in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property the complete
abandoned property identification number, and the odometer reading of the
abandoned property, if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo., or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Schedule I
CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES
Table I-A. Crosswalks and Safety Zones [R.O. 2006 Sch. II; Ord. No.
1440 §1, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 305.040 (C — D) and when
signs or other appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway are placed giving notice thereof, the following areas shall
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the
towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The Board of Aldermen may from time to time establish maximum
reasonable towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by
towing and storage companies operating within the City, and which are
consistent with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158,
RSMo. Any violation of said established maximum charges shall be
deemed a violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable
pursuant to Section 100.060.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
9. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.156.2, 304.158.6, 304.158.10, RSMo.
10.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.156, RSMo.
Section
385.050
FENTON CITY CODE Table I-A
300:88
be designated Crosswalks or Safety Zones and it shall be unlawful for
any driver of any vehicle to enter such Crosswalk or Safety Zone while a
pedestrian is in such Crosswalk or Safety Zone.
Location
Bent Tree Trails Drive near Uthoff Drive
Gravois Road near Mound Street
Henderson Drive near Khoury League Fields
Larkin Williams Road, 800 Block of
Larkin Williams Road between the Meramec Greenway Trail and Fenton
City Park [Ord. No. 3517 §1, 5-28-2015]
Larkin Williams Road near Parkside Acres Drive
Larkin Williams Road near Riverside Drive
Larkin Williams Road near Valiant Drive
Sweaney Lane near Larkin Williams Road
Sweaney Road near Larkin Williams Road
Uthoff Drive near Bent Tree Trails Drive
Valiant Drive near Larkin Williams Road
Ware Street at Center Street
Water Street at Ferry Street
Water Street near Mound Street
Schedule II
SPEED LIMITS
Table II-A. Speed Limits. [R.O. 2006 Sch. III; Ord. No. 497,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 747, 11-19-1984; Ord. No. 754, 11-19-1984;
Ord. No. 756, 11-19-1984; Ord. No. 831, 9-16-1985; Ord. No. 921,
7-21-1986; Ord. No. 1183, 1-16-1989; Ord. No. 1253, 6-19-1989;
Ord. No. 1429 §1, 10-15-1990; Ord. No. 1449 §1, 12-17-1990; Ord.
No. 1956 §1, 4-15-1996; Ord. No. 2150 §1, 6-15-1998; Ord. No. 2169
§2, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2252 §1, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 2261 §1,
7-27-1999; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2334 §1,
10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2539 §1, 1-22-2003; Ord. No. 2642 §1,
3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2695 §1, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 2816 §1,
6-19-2006; Ord. No. 3034 §1, 5-28-2009]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 320.010 and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speeds listed below on the streets as
designated.
Table I-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
300:89
Location Speed Limit
All streets within the City of Fenton except as
otherwise provided.
25 m.p.h.
Alameda. 20 m.p.h.
Allen Road (Old South Hwy. 141 to City limits). 20 m.p.h.
Alvarado Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Ashgate Court from Forest Knoll Drive to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Autumn Parc Court. 20 m.p.h.
Axminister Drive from Larkin Williams Road to
Headland Drive.
30 m.p.h.
Bent Oak Ridge Court. 20 m.p.h.
Bent Oak Ridge Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Bent Tree Trails Court. 20 m.p.h.
Bent Tree Trails Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Bolger Court from Larkin Williams to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Bowles Avenue east side lane from south City limits to
Larkin Williams Road.
40 m.p.h.
Buckwood Court from Forest Knoll to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Cassens Court. 20 m.p.h.
Cassens Drive from Soccer Park Road to its terminus. 30 m.p.h.
Cassens Industrial Court. 20 m.p.h.
Center Street from West Street to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Chase Drive from Rudder Road to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Chrysler Lane from Riverside Drive to Valiant Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Colina Tierra Lane. 20 m.p.h.
Coronita Court. 20 m.p.h.
Coronita Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Coronita Way. 20 m.p.h.
Country Home Drive (City limits to terminus). 30 m.p.h.
Courtney Estates Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Dart Lane from Riverside Drive to Valiant Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Deer Pointe Court. 20 m.p.h.
El Paso Court. 20 m.p.h.
Elderwood Court from Sennawood to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Fabick Drive from South Highway Drive to Axminister
East.
30 m.p.h.
Fabick Lane from Larkin Williams to its terminus. 15 m.p.h.
Fabricator Drive from Yarnell to Fabick Drive. 30 m.p.h.
Table II-A FENTON CITY CODE Table II-A
300:90
Location Speed Limit
Fenpark Drive from Rudder Road to Wolfner
Drive—West.
30 m.p.h.
Fenton Meadows Court 20 m.p.h.
Ferry Street from Water Street to Center Street. 20 m.p.h.
Fir Crest Lane from Forest Knoll to Sennawood Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Fleetwood Drive from Larkin Williams Road to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Forest Grove Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Forest Knoll Drive from New Smizer Mill Road to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Forest Oak Court from Forest Knoll Drive to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Fury Drive from Riverside Drive to Valiant Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Gilsinn Lane from South Highway Drive to Horan. 30 m.p.h.
Goode Street from Main Street to Water Street. 20 m.p.h.
Grave Street from Water Street to Gravois Road. 20 m.p.h.
Gravois Bluffs Boulevard. 20 m.p.h.
Gravois Bluffs Boulevard from South Old Highway
141 to Highway Thirty.
30 m.p.h.
Gravois Road (Summit Drive to City limits). 30 m.p.h.
Gravois Road from east to west City limits. 30 m.p.h.
Gregory Lane from North Highway 141 to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Headland Drive from Fabricator to Wolfner East. 30 m.p.h.
Heathwood Lane from Forest Knoll to Sennawood
Drive.
20 m.p.h.
Highway 30 from eastern to western City limits. 60 m.p.h.
Highway 141, within the City of Fenton limits. 50 m.p.h.
Hitzert Court from North Highway Drive to its
terminus.
30 m.p.h.
Horan Drive from Larkin Williams to Bowles Avenue. 30 m.p.h.
I-44 from eastern to western City limits. 60 m.p.h.
Imperial Lane from Riverside Drive to Valiant Drive. 20 m.p.h.
La Palma Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Larkin Williams Industrial Court from Larkin Williams
Road to Horan.
30 m.p.h.
Larkin Williams Road from Water Street to South
Highway Drive.
30 m.p.h.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
300:91
Location Speed Limit
Littleton Court from New Smizer Mill Road to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Main Street from Grave Street to Gravois Road. 20 m.p.h.
Manufacturers Drive from Axminister East to Wolfner
East.
20 m.p.h.
McCarthy Drive. 30 m.p.h.
Merus Court from Larkin Williams to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Misty Manor Drive (Hwy. 30 to terminus). 20 m.p.h.
Montevale Court. 20 m.p.h.
Mound Street from Water Street to Center Street. 20 m.p.h.
Mraz Lane from North Highway Drive to its terminus. 35 m.p.h.
Murray Hill Drive from Hays Hill Drive to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
North Highway Drive from east to west City limits. 45 m.p.h.
Ocello Drive from Larkin Williams Industrial Court to
its terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Old South Highway Drive from Gravois to south City
limits.
30 m.p.h.
Opps Lane from Gravois to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Park Meadow Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Parkside Acres Drive from Larkin Williams to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Peffer Lane from Riverside Drive to Valiant Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Raintree Court from Forest Knoll to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
RiverChase of Fenton, entrance and exit lanes at. 15 m.p.h.
River Hills Drive. 20 m.p.h.
RiverChase Circle. 20 m.p.h.
Riverside Drive from Wolfner East to Larkin Williams. 20 m.p.h.
Riverside Drive from Yarnell to Wolfner East. 30 m.p.h.
Rudder Industrial Park Drive from Rudder Road to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Rudder Road from Yarnell Road to Larkin Williams
Road.
30 m.p.h.
Saline Road (Gravois Road to City limits). 30 m.p.h.
San Benito. 20 m.p.h.
San Martin Court. 20 m.p.h.
San Simeon. 20 m.p.h.
San Sebastian. 20 m.p.h.
Table II-A FENTON CITY CODE Table II-A
300:92
Location Speed Limit
Sennawood Drive from New Smizer Mill Road to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
Shadow Bend Court [Ord. No. 3571 § 1, 1-28-2016] 20 m.p.h.
Shadow Bend Drive [Ord. No. 3571 § 1, 1-28-2016] 20 m.p.h.
Somerset Ridge Drive from Littleton Court to its
terminus.
20 m.p.h.
South Highway Drive from east to west City limits. 45 m.p.h.
Stemwood Way from Littleton to Somerset Ridge
Drive.
20 m.p.h.
Swansea. 20 m.p.h.
Sweaney Drive. 15 m.p.h.
Sweaney Lane. 15 m.p.h.
Tierra Court. 20 m.p.h.
Treecrest from Forest Knoll Drive to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
United Drive from South Highway Drive to its
terminus.
30 m.p.h.
Uthoff Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Uthoff Lane from Horan Drive to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Valiant Drive from Larkin Williams to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Villa Gran Way. 20 m.p.h.
Ware Street from Water Street to Center Street. 20 m.p.h.
Water Street from Gravois Road to Larkin Williams
Road.
20 m.p.h.
West Street from Gravois to Center Street. 20 m.p.h.
Winter Green Estates Drive. 20 m.p.h.
Winter Hill Circle. 20 m.p.h.
Wolfner Drive between Riverside Drive and the
eastern boundary of the airport.
20 m.p.h.
Wolfner West from Larkin Williams to its terminus. 30 m.p.h.
Woodington Court. 20 m.p.h.
Woodridge Trails. 20 m.p.h.
Woodridge Trails Court. 20 m.p.h.
Woodway Circle from New Smizer Mill Road to New
Smizer Mill Road.
20 m.p.h.
Woodway Court from Woodway Circle to its terminus. 20 m.p.h.
Woodway Drive from New Smizer Mill Road to
Woodway Circle.
20 m.p.h.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
300:93
Location Speed Limit
Woodway Drive from North Highway 141 to Woodway
Circle.
20 m.p.h.
Yarnell Road from Larkin Williams Road to Soccer
Park Road.
30 m.p.h.
Zapata Court. 20 m.p.h.
Schedule III
RESTRICTED TURNS
Table III-A. Restricted Turns. [R.O. 2006 Sch. IV; Ord. No. 656,
6-20-1983; Ord. No. 1131, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 1184, 1-16-1989;
Ord. No. 1713 §1, 9-21-1993; Ord. No. 2007 §1, 11-18-1996]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall make a right
turn, left turn or U-turn upon any street or at any intersection where such
turns are restricted in accordance with Section 305.040(G).
Location Restriction
Center Street, eastbound at Ferry
Street.
No left turn.
Center Street, westbound at Ferry
Street.
No right turn.
Fenton Plaza, west exit onto Gravois
Road.
No left turn.
Gravois Road, westbound at the
west exit/entrance to Fenton Plaza.
No left turn.
Gravois Road, eastbound at Ferry
Street.
No left turn.
Gravois Road, westbound at Ferry
Street.
No right turn.
Gravois Road, westbound at Main
Street.
No right turn.
Main Street, eastbound at Ferry
Street.
No left turn.
Main Street, westbound at Ferry
Street.
No right turn.
Main Street, eastbound at Mound
Street.
No right turn.
Main Street, westbound at Mound
Street.
No left turn.
New Smizer Mill Road, northbound
traffic at 808.
No left turn.
Table II-A FENTON CITY CODE Table III-A
300:94
Location Restriction
New Smizer Mill Road (Route 141),
southbound traffic at Sennawood
Drive.
No left turn.
Rudder Road at the intersection of
Rudder Road with the east entrance
to Interstate 44.
No left turn.
Sennawood Drive, traffic exiting
from Forest Knoll Subdivision at
New Smizer Mill Road (Route 141).
No left turn.
Water Street, eastbound at Mound
Street.
No right turn.
Water Street, westbound at Mound
Street.
No left turn.
Schedule IV
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Table IV-A. One-Way Streets and Alleys. [R.O. 2006 Sch. V; Ord. No.
599, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 919, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 1469 § 1,
2-20-1991]
In accordance with Sections 330.010 and 330.020 and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, as authorized by Sections 330.010 and
330.020, no operator of a vehicle shall drive such vehicle in any direction
other than that of lawful traffic movement as indicated by such signs.
Location Direction
Ferry Street from Water Street to
Center Street.
Southwestbound
Mound Street from Water Street to
Gravois Road.
Northeastbound
North Highway Drive from the
300th block of North Highway Drive
west to the Bowles Avenue overpass.
Westbound
South Highway Drive from the
Bowles Avenue overpass to the
400th block of South Highway Drive.
Eastbound
Schedule V
THROUGH STREETS
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table V-A
300:95
Table V-A. Through Streets. [R.O. 2006 Sch. VI; Ord. No. 497,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 335.010 when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every
intersection before entering any of the following through streets:
Through Streets
Bowles Avenue
Gravois Road
Highway 141
North Highway Drive
South Highway Drive
South Highway 141
Schedule VI
STOP SIGNS
Table VI-A. Stop Signs. [R.O. 2006 Sch. VII; Ord. No. 497,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 658, 7-18-1983; Ord. No. 664, 9-19-1983; Ord.
No. 678, 12-19-1983; Ord. No. 744, 9-17-1984; Ord. No. 932,
8-25-1986; Ord. No. 996, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1124, 8-15-1988; Ord.
No. 1197, 2-20-1989; Ord. No. 1243, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1252,
6-19-1989; Ord. No. 1594 §1, 4-20-1992; Ord. No. 1597 §1,
5-18-1992; Ord. No. 1618 §1, 8-17-1992; Ord. No. 1701 §1,
7-20-1993; Ord. No. 1709 §1, 9-21-1993; Ord. No. 1931 § 2,
1-17-1996; Ord. No. 1936 §2, 2-22-1996; Ord. No. 1946 §1,
3-18-1996; Ord. No. 2078 §1, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 2081 §1,
7-21-1997; Ord. No. 2089 §1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 2094 §1,
9-15-1997; Ord. No. 2169 §3, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2171 §1,
8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2321 §2,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2333 §1, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 2419 §1,
9-17-2001; Ord. No. 2704 §1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 2757 §1,
9-19-2005]
In accordance with Sections 335.030 through 335.050 and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, the driver of any vehicle shall stop at the
following locations:
Stop Sign Location
Allen Road westbound at Old South Highway 141
Axminister at Larkin Williams Road
Axminister Drive at Fenpark Drive (4-way)
Bent Oak Ridge Court southeast corner northbound at Bent Tree Trails
Drive
Table V-A FENTON CITY CODE Table VI-A
300:96
Stop Sign Location
Bent Oak Ridge Drive northwest corner southbound at Bent Tree Trails
Drive
Bent Tree Trails Court northwest corner southbound at Bent Tree Trails
Drive
Bent Tree Trails Drive northeast corner westbound at Bent Oak Ridge
Drive
Bent Tree Trails Drive southwest corner eastbound at Uthoff Drive
Bolger Court eastbound at Larkin Williams Road
Bowles Avenue westbound at Larkin Williams Road
Bowles Spur at southbound Bowles Avenue
Cassens Drive southbound at Soccer Park Road
Center Street at Mound Street (4-way)
Center Street at West Street, which includes access from the Fenton Post
Office parking lot and Fenton Plaza (4-way)
Chase Drive at Rudder Road
Chrysler Drive eastbound at Riverside Drive
Chrysler Drive westbound at Valiant Drive
Church Street at Main Street
City Hall/Community Center entrance at New Smizer Mill Road
Coronita Drive at Villa Gran Way
Courtney Estates Drive and Montevale Court (3-way)
DaimlerChrysler, main gate entrance, at North Highway Drive
DaimlerChrysler, west lot entrance, at North Highway Drive
Dart Lane eastbound at Riverside Drive
Dart Lane westbound at Valiant Drive
Deer Pointe Court southbound at Park Meadow Drive
El Paso Court northbound at Villa Gran Way
Fabick at Larkin Williams Road
Fabick Drive northbound at Rudder Road
Fabick Drive southbound at New Smizer Mill Road
Fabricator Drive eastbound at Yarnell Road
Fencorp Court northbound at Axminister Drive
Fenpark at Rudder Road
Fenton Business Park Court southeast corner northbound at Rudder Road
Ferry Street at Center Street (4-way)
Fleetwood Drive eastbound at Larkin Williams Road
Forest Grove Drive and Montevale Court (3-way)
Table VI-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table VI-A
300:97
Stop Sign Location
Forest Knoll Drive at New Smizer Mill Road
Fury Drive eastbound at Riverside Drive
Fury Drive westbound at Valiant Drive
Gilsinn at Horan Drive
Gilsinn Drive northbound at South Highway Drive
Goode Drive eastbound at Water Street
Grave at Water (3-way)
Grave Street southbound at Gravois Road
Gravois Place at Gravois Road
Gravois Road northbound at Summit Drive
Gregory Lane at New Smizer Mill Road (3-way)
Hays Hill Drive at New Smizer Mill Road
Headland Drive northbound at Fabricator Lane
Headland Drive southbound at Wolfner Drive
Headquarters Park Drive eastbound at Gilsinn Drive
Henderson Drive eastbound at Larkin Williams Road
Hitzert Court at North Highway Drive
Imperial Lane eastbound at Riverside Drive
Imperial Lane westbound at Valiant Drive
Intertech Drive southbound at Bowles Avenue
LaPalma Drive at Villa Gran Way
LaPalma Drive, northwest corner, and San Sebastian, facing traffic moving
south on LaPalma Drive
Larkin Williams at Yarnell Road
Larkin Williams Industrial Court eastbound at Larkin Williams Road
Larkin Williams Industrial Court northbound at Horan Drive
Larkin Williams Road — Horan — Rudder (4-way)
Larkin Williams Road at South Highway Drive
Littleton Court at New Smizer Mill Road
Main Street at Ferry Street (both directions)
Main Street at Mound Street (both directions)
Main Street eastbound at Gravois Road
Main Street southwest at Grave Street
Manufacturers Drive southbound at Wolfner Drive
Mayflower Drive at Rudder Road
Merus Court westbound at Larkin Williams Road
Table VI-A FENTON CITY CODE Table VI-A
300:98
Stop Sign Location
Misty Manor Road at London Circle Drive (2-way)
Mound Street at Water Street
Nolan Road at Saline Road
Ocello Drive at Larkin Williams Industrial Court
Old South Highway 141 at Gravois Road
Park Meadow Drive at Forest Grove Drive (3-way)
Parkside Acres Drive at Larkin Williams Road
Peffer Lane eastbound at Riverside Drive
Peffer Lane westbound at Valiant Drive
Premier Drive at Fabick Drive
RiverChase of Fenton Recreation Center entrance at Horan Drive
Riverside at Larkin Williams Road
Riverside at Yarnell Road
Rudder Industrial Park at Rudder Road
Rudder Road, southeast corner, facing south at the exit of the Fairfield Inn
parking lot
Rudder Road, southwest corner, facing west
Rudder Road at Yarnell Road
San Benito Lane eastbound at San Simeon Way
San Martin Court at Villa Gran Way
San Sebastian Drive at LaPalma Drive (3-way)
San Sebastian Drive at Villa Gran Way
San Sebastian Drive northeast bound at Swansea Drive
San Sebastian Drive — San Simeon Way (4-way)
San Sebastian Drive southwest bound at Swansea Drive
Sennawood Drive at New Smizer Mill Road
Shadow Bend Court westbound at Shadow Bend Drive [Ord. No. 3571
§ 2, 1-28-2016]
Shadow Bend Drive westbound at Bowles Avenue [Ord. No. 3571 § 2,
1-28-2016]
Skinker Lane southbound at Gravois Road
Somerset Ridge Drive southbound at Littleton Court
South Highway Drive, northeast corner, facing east
South Highway Drive, northwest corner, facing north
St. Louis Truck Port east lot exit at Soccer Park Road
Summit Place Court at Country Home Drive
Table VI-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table VI-A
300:99
Stop Sign Location
Summit Tree Court at Country Home Drive
Swansea Drive northwest bound at San Sebastian Drive
Swansea Drive southeast bound at Somerset Ridge Drive
Sweaney Drive, at the southwest corner, and Sweaney Lane, facing oncoming traffic from Sweaney Lane
Sweaney Drive east at Larkin Williams Road
Sweaney Drive north at Larkin Williams Road
United Drive, northbound at Rudder Road
Uthoff Drive, northbound at the crosswalk, at the entrance to Uthoff
Valley Elementary School
Uthoff Drive, southbound, at Bent Tree Trails Drive
Uthoff Lane at Horan Drive
Valiant at Larkin Williams Road
Villa Gran Way at Alvarado (3-way)
Villa Gran Way at Coronita Drive
Villa Gran Way at San Sebastian Drive
Villa Gran Way at San Simeon (3-way)
Villa Gran Way, westbound, at Bowles Avenue
Ware Street at Gravois (both directions)
Ware Street at Main Street (4-way)
Ware Street at Water Street
Water at Gravois
Water Street at Grave Street
Water Street at Mound Street (both directions)
West Street at Center Street
West Street at Gravois Road
Wintergreen Estates Drive westbound at Old South Highway 141
Wintergreen Estates Drive (T-intersection) sign to include wording that
cross traffic does not stop
Wolfner Drive — east at Riverside Drive
Wolfner Drive — west at Larkin Williams Road
Woodridge Trails at Bowles Avenue
Woodway Circle at New Smizer Mill Road
Woodway Drive at New Smizer Mill Road
Yarnell Road at Soccer Park Road
Zapata Court, northbound at Villa Gran Way
Table VI-A FENTON CITY CODE Table VI-A
300:100
Schedule VII
YIELD SIGNS
Table VII-A. Yield Signs. [R.O. 2006 Sch. VIII; Ord. No. 497,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 920, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 1251, 6-19-1989; Ord.
No. 1723 §1, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000]
In accordance with Sections 335.030, 335.040 and 335.060 and when signs
are erected giving notice thereof, the driver of any vehicle approaching a
yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching
on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
Yield Signs
Bowles Avenue and eastbound Highway 141.
Bowles Avenue and eastbound Horan Drive.
Bowles Avenue and eastbound New Smizer Mill Road.
Bowles Avenue and northbound Bowles Spur.
Bowles Avenue and westbound Highway 141.
Bowles Avenue and westbound New Smizer Mill Road.
Bowles Avenue eastbound entrance ramp and I-44.
Bowles Avenue westbound entrance ramp and I-44.
Bowels Spur and eastbound South Highway Drive.
Bowles Spur and southbound Bowles Avenue.
Fabick Drive and eastbound entrance ramp to I-44.
Fenton Plaza, both parking lot exits, onto Gravois Road.
Ferry Street, from right turn lane, onto Gravois Road.
Gregory Lane and westbound Highway 141.
Highway 30.
Highway 141 and northbound Bowles Avenue.
Highway 141 and northbound Gregory Lane.
Highway 141 and northbound San Simeon Way.
Highway 141 and southbound Bowles Avenue.
Highway 141 eastbound ramp.
Horan Drive and northbound Bowles Avenue.
Mraz Lane and westbound North Highway Drive.
New Smizer Mill Road and northbound Bowles Avenue.
New Smizer Mill Road and southbound Bowles Avenue.
North Highway Drive and northbound Mraz Lane.
Table VI-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table VII-A
300:101
Yield Signs
Rudder Road and eastbound South Highway Drive.
San Simeon Way and westbound Highway 141.
South Highway Drive and westbound Rudder Road.
Uthoff Farm Court and northbound Uthoff Drive. [Ord. No. 3467 §1,
9-25-2014]
Wal-Mart parking lot exit at the traffic signal onto Gravois Road.
Schedule VIII
NO PARKING AT ANY TIME
Table VIII-A. No Parking At Any Time. [R.O. 2006 Sch. IX; Ord. No.
497, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 513, 3-17-1980; Ord. No. 534, 1-19-1981;
Ord. No. 543, 7-21-1981; Ord. No. 688, 1-16-1984; Ord. No. 776,
12-17-1984; Ord. No. 972, 2-16-1987; Ord. No. 1069, 3-21-1988;
Ord. No. 1081, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 1105, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 1109,
7-18-1988; Ord. No. 1122, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 1492 §1, 5-20-1991;
Ord. No. 1635 §1, 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 2026 §1, 2-19-1997; Ord. No.
2169 §4, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2210 §1, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 2296 §1,
2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2326 §1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 2388 §2,
5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2445 §1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 2569 §1,
5-19-2003]
In accordance with Section 365.030 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Location
Allen Road (Old South Highway 141 to City limits)
Axminister Drive
Bent Tree Trails Drive (westbound, 100 feet from Uthoff Drive — No
Parking Here to Corner) [Ord. No. 3689 § 1, 5-25-2017]
Bolger Court
Bowles Avenue (both sides) from Larkin Williams Road to its terminus
Bowles Avenue — east side
Cassens Drive
Center Street
Chase Drive
City Hall/Community Center Complex: the driveway entrance from New
Smizer Mill Road to the entrance of the City Hall/Community Center
parking lot and the driveway entrance from Gregory Lane to the rear
parking lot of City Hall
Country Home Drive (City limits to terminus)
Table VII-A FENTON CITY CODE Table VIII-A
300:102
Location
Dennis Property: both sides of the street from Grave Street to the
southwest corner of the building, and the driveway across the rear of the
building
Fabick Drive
Fabick Lane
Fenpark Drive
Fenton Plaza: from the west entrance, across the front of the buildings, to
#14 Fenton Plaza
Ferry Street
Fircrest Lane from Forest Knoll Drive to fifty (50) feet west
Forest Knoll Drive (east side) between New Smizer Mill Road and Forest
Oak Court
Forest Knoll Drive (south side)
Gilsinn Drive
Grave Street
Gravois Road: the driveway between #10 Gravois Road and #18 Gravois
Road, to the extreme rear of both buildings
Hays Hill Drive (north side) between New Smizer Mill Road and River
Hills Drive
Hays Hill Drive (south side) between New Smizer Mill Road and River
Hills Drive
Headland Drive
Heathwood Lane from Forest Knoll Drive to fifty (50) feet west
Hitzert Court
Horan Drive
Larkin Williams Industrial Court
Larkin Williams Road
Larkin Williams Road (both sides) from cul-de-sac to three hundred (300)
feet south
Littleton Court (both east and west sides) from the intersection of
Highway 141 (New Smizer Mill Road) and Littleton Court and proceeding
north for a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet
Main Street (Ferry to Mound, north side)
Main Street (Ware to Grave, both sides)
Main Street (Ware Street to Ferry Street, south side only)
Manufacturers Drive
Merus Court
Mound Street
Table VIII-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table VIII-A
300:103
Location
Mraz Lane
New Smizer Mill Road from Hays Hill Drive to Forest Knoll Drive (both
sides)
North Highway Drive
RiverChase Recreation Facility—entrance/exit road (west side only)
RiverChase Service Road—both sides of the road
Riverside Drive (Larkin Williams Road to Wolfner Drive, east side only)
Rudder Industrial Park Drive
Rudder Road
San Simeon Way (east side) at its intersection with Highway 141 (New
Smizer Mill Road) and proceeding north for a distance of approximately
one hundred (100) feet
Shadow Bend Drive (south and west side) from Bowles Avenue to cul-desac [Ord. No. 3571 § 3, 1-28-2016]
Smizer Mill Road (north side) from City limits to terminus
South Highway Drive
800 South Highway Drive: both entrances across the front of the entire
building at the curb next to the building, east end of the building at the
storage building, across the rear of the building drive-through, allowing
parking across the stripped area next to the building, and the west end of
the building, and the west end of the building at the outside stairs
St. Paul's Church and School: the driveway from Forest Knoll to the edge
of the parking lot, and the driveway and edge of parking lot from Highway
141 to the east end of the church building
United Drive
Uthoff Drive (southbound, 90 feet from Bent Tree Trails Drive — No
Parking Here to Corner) [Ord. No. 3689 § 1, 5-25-2017]
Uthoff Drive (southbound, 180 feet from Horan Drive — No Parking Here
to Corner) [Ord. No. 3689 § 1, 5-25-2017]
Valiant Drive from Larkin Williams Road to three hundred (300) feet west
Ware Street
Water Street (Goode to Grave, both sides)
Western Plaza: across the front of all stores at the curb and between
buildings
Wintergreen Estates Drive: either side for a distance of one hundred sixty
(160) feet east of South Old Highway 141
Woodway Circle (both east and west sides) from both its intersections
with Highway 141 (New Smizer Mill Road) and proceeding north for a
distance of approximately two hundred (200) feet
Yarnell Road
Table VIII-A FENTON CITY CODE Table VIII-A
300:104
Schedule IX
CURB LOADING ZONES
Table IX-A. Curb Loading Zones. [R.O. 2006 Sch. X; Ord. No. 1915
§ 25, 11-20-1995; Ord. No. 1996 § 1, 10-21-1996]
In accordance with Section 360.020 and when a permit has been issued by
the City Administrator and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
following areas shall be designated Curb Loading Zones:
Location
One hundred (100) feet along the north side of Ware Street from the rear
of the driveway entrance to the Metro Electric Supply Warehouse, to the
entrance of the parking lot in the rear of the warehouse. The remainder of
Ware would continue to be a "No Parking" zone.
Schedule X
PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS
Table X-A. Public Carrier Stops and Stands. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XI]
In accordance with Section 360.050 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, the following areas shall be designated Public Carrier Stops
and Stands.
Schedule XI
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS
Table XI-A. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours. [R.O. 2006
Sch. XII; Ord. No. 1517 §2, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000]
In accordance with Section 365.040 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall, during the times parking is prohibited, park
a vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Location
Fircrest Lane (north side only) prohibited on Sundays from 8:00 A.M. to
Noon.
Forest Knoll Drive (west side only) between New Smizer Mill Road and
Fircrest Lane prohibited on Saturdays from 5:00 P.M. to 8:30 P.M. and on
Sundays from 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 P.M.
Heathwood Lane (north side only) prohibited on Sundays from 8:00 A.M.
to Noon.
Table VIII-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table XI-A
300:105
Location
Wolfner Drive, north side from Riverside Drive to terminus at airport
border, "No Parking" on Monday through Friday from 8:00 A.M. until 5:00
P.M.
Schedule XII
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED
Table XII-A. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XIII;
Ord. No. 1228, 4-19-1989; Ord. No. 1293, 8-21-1989; Ord. No. 2007
§2, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2493 §1,
7-15-2002; Ord. No. 3301 §1, 12-20-2012]
In accordance with Section 340.280 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate a commercial vehicle upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Location
Alameda Court
Alvarado Drive
Ashgate Court
Autumn Parc Court
Bent Oak Ridge Court
Bent Oak Ridge Drive
Bent Tree Trails Court
Bent Tree Trails Drive
Buckwood Court
Busch Forest Lane
Chrysler Lane
Colina Tierra Lane
Coronita Court
Coronita Drive
Coronita Way
Courtney Estates Drive
Dart Lane
Deer Pointe Court
El Paso Court
Elderwood Court
Fenton Meadows Court
Ferry Street
Table XI-A FENTON CITY CODE Table XII-A
300:106
Location
Fircrest Lane
Fleetwood Drive
Fleetwood Meadows Court
Forest Grove Drive
Forest Knoll Drive
Forest Oak Court
Fury Drive
Goode Street
Gregory Lane
Hays Hill Drive
Heathwood Lane
Imperial Lane
La Palma Drive
Larkin Williams Road between Wolfner Drive and Yarnell Road
Littleton Court
Montevale Court
Mound Street
Murray Hill Drive
New Smizer Mill Road east of Gregory Lane
Park Meadow Drive
Parkside Acres Drive
Peffer Lane
Raintree Court
Riverchase Circle
River Hills Drive
Riverside Drive
San Benito Lane
San Martin Court
San Sebastian Drive
San Simeon Way
Sennawood Drive
Shadow Bend Court
Shadow Bend Drive
Somerset Ridge Drive
Stemwood Way
Swansea Drive
Table XII-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table XII-A
300:107
Location
Tierra Court
Treecrest Court
Uthoff Farm Court
Uthoff Farm Lane
Uthoff Lane
Valiant Drive
Villa Gran Way
Water Street
West Street
Wintergreen Estates
Winter Hill Circle
Winterview Circle
Woodington Court
Woodridge Trails Court
Woodridge Trails Drive
Woodway Circle Drive
Woodway Court
Woodway Drive
Zapata Court
Schedule XIII
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Table XIII-A. Traffic Control Devices. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XIV; Ord. No.
497, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 663, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 911, 6-16-1986;
Ord. No. 1931 §1, 1-17-1996; Ord. No. 1936 §1, 2-22-1996; Ord. No.
2089 §2, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 2097 §1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 2169 §1,
8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 2321 §1,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2388 §1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2775 §1,
12-19-2005]
In accordance to Section 315.060, the driver of any vehicle shall obey all
traffic control devices at the following locations:
Location
Bowles Avenue and Horan Drive
Bowles Avenue and South Highway Drive
Bowles Avenue and West Park Center Drive
Bowles Avenue at the intersection of North Highway Drive
Table XII-A FENTON CITY CODE Table XIII-A
300:108
Location
Gravois Bluffs Boulevard at Gravois Bluffs Circle Drive
Gravois Bluffs Boulevard at McCarthy Drive
Gravois Road and the east exit of Fenton Plaza Shopping Center
Gravois Road and Ferry Street
Gravois Road and Grave Street/South Highway 141
Gravois Road and Mound Street
Highway 30 and Misty Manor Drive
Highway 30 and Summit Drive
Highway 141 and Gravois Road
Horan Drive at Fenton Fire Protection District #2 House
Larkin Williams Road between the Meramec Greenway Trail and Fenton
City Park [Ord. No. 3517 §2, 5-28-2015]
North Highway Drive and Mraz Lane
North Highway Drive and westbound I-44 exit ramp
South Old Highway 141 and Gravois Bluffs Boulevard
State Route 141 and Gregory Lane
State Route 141 at the intersection of Dierbergs Fenton Crossing
Shopping Center
State Route 141 at Bowles Avenue
State Route 141 at Gravois Bluffs Boulevard
State Route 141 at San Simeon Way
State Route 141 at westbound Route 30 entrance ramp
State Route 141 at westbound Route 30 exit ramp
Schedule XIV
FLASHING SIGNALS
Table XIV-A. Flashing Signals. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XV; Ord. No. 497,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 2296 §1, 2-24-2000]
In accordance to Section 315.080, the driver of any vehicle shall obey an
illuminated flashing red or yellow signal at the following locations:
Location
Larkin Williams Road at Sweaney Drive
Larkin Williams Road, 800 block, at bike/pedestrian crossing
Schedule XV
Table XIII-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table XIV-A
300:109
NO STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS
OR CONGESTED PLACES
Table XV-A. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous or
Congested Places. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XVI; Ord. No. 513, 3-17-1980]
In accordance with Section 355.090 where signs are erected at hazardous
or congested places as authorized therein, no stopping, standing or parking
shall be permitted except according to erected sign notices in the following
designated areas:
Location
Gravois Road within the City limits
Schedule XVI
(RESERVED)
Schedule XVII
LOCAL TRAFFIC ONLY
Table XVII-A. Local Traffic Only. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XVIII; Ord. No.
933, 8-25-1986]
In accordance with Section 340.300 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall, at any time, drive a vehicle upon any of the
following streets designated for local traffic only:
Location
Goode Drive
Schedule XVIII
REGULATION OF THROUGH TRAFFIC
Table XVIII-A. Regulation of Through Traffic. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XIX;
Ord. No. 1172 §1, 11-21-1988; Ord. No. 1299, 9-18-1989; Ord. No.
1690 §1, 6-22-1993]
In accordance with Section 340.310 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate a motor vehicle directly between the
specified locations at the times specified.
Table XIV-A FENTON CITY CODE Table XVIII-A
300:110
Location Regulation of Through Traffic
Fire lane at 575 Rudder Road No through traffic on fire lane from
575 Rudder Road to 650 South
Highway Drive.
New Smizer Mill Road at Littleton
Court
No through traffic to the
intersection of Villa Gran Way and
Bowles Avenue.
New Smizer Mill Road at San
Simeon Way
No through traffic to the
intersection of Villa Gran Way and
Bowles Avenue.
Villa Gran Way and San Simeon Way No through traffic from the
intersection of Bowles Avenue and
Villa Gran Way to the intersection of
San Simeon Way and New Smizer
Mill Road.
Villa Gran Way and San Simeon Way No through traffic from the
intersection of Bowles Avenue and
Villa Gran Way to the intersection of
Littleton Court and New Smizer Mill
Road.
Schedule XIX
CERTAIN VEHICLES LICENSED IN EXCESS OF EIGHTEEN
THOUSAND POUNDS PROHIBITED
Table XIX-A. Certain Vehicles Licensed in Excess of Eighteen
Thousand Pounds Prohibited. [R.O. 2006 Sch. XX; Ord. No. 1294,
8-21-1989; Ord. No. 1996 §2, 10-21-1996; Ord. No. 2296 §1,
2-24-2000]
In accordance with Section 340.290, certain vehicles licensed in excess of
eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds are prohibited from using the following
streets when signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Location
Larkin Williams Road from Wolfner Drive to Yarnell Road.
Larkin Williams Road from Yarnell Road to Ferry Street.
Uthoff Drive.
Yarnell Road from Larkin Williams Road North to Fabricator Drive.
Schedule XX
CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON BRIDGES
Table XVIII-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table XX-A
300:111
Table XX-A. Certain Vehicles Prohibited on Bridges. [R.O. 2006 Sch.
XXI; Ord. No. 2296 §3, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 3282, 8-23-2012]
In accordance with Section 340.270, vehicles licensed in excess of the
weight limits posted on the following bridges are prohibited when signs are
erected giving notice thereof.
Location Weight Limit
Fenton Creek Bridge on Gravois
Road
34 tons
Fenton Creek Bridge on Mound
Street
15 tons
Fenton Creek Bridge on South
Highway 141
17 tons (single axle)
22 tons (tandem axle)
36 tons (combination)
Meramec River Bridge on Gravois
Road
27 tons
Saline Road, unnamed tributary
bridge
44.8 tons (single axle)
67.2 tons (others)
Yarnell Creek Bridge on Bowles
Avenue
44.8 tons (single axle)
67.2 tons (others)
Yarnell Creek Bridge on Horan Drive 34 tons
Yarnell Creek Bridge on Larkin
Williams Road
36 tons
Table XX-A FENTON CITY CODE Table XX-A
300:112

Chapter 400
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 400.010. Title. [Ord. No. 3890, 1-24-201948]
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Code of
the City of Fenton, Missouri.”
Section 400.020. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3890, 1-24-2019]
A. This Zoning Code is enacted pursuant to authority conferred under
State law for the purpose of regulating and controlling the zoning and
use of land, buildings, and structures within the City to promote public
safety, health and general welfare of its citizens. This Title is specifically
designed to:
1. Reflect and effectuate the principles and policies articulated in the
Comprehensive Plan;
2. Enhance and protect the character and stability of residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational, and open space areas within
the City;
3. Foster the safe, efficient and economic use of the land, the City’s
transportation infrastructure, and other public facilities and
services;
4. Enhance and preserve the value of land, buildings, and structures
throughout the City;
5. Divide the City into zoning Districts and establish, by reference, a
map showing the boundaries of such Districts;
6. Fix reasonable standards to which land, buildings, structures, and
their uses must conform;
7. Prohibit uses, buildings, or structures which are incompatible with
the character or development of uses, buildings, or structures
permitted within specified zoning Districts;
8. Provide for the continuation of non-conforming uses as required by
law;
9. Designate and define the powers and duties of the officials
administering and enforcing this Chapter; and
10. Provide penalties for the violation of this Chapter.
B. This document will help guide the City to:
48.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 400, General Provisions, containing Sections 400.010
through 400.030, was repealed 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3890.
Section
250.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:229
Section 400.030. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3890, 1-24-2019]
1. Provide infrastructure more economically;
2. Bring complimentary uses together;
3. Provide the efficient delivery of needed public services such as
police and fire control;
4. Control and reduce traffic congestion around business and
commercial areas;
5. Provide efficient access to transportation facilities; and, most
importantly,
6. Provide for open park spaces.
A. When discussing the intended meaning of the terminology used in this
Zoning Code, the following rules shall be observed:
Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined
in this Code shall have their standard English dictionary meanings.
Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine gender.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
Words used in the singular number shall include the multiple tense.
The term “shall” is always mandatory; the term “may” is permissive.
The term “this municipality” shall mean the City of Fenton, Missouri.
The words “lot,” “parcel,” “tract” and “site” shall be synonymous.
The words “building” and “structure” shall be synonymous.
The words “extend,” “enlarge” and “expand” shall be synonymous.
The words “abutting,” “adjacent” and “contiguous” shall be
synonymous.
All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot (ft) or
(inches).
References to Sections shall be deemed to include all Subsections
within that Section; but a reference to a particular Subsection
designates only that Subsection.
A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly
limited.
Section
400.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:230
B. Definitions. As used in this Title, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
ABUTS/ABUTTING — Having a common lot line or district line.
ACCESS WAY — A curb cut, ramp, driveway or other means for
providing specific vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading
area. This definition does not include bikeway or walkway.
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — Any building or
structure, the use of which is incidental to, subordinate in size or
purpose, and customarily in conjunction with the principal structure
or use permitted or permitted by Special Use in the Zoning District
in which it is located and is located on the same lot as the principal
structure or use.
Except as otherwise provided for within this Title IV, any accessory
building or structure attached to the Principal Building shall be
considered as part of the principal building and shall comply with the
minimum Setback requirements of the Zoning District in which the
Principal Building is located.
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use of a building or land which is
incidental to the principal use permitted or permitted by Special Use in
the Zoning District in which it is located, customarily associated with
the principal use, and located on the same lot as the principal building,
structure or use.
Except as otherwise provided within this Title IV, any building or
structure housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the
principal building when it has any part of a wall in common with the
main building or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as
an integral part of the principal structure.
ADMINISTER — The direct application of medical Marijuana to a
Qualifying Patient, to the extent allowed by and pursuant to the terms
of Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution, by way of any of
the following methods:[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
Ingestion of capsules, teas, oils, and other Marijuana-Infused
Products;
1.
Vaporization or smoking of dried flowers, buds, plant material,
extracts, or oils;
2.
3. Application of ointments or balms;
4. Transdermal patches and suppositories;
5. Consuming Marijuana-Infused food Products;
Any other method recommended by a Qualifying Patient’s
Physician as authorized by Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri
Constitution.
6.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:231
AIRPORT — An area for the landing or taking off of aircraft, containing
two (2) or more runways of a least two thousand (2,000) feet in length,
possessing facilities for the storage, servicing or repairing of aircraft,
and open to public use, but not to all types of aircraft.
AISLE — A vehicular traffic way within an offstreet parking area. Also,
is used as a means of ingress/egress from parking spaces.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to abutting property.
ALTER — To change the size, shape or use of a structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — An establishment designed to provide medical
care to animals and which may have the capability of providing on-site
overnight care and boarding but does not include outdoor kennels or
runs.
APPLICANT — Any person, corporation or other legal entity with the
written consent of the owner seeking approval under these regulations.
ART DEALER — An establishment engaged in the sale of works of art.
ARTISAN, CRAFTSMAN AND PHOTOGRAPH STUDIO — The workshop
or studio of an artist, craftsperson, sculptor, or photographer, which
workshop is primarily used for on-site production of unique custom
goods through the use of hand tools or small-scale equipment, and
only incidentally used, on an infrequent basis if at all, as an accessory
gallery or for incidental sales.
ASPHALT — A bituminous material (oil-based); usually refers to
concrete made with sand, gravel and a bituminous binder.
ATTACHED — As applied to buildings, “attached” means having a
common wall and/or a common roof.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM FACILITY) — A mechanized
consumer banking device operated by a Financial Institution for the
convenience of its customers, whether outside or in an accesscontrolled
facility. ATM Facilities located outside of a building and not
on the premise of a Financial Institution shall be considered a Principal
Use.
AUTOMOBILE — Any automobile not defined as a Commercial Motor
Vehicle.[Ord. No. 3945, 6-27-2019]
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND/OR SERVICES — An establishment
primarily engaged in automotive related sales or services. Terms
associated with Automotive Sales and/or Services shall be defined as
follows:[Ord. No. 3945, 6-27-2019]
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:232
AUTOMOTIVE COLLISION SHOP – An establishment primarily
engaged in the major repair of Automobiles and other non-Commercial
Motor Vehicles, including the straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, installation or repair of equipment or parts on motorized
vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, radios, transmissions, glass,
and engines or engine parts and short-term outdoor storage of
Automobiles and other non-Commercial Motor Vehicles until such
repairs are performed, but excluding dismantling or salvage.
AUTOMOTIVE CONVENIENCE STORE – An establishment primarily
engaged in gasoline, diesel fuel, and oil sales at retail (with no
Automobile repair facilities) and the retail sale of a limited line of
goods that generally includes tobacco products, milk, bread, soda,
snacks, and similar household convenience goods for customers. Such
establishment may include an accessory automatic carwash.
AUTOMOTIVE CUSTOMIZING SHOP – An establishment that
primarily provides indoor after-sales services for Automobiles
(including the attendant retail sales of accessories for such
Automobiles), such as installation, conversion, and modifications to the
interior or exterior of Automobiles, and may include indoor automotive
detailing or dent removal.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES, NEW – An establishment primarily engaged in
the sale and/or lease of new Automobiles, including incidental outdoor
display, parking, and indoor servicing of vehicles available for sale or
lease. Such a use also may include the sales of used Automobiles as a
subordinate use.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES, USED – An establishment primarily engaged
in the sale of used Automobiles, including incidental outdoor display,
parking, and indoor servicing of such vehicles available for sale.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STORE – An establishment primarily engaged
in the sale and replacement or servicing of spark plugs, oil, water
hoses, brake fluids, batteries, distributors, tires, brakes, fuel pumps, or
other automotive parts or accessories for Automobiles. An Automotive
Service Store may perform minor repairs of Automobiles and may
have short-term outdoor storage of such vehicles until such repairs are
performed, but excluding dismantling or salvage.
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING FACILITY An establishment engaged in
washing and cleaning of Automobiles and related light equipment.
Typical uses include self-service service and full-service car washes.
BACKFILL — Soil deposited in excessive part of an excavation after
completion of construction in the excavation.
BANQUET FACILITY — An establishment available for lease by private
parties to accommodate functions, including, but not limited to,
banquets, weddings, anniversaries, and similar celebrations or events,
including accessory facilities thereto. Banquet Facilities may serve
alcohol and have Outdoor Dining as an accessory use.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:233
BASEMENT — A floored and walled substructure of a building at least
fifty percent (50%) below the average finished grade of the building. A
basement shall not be included in computing the number of stories for
the purpose of height regulations unless it is subdivided, rented, sold or
leased for dwelling purposes.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN — An establishment operated in a private
residence or portion thereof, consisting of between one (1) and twelve
(12) guest rooms, which provides temporary accommodations to
overnight guests for a fee and which is occupied by the operator of such
establishment.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of street,
railroad or other rights-of-way, parks or other similar uses.
BOARD — The City of Fenton Board of Aldermen, unless specifically
noted as the City of Fenton Board of Adjustment.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT — The adjustment to lot lines of platted
lots or other lawful parcels for the purpose of adjusting the sizes of
building sites. The adjustment can be accomplished by plat or deed and
must be reviewed by the Community Development Department prior to
recording with the Recorder of Deeds of St. Louis County. No new lots
shall be created by a boundary adjustment or shall the lots be reduced
below the minimum size and dimensions as required by the Zoning
Code.
BUFFER AREA — An area of land undeveloped (except for landscaping,
fences and/or open space) used to protect a use situated on one (1) lot
from the deleterious effects of a use on an adjacent lot.
BUILDING — Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and
designed or used to shelter persons, chattels or property.
BUILDING BASE — The bottom of a building, including its foundation.
BUILDING CODE — Set of regulations affecting building design and
construction.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The outline of a horizontal section of the
structure, usually at the ground plane.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average grade at the front wall of a building to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of mansard roof. Also means the
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
Chimneys, towers, cooling towers and similar projections shall not be
included in calculating building heights.
BUILDING LINE — The line nearest the front of and across a lot,
delineating the required yard from the lot line.
BUILDING/SITE RELATIONS — The interactive relationships between
a building and the site it occupies.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:234
BULK — Any one (1) or any combination of the following structural or
site design characteristics:
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking or
storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three (3)
sides.
CASH-FOR-GOLD OPERATION — An establishment that engages in the
retail purchase and resale of precious metals.
CEMETERY — Lands used for the internment of the dead, including
mausoleums, graves, columbarium, related sales and maintenance
facilities, and a mortuary or funeral chapel.
CHANNEL — A natural or manmade device, creek or waterway for
conveying flowing surface water.
CHILD CARE — The care and supervision of another’s child for less
than twenty-four (24) hours a day.
CHURCH — A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility that
has a Principal Use of religious worship of any denomination.
CITY — The City of Fenton.
CITY OFFICIALS — Mayor, Board of Aldermen and/or personnel
authorized by them.
CLUB AND CIVIC LODGE — An organization of persons for special
purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, literature, politics,
or other common goals, interests, or activities, characterized by
membership qualifications, dues, or regular meetings, excluding clubs
operated for profit and/or Churches.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer which
is designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of
property or which is used primarily for the transportation of passengers
for hire, including, but not limited to, tow trucks, dump trucks, box
trucks, refuse or garbage trucks, buses, semi-trailers, or truck-tractors
or any motor vehicle or trailer having a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) in excess of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds.[Ord. No.
3945, 6-27-2019]
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER — An establishment
engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or offering to
negotiate, negotiating, or advertising the sale of a Commercial Motor
1. Size or height of structure;
Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets
or other structures;
2.
3. Lot area; and
4. Yards or setbacks.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:235
Vehicles, including the outdoor display of vehicles, distribution of parts,
and indoor service.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR — An establishment
primarily engaged in the indoor repair or customization of Commercial
Motor Vehicles, including the straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, installation, or repair of equipment or parts on motorized
vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, radios, transmissions, glass,
and engines or engine parts and short-term outdoor storage of
Commercial Motor Vehicles until such repairs are performed, but
excluding dismantling or salvage.[Ord. No. 3945, 6-27-2019]
COMMERCIAL USE — A use that is connected with or furthers an
ongoing profit-making activity.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Fenton.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility owned by a public or not-for-profit
entity, that is designed for indoor and outdoor group activities,
including meeting or recreational rooms, pools, ballfields, and
playgrounds.
COMPACTION — Action that tends to lower the void ration and increase
the density of a soil mass; generally, refers to compacting it into a lesser
volume.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The Master City Plan
or Master Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Commission which
addresses future needs and the specific future uses of land within the
City of Fenton.[Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
CONFORMING USE — Uses which are in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this Code.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan that illustrates the procedure for
preserving trees and/or other natural areas within a site development
plan.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT DEALER — An establishment primarily
engaged in the sale and/or rental of construction equipment, power
systems, and parts, and the outdoor display and indoor service of
such equipment; which may include a truck and trailer rental facility
affiliated with and subordinate to the Construction Equipment Dealer
on the same property.
CONSTRUCTION PLAN — Plan of a building or site showing the
position, form, dimensions and other required data for proposed
construction.
CONTOURS — Lines on a site plan which represent points of the same
elevation as referenced to a ground surface.
CONVENTION CENTER — A facility used for business or professional
conferences and seminars, often associated with a Hotel.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:236
CULTIVATION — As related to activity authorized pursuant to Article
XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution and all rules and regulations
issued by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services,
the process by which a person, business or legal Entity promotes the
germination and growth of a seed to a mature Marijuana plant.[Ord.
No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
CULTIVATION IDENTIFICATION CARD — An additional, separate, or
enhanced Identification Card issued by the State of Missouri allowing
the holder to cultivate medical Marijuana in amounts and in secure
manners as authorized by the Department, only to the extent
authorized by applicable law.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
DAY CARE FACILITY — A building operated by an establishment who
holds itself out as providing child care for more than four (4) children
during the daytime, for compensation or otherwise, except those
operated by a school system or in connection with an establishment
which provides child care as a convenience for its customers or its
employees, but a day care facility shall not include any private or
religious organization academic preschool or kindergarten, a home
school, a weekly Sunday or Sabbath school, a vacation Bible school or
child care made available while the parents or guardians are attending
worship services, or other meetings and activities conducted or
sponsored by a religious organization. A Day Care Facility shall not be
located in a dwelling.
DECK — A flat floored platform not set into but raised above the ground
or finished grade at least twelve (12) inches, serving as a floor, which is
usually, but not necessarily, made of treated and untreated woods and
polyvinyl boards and attached to a wall.
DEDICATION — The allocation of land within development for nondevelopment
purposes related to the community’s residents or those of
the development. This type of dedication will usually include, but is not
limited to, bike trails, parks, lakes or common ground.
DENSITY — The amount of something per unit area measure.
Habitation units per square feet of area.
DEPARTMENT — The Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services, or its successor agency.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
DETACHED — As applied to buildings, “detached” means surrounded
by yards on the same lot as the primary structure.
DETENTION POND — A drainage facility consisting of a customarily
dry basin designed to accept and hold storm water and release it
gradually at no greater rate than the pre-development flow rate (or
other approved release rate) to prevent flooding of adjacent land and
reduce stream erosion. (Also see RETENTION POND.)
DEVELOPER — Commonly known as the person or company
responsible for the change in development of the land.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:237
DEVELOPMENT — To erect any structure or to install any
improvements on a tract of land or to undertake any activity such as
grading or site preparation for the purpose of occupancy.
DIMENSIONS — Refers to both lot depth and lot width measured to the
nearest foot or inch.
DIRECTOR — The Community Development Director or other official,
as appointed by the Mayor of Fenton with the approval and consent
of the Board of Aldermen to administer this Code, or their delegated
representative.[Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
DISTILLERY — An establishment that produces alcoholic beverages onsite
and generally includes an accessory tasting room. A tasting room
allows customers to taste samples of products manufactured on-site
and purchase related sales items.
DISTRICT (ZONING) — A portion of the land within the City limits of
the City of Fenton wherein certain uniform requirements or various
combinations thereof apply to structures, lots and land uses under the
terms of this Code.
DITCH — An open channel conveying surface water flow with side
slopes of 6:1 or steeper (not to exceed 3:1).
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An accessory use where patrons are
served through a window or other device while remaining in their
motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a
garage or off-street parking area.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof used exclusively for
human habitations, except hotels, nursing homes, or house trailers.
The following words or terms associated with dwelling shall have the
following meanings:
APARTMENT – A room or suite of rooms in a building intended or
designed for use as a single dwelling unit, provided with separate
cooking and sanitary facilities.
CONDOMINIUM – A dwelling unit in a multi-family building in which a
person has both separate ownership of a unit and a common interest,
along with the Condominium’s other owners, in the common areas.
LOFT – A dwelling located above the first floor of a non-residential use
such as a store or office.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY – A building or portion thereof
designed exclusively for three (3) or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY – A detached building containing one (1)
dwelling unit, provided, however, notwithstanding any other provisions
of this Code to the contrary, for the purposes of this Chapter a Group
Home and Foster Home shall be included in the definition of a singlefamily
home.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:238
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED – Two (2) single-family
dwellings sharing common wall areas, each dwelling having its own
lot.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY – A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other and
being on a single lot.
DWELLING UNIT — One (1) room or more rooms and a single kitchen
and at least one (1) bathroom, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as a separate quarters for the exclusive use of a single
housekeeping unit for living, cooking and sanitary purposes, located
in a Single-Family, Two-Family or Multi-Family Dwelling or mixed-use
Building.
EASEMENT — A right to use another person’s real property for certain
limited purposes. Such examples include road or utility maintenance/
improvement granted by property owner to City, County, State for the
purpose of maintenance, improvements or widening.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — A facility that provides for the education
and/or training of individuals or groups. Terms associated with an
Educational Facility shall be defined as follows:
ACADEMIC SCHOOL – Any private or publicly-owned and operated
institution providing academic instruction for students from pre-school
up to and including 12th grade.
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES – Any private or publicly-owned and
operated institution of higher education, not including vocational and
technical schools.
VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL SCHOOL – A facility that focuses
on skills training for particular jobs or career fields, rather than on
academics in the liberal arts. Programs at these schools typically
last one (1) to two (2) years full-time, although students may attend
part-time, and students may obtain diplomas, certificates, or associate
degrees, depending on the length of the program.
TUTORING AND TEST PREPARATION CENTER – A private facility that
focuses on teaching academic skills.
ELEVATION — The external face of the principal building or structure
on a lot.
ELEVATION LINE, FRONT — A line that follows the contours of the
elevation of the principal building facing the front lot line and that
extends out from the corners of that elevation on a line generally
parallel to the front lot line to the lot lines intersecting the applicable
front lot line.
ELEVATION LINE, REAR — A line that follows the contours of the
elevation of the principal building facing the rear lot line and that
extends out from the corners of that elevation on a line generally
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:239
parallel to the front lot line to the lot lines that intersect (or form a
vertex at) the rear lot line.
ELEVATION, FRONT — The elevation of a building that is
architecturally designed and constructed as the front facade of a
building as determined by the Director.
ELEVATION, REAR — The elevation of a building that is most closely
opposite of the front elevation.
EMERGENCY SERVICE FACILITY — A facility for public organizations/
entities that provide public safety services by addressing different
emergencies, including Police, Fire, and Ambulance.
ENGINEER — The duly designated engineer for the City.
ENLARGE — To increase the size such as floor area or height of an
existing principal structure or accessory use. Also, can include devoting
more land to an existing use.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY OR THEATER — A building or part of a
building devoted to showing motion pictures or dramatic, musical or
live performances. For the purposes of this Chapter, Adult Theater,
Adult Arcade, and Adult Cabaret as defined in Section 456.010, shall
not be included in the definition of Entertainment Facility or Theater.
Entertainment Facilities or Theaters may serve alcoholic beverages
with at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income derived from the
sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the premises.
ENTITY — A natural person, corporation, professional corporation,
non-profit corporation, cooperative corporation, unincorporated
association, business trust, limited liability company, general or limited
partnership, limited liability partnership, joint venture, or any other
legal Entity.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
EQUIPMENT — The tools, stock or apparatus related to a business
and kept on-site. Equipment shall not be offered for sale or used for
promotion or placed in long-term storage. For the purpose of this
definition, long-term shall mean ninety (90) days or more.
EROSION — Progressive loss of a soil mass usually due to or by flowing
water.
ESTABLISHMENT — An Institution or place of business.
F.E.M.A. — Federal Emergency Management Agency. An office of the
Federal Government that deals with flood impact management.
FABRICATION — A method, operation, or series of actions intended to
some new and useful end or result by changing a material’s chemical or
physical characteristics.
FAMILY — One (1) or more persons who are related by blood, marriage
or adoption (including foster care), living together and occupying a
single dwelling unit, or a group of not more than three (3) persons living
together on a non-profit, cost-share basis.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:240
FARMERS MARKET — An establishment where local farmers sell fruits
and vegetables and often meat, cheese, and bakery products directly
to customers. A Farmers Market may be indoors and/or outdoors and
typically consisting of booths, tables, or stands for the sale of products.
FARMING — The use of a lot for the production, keeping, or
maintenance, for sale or personal use, of plants and animals, including,
but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy
animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats, or
any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of
any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; trees and forest
products; fruits of all kinds; vegetables; nursery; floral, ornamental
and greenhouse products; and structures necessary for processing,
treating, maintaining, or storing of same; but excluding feed lots,
stockyards, food canning plants, and animal slaughterhouses and
buildings use for the sale of products on-site.
FENCING — A structure functioning as a boundary or barrier made of
post, wire or rails. Fencing materials may include wood, plastic or other
synthetic materials, woven fabric, chain-link or masonry elements.
FENCING, BLIND — Fencing which is used to block or shield the
visibility of outdoor storage of equipment or materials including storage
containers from the street and property immediately adjacent to the
subject site.
FENCING, CHAIN-LINK — A series of interlinked (open mesh) metal
links of thick (or heavy) gauge wire supported by metal posts used to
confine, restrain or secure.
FILL — Buildup of the site surface above the original grade. Soil deposit
produced by other than natural effects.
FINAL PLAT — A complete and exact plan of subdivision prepared for
official recording as required by law.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A State or Federally chartered bank,
savings association, credit union, or industrial land company located
in a building which provides for the custody, loan, exchange, or issue
of money, extension of credit, or facilitating the transmission of funds,
which may include accessory drive-through service on the same
premises but does not include Pawnshops and Small Loan Businesses.
FITNESS INSTRUCTION STUDIO — An establishment offering
instruction, including, but not limited to: dance, ballet, yoga, martial
arts, personal training, and gymnastics.
FLOOD ELEVATION — The water surfaces elevation of the most severe
flood that on the basis of Corps of Engineer’s data may be expected
to occur once every one hundred (100) years. (Also known as the
“100-year” flood.)
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) AND FLOOD INSURANCE
RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of the City of Fenton on which the
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:241
Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries and
the zoning establishing insurance rates applicable to the City within
these boundaries.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration containing flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the floors of a building measured from the exterior walls or from the
center of the common walls of attached buildings. Gross floor area
includes basement floors; attic floor space; halls, closets, stairwells;
space devoted to mechanical equipment and enclosed porches.
FLOOR AREA, PRIMARY — The total horizontal area of the first floor of
the building as measures from the exterior walls.
FLOWERING PLANT — A Marijuana plant from the time it exhibits
the first signs of sexual maturity through harvest.[Ord. No. 3917,
4-25-2019]
FOSTER HOME — A private residence licensed by the Division of
Family Services or Department of Mental Health to provide foster care
to one (1) or more but less than seven (7) children who are unrelated to
either foster parent by blood, marriage or adoption.
FREEWAY — A roadway solely devoted to vehicular traffic, with no
parallel walks, crossed by totally grade-separated intersections at wide
intervals and having no frontage access.
FRONTAGE — The lineal extent of the front or street side of a lot.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial or cremation, for the display of the deceased and/
or for ceremonies or service related thereto, including cremation and
the storage of caskets, funeral urns, funeral vehicles and other funeral
supplies.
GARAGE (PRIVATE) — An enclosed space for the storage of one (1) or
more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service
is conducted for profit therein or that space therein for more than one
(1) car is leased to a non-resident of the premises.
GARAGE (PUBLIC) — Any garage that is not classified as a private
garage and is used for inside storage, repair, rental, servicing or
supplying of gasoline or oil to motor vehicles. However, a “public
garage” shall not be used for the storage of dismantled motor vehicles.
GARAGE (STORAGE) — Any building or premises, except those used
as a private garage, used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or
storing motor-driven vehicles.
GENERAL SERVICE CONTRACTOR — A person whose principal
business involves specialized residential or non-residential
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:242
construction, repair, improvement or service of real property. A General
Service Contractor may display and store products for sale indoors.
GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDING — A building in which
government affairs, predominantly administrative, professional,
clerical, or other services, are performed and which is designed to
serve patrons at the site. Typical uses include, Police sub-stations,
United States post offices, and City Hall.
GRADE — Elevation of the ground surface at some location which is
often qualified as the original grade and/or the finished grade. This
definition also includes slope of the ground surface (angle from the
horizontal) at some location, commonly called gradient.
GROCERY STORE, CONVENIENCE — An establishment that:
GROCERY STORE, GENERAL — An establishment that:
GROUND COVER — Anything besides soil used to produce a site
surface; usually refers to surface-spreading plants, such as grass or ivy.
GROUP HOME — A single-family dwelling in which eight (8) or fewer
unrelated mentally or physically handicapped persons reside and may
include two (2) additional persons acting as house parents or guardians
Offers a diverse variety of unrelated, non-complementary food and
non-food commodities, such as beverages, dairy, dry goods, fresh
produce, and other perishable items, frozen foods, household
products, and paper goods;
1.
May provide beer, wine, and/or liquor sales for consumption off the
premises;
2.
May prepare minor amounts of food on site for immediate
consumption;
3.
4. Markets the majority of its merchandise at retail prices;
5. May not have an accessory Restaurant Use; and
6. May not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
Offers a diverse variety of unrelated, non-complementary food and
non-food commodities, such as beverages, dairy, dry goods, fresh
produce, and other perishable items, frozen foods, household
products, and paper goods;
1.
May provide beer, wine, and/or liquor sales for consumption off the
premises;
2.
May prepare minor amounts of food on site for immediate
consumption;
3.
4. Markets the majority of its merchandise at retail prices; and
5. May have an accessory Restaurant and/or florist use.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:243
who need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or
physically handicapped person.
HARDSHIP — A condition caused by peculiar characteristics of a tract
of land which prevents strict compliance with these regulations; does
not include personal or economic disadvantages or self-created
conditions.
HEALING ARTS ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment providing
health treatments or therapy generally not performed by a medical
doctor or physician such as physical therapy, massage, acupuncture,
aromatherapy, audiology, and homeopathy.
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that is open to members and guests
and that provides facilities for at least two (2) of the following: aerobic
exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, fitness classes,
game courts, and swimming facilities and that also includes amenities
such as saunas, showers, and lockers.
HEARING, PUBLIC — A meeting announced and advertised in advance
that is open to the public and at which the public is given an opportunity
to speak and participate.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity conducted in a dwelling unit or
an accessory building or structure of a dwelling unit as an economic
enterprise or for financial gain by members of the household residing
therein that is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes.
HOTEL — An establishment that:[Ord. No. 3946, 6-27-2019]
HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY — An establishment that:[Ord. No. 3946,
6-27-2019]
Offers temporary lodging in rooms, for thirty (30) consecutive days
or less in a calendar year, and charges guests on a per night basis;
1.
May include restaurants, meeting, multi-function, or banquet
rooms, and other accessory uses and services, including, without
limitation, newsstands, gift shops, and similar incidental uses
conducted entirely within the principal building;
2.
May include one (1) manager’s quarter for the on-duty manager
adjacent to the lobby area; which may include a kitchen or cooking
facility but may not exceed the area of a typical guestroom within
the hotel or be utilized as a temporary or permanent residence; and
3.
4. Does not provide a kitchen or cooking facilities within the rooms.
Offers temporary lodging in rooms which are advertised, designed,
intended or routinely utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy; and
typically charges guests on a weekly or monthly basis;
1.
May include restaurants, meeting, multi-function, or banquet
rooms, and other accessory uses and services, including, without
2.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:244
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, sanitary and storm sewer, water mains,
pavements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, road signs, lights, trees and
other appropriate actions required to render land suitable for the use
proposed.
INDUSTRIAL OR BUSINESS PARK — A tract of land which is planned
as a whole for use by businesses with large lot sizes for planned
expansion of each business. These businesses will normally own or
control individual lots within the development tract. They will by virtue
of such unified planning and development receive greater amenities
and/or lower individual development costs. A “park” may contain one
(1) type of use or a variety of uses within its zoning class.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY — A use engaged in the basic processing,
fabrication, and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly
from extracted or raw materials, or storage and/or use of heavy
machinery and/or construction vehicles/equipment. Heavy Industrial
may not include: facilities producing explosives or flammable gases
or liquids, facilities for animal slaughtering, tanning, meatpacking or
rendering, sulphur plants, rubber reclamation plants or cement plants,
steel or any other metal mills, foundry or smelters, and those general
uses which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor,
dust, smoke or noise.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT — A use engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products,
but excluding basic industrial processing.
INSTITUTION — An organization established for a religious,
educational, professional, or social purpose.
INTERSECTION — The point at which two (2) or more public rights-ofway
meet.
LANDSCAPING — Changing, rearranging or adding to the original
vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect
appropriate for the use to which the land is put.
LIQUOR STORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of
packaged alcoholic beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and liquor for
limitation, newsstands, gift shops, and similar incidental uses
conducted entirely within the principal building;
May include one (1) manager’s quarter for the on-duty manager
adjacent to the lobby area; which may include a kitchen or cooking
facility but may not exceed the area of a typical guestroom within
the hotel or be utilized as a temporary or permanent residence; and
3.
Provides kitchen or cooking facilities for the preparation of food by
guests in at least thirty percent (30%) of the rooms or units.
4.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:245
consumption off the premises, with sampling permitted on site with an
approved license.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space used for the temporary parking
of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.
LOT — A platted parcel of land intended to be separately owned,
developed and otherwise used as a unit. The word lot shall include the
word “plot,” “tract” or “parcel.” The derivations of a lot shall maintain
the following definitions.
LOT AREA – The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side
and rear lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER – A lot, or portion thereof, situated at the intersection
of two (2) or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more
than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH – The average distances between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, FLAG – A residential lot with two (2) discernible portions
described as follows:
1. Access Portion. That portion of the lot having frontage on or
abutting a public road, with the frontage being sufficient in width
for a private drive to serve the building site portion.
2. Building Site Portion. That portion of the lot not fronting on or
abutting a public road but connected to a public road by the
access portion of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR – Any lot other than a through or corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH – A lot other than a corner lot which has a street on
two (2) opposite sides of the lot (Also known as a “double-frontage”
lot).
LOT WIDTH – The horizontal distance between the lot lines
perpendicular to the front lot line, measured along the building line.
LOT LINE — A line dividing one (1) lot from another, or from a public
or private street right-of-way or any other public right-of-way (also see
PROPERTY LINE). The derivations or modifications of a lot line shall
maintain the following definitions:
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:246
LOT LINE, FRONT – The line separating the lot from the public rightof-
way, private street, and/or access easement which it fronts.
LOT LINE, REAR – The line or lines that are most closely parallel to
the front lot line. On a corner lot in Residential Districts, one (1) side
lot line may be established in lieu of a rear lot line; provided that, in no
case may the rear lot line that is mostly parallel with the rear elevation
of the principal building be established as a side lot line in lieu of the
rear lot line. On through lots in the Residential District, one (1) rear lot
line may be established in lieu of a front lot line; provided that the rear
lot line established in lieu of a front lot line is the line most parallel
with the rear elevation of the principal building.
LOT LINE, SIDE – Any lot line that intersects with the front lot line and
is not a front lot line or rear lot line. On an interior lot that is triangular
in shape, the vertex of the side lot lines is considered to be a rear lot
line parallel with the rear elevation of the principal building.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot shown upon a plan of a subdivision or upon
a plat which is attached to or to which reference is made on a deed
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of St. Louis County.
LOT-BY-LOT DEVELOPMENT — The conventional approach to
development in which each lot is treated as a separate development
unit conforming to all land-use, density and bulk requirements of the
zoning district.
M.S.D. — The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
MAJOR ARTERIAL OR HIGHWAY — Major activity streets which
connect population concentrations and provide rapid vehicular travel
between cities and development areas.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS — Products that are infused with
Marijuana or an extract thereof and are intended for use or
consumption other than by smoking, including, but not limited to,
edible products, ointments, tinctures, and concentrates.[Ord. No.
3917, 4-25-2019]
MARIJUANA OR MARIHUANA — Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa,
and Cannabis ruderalis, hybrids of such species, and any other strains
commonly understood within the scientific community to constitute
Marijuana, as well as resin extracted from the plant and Marijuana-
Infused Products. “Marijuana” or “Marihuana” do not include industrial
hemp containing a crop-wide average tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration that does not exceed three-tenths of one percent (3/10 of
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:247
1%) on a dry weight basis, or commodities or products manufactured
from industrial hemp.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MAXIMUM — Qualification as the most extensive or the most that will
be allowed.
MEDICAL FACILITY — A facility that provides medical and allied health
services to an individual by physicians and other health care
professionals licensed by a State-sanctioned Board overseeing the
provision of medically oriented outpatient services. Medical facilities
include, laboratories, diagnostic centers, and outpatient treatment
facilities such as urgent care clinics.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS — A Medical Marijuana business
shall be defined as any of the following hereinafter defined
entities:[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed
by the State of Missouri to acquire, cultivate, process, store, transport
and sell Marijuana to a Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility, Medical
Marijuana Testing Facility, Medical Marijuana-Infused Products
Manufacturing Facility.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY — A facility licensed
by the State of Missouri to acquire, store, sell, transport, and deliver
Marijuana, Marijuana-Infused Products, and drug paraphernalia used
to Administer Marijuana as provided by the State of Missouri solely
pursuant to the terms of Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri
Constitution to a Qualifying Patient, a Primary Caregiver, another
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility, a Medical Marijuana Testing
Facility, or a Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing
Facility.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility certified by
the State of Missouri to acquire, test, certify, and transport
Marijuana.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A facility
certified by the State of Missouri to store and transport
Marijuana.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
1. Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility.
2. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility.
3. Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing Facility.
4. Medical Marijuana Testing Facility.
5. Medical Marijuana Transportation Facility.
Any other Entity currently or hereafter included in and regulated
by Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution and the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and
Senior Services for the State of Missouri.
6.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:248
MEDICAL MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING
FACILITY — A facility licensed by the State of Missouri to acquire,
store, manufacture, transport, and sell Marijuana-Infused Products to
a Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility, a Medical Marijuana Testing
Facility, or to another Medical Marijuana-Infused Products
Manufacturing Facility.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MEDICAL OFFICE — A building with one (1) or more physicians,
dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, or other health practitioners
providing medical services in a specific area of health care, organized
as a single business entity, and lawfully established for medical
consultation to persons on an outpatient basis. This term, includes, but
is not limited to, mental health care, addiction counseling, chiropractic,
and optical services; and physical therapy offices, clinics, and facilities.
MEDICAL USE — The production, possession, delivery, distribution,
transportation, or administration of Marijuana or a Marijuana-Infused
Product, or drug paraphernalia used to Administer Marijuana or a
Marijuana-Infused Product as provided by Article XIV, Section 1 of the
Missouri Constitution, for the benefit of a Qualifying Patient to mitigate
the symptoms or effects of the patient’s qualifying medical condition as
defined in Missouri State law.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
MINIMAL — Qualification as the least favorable or the least that can be
expected for a given situation.
MIXED USE — The Development of a Lot, tract or parcel of land,
Building or Structure with two (2) or more different Uses, including, but
not limited to, residential, office, retail, public uses, personal service
or entertainment uses (but not including accessory uses), designed,
planned and constructed as a unit.
MODULAR UNIT — Factory fabricated transportable building unit
designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units
at a building site into a modular structure to be used for commercial,
educational or industrial purposes.
MOTEL — See HOTEL.
MUSEUM — An establishment devoted to the acquisition, conservation,
study, exhibition, and educational interpretation of objects having
scientific, historical, or artistic value.
NON-CONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE — A building, structure or
use of land existing at the time of enactment of this Code and which
does not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is
situated.
NURSERY — An establishment where flowers, shrubbery, vegetables,
trees, and other horticultural and floricultural products are grown,
propagated, and may be sold on-site.
NURSING HOME — Any premises, other than a hospital or residential
substance abuse treatment center, which provides twenty-four (24)
hour personal and health care, accommodation and board to individuals
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:249
under the daily supervision of a licensed nurse and the supervision of a
licensed physician, including “Residential Care Facilities I and II,” and
“Intermediate Care Facility” or a “Skilled Nursing Facility” as defined
by Chapter 198, RSMo.
OFFICE, GENERAL — A building with one (1) or more establishments
providing executive, management, administrative or professional
services, but not Medical Offices or Medical Facilities, or the sale of
merchandise, except as accessory to a permitted Principal Use. Typical
uses include real estate, insurance, property management, investment,
employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design, engineering,
accounting, and similar offices.
OPTIMAL — Qualification as the most favorable or the most that can be
expected for a given situation.
OUTDOOR DINING — An accessory use of a restaurant, tavern, or
other establishment engaged in the sale of food and/or beverages with
tables located on the sidewalk, patio, or other open paved area in front
of or adjoining the related establishment.
OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA — An unroofed, unenclosed, paved area
outside of a business used to store equipment and materials or items
other than properly licensed vehicles or equipment capable of traveling
on the public roadways. The equipment and materials stored outdoors
must be a necessary and integral function in the operation of the
business on the premises, including equipment and materials stored
temporarily for an off-site job site.
OUTDOOR STORAGE BIN — A covered or uncovered receptacle that is
typically enclosed on three (3) sides and used for temporary or longterm
storage of materials. Such storage devices are not customarily
used to transport goods, equipment, or material.
OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS — Containers customarily used in
the transport of goods, equipment and material used to store those
goods, equipment and material on the lot of a business or company.
These storage devices may be used for either temporary or long-term
storage.
PARKING — The temporary storage of properly licensed vehicles or
equipment capable of traveling on the public roadways.
PARKING AREA (INCLUDES LOT OR OFF-STREET PARKING) — Land
that is improved in accordance with this Code and used primarily for
the storage of passenger motor vehicles. An “off-street parking area,”
depending on the circumstances of its use, may be either a principal
use or an accessory use.
PARKING STALL — Area assigned to a single vehicle for parking.
PARKING STRUCTURE — Any building containing motor vehicle
parking that is a Principal Use, with or without any additional Uses.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:250
PATIO — A level unenclosed surfaced area, not exceeding twelve (12)
inches in height, located at the finished grade that is usually directly
adjacent to a building.
PAVEMENT — Structural surfacing of the ground for walks, drives,
parking lots and roads.
PAWNSHOP — An establishment engaged in the buying and selling
of new and secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by
personal property.
PERSONAL AND BUSINESS SERVICE SHOP — Shops primarily
engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person
or such person’s apparel or rendering services to business
establishments such as laundry or dry-cleaning tailoring, beauty or
barber shops, employment service, mailing or copy and printing shops,
shipping stores, and sign shops.
PET GROOMING FACILITY — An establishment primarily engaged in
the cleaning, bathing, brushing, and cutting of hair of household pets.
Pet grooming facilities do not include outdoor kennels, medical care, or
overnight care.
PET SUPPLY STORE — An establishment primary engaged in the sale of
pet supplies, which may include the accessory indoor sale or adoption
of pets, pet grooming, and/or veterinarian clinic or hospital, but does
include outdoor kennels or runs.
PHARMACY — An establishment where prescription drugs are
compounded, dispensed, or sold by a pharmacist and where
prescription drug orders are received or processed in accordance with
the pharmacy laws as defined by Chapter 338 of the Missouri Revised
Statutes. A Pharmacy may engage in general light retail sales and may
include accessory drive-through service on the premises.
PHYSICIAN — An individual who is licensed and in good standing to
practice medicine or osteopathy under Missouri law.[Ord. No. 3917,
4-25-2019]
PHYSICIAN CERTIFICATION — A document, whether handwritten,
electronic or in another commonly used format, signed by a Physician
and stating that, in the Physician’s professional opinion, the patient
suffers from a qualifying medical condition as defined in Missouri State
law.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
PLANTINGS — A set of growing plants used to develop the landscaping
for a site.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout of a City, township, section or subdivision
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PLAT (FINAL) — A map of land subdivision prepared in form suitable
for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and
acceptances and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:251
defining lots, blocks, streets, alleys, public areas and other dimensions
of land.
PLAT (PRELIMINARY) — A map of a proposed land subdivision showing
the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to
indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land. This
proposed land subdivision must be submitted in accordance with all
requirements of this Code.
PLOT — A parcel of land consisting of one (1) or more lots or portions
thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat.
PORCH — A platform, that may be enclosed and/or covered by a roof,
projecting from the wall of a building with direct access to or from a
building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The main building or
structure erected on or the principal use occupying a lot, as
distinguished from an accessory structure or use.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominate use of land, building or
structure.
PRIMARY CAREGIVER — An individual twenty-one (21) years of age
or older who has significant responsibility for managing the well-being
of a Qualifying Patient and who is designated as such under the rules
and regulations of the Department and possesses a Department issued
Primary Caregiver or Primary Caregiver Cultivation Identification
Card.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS — Private restriction or trust indenture is
a recordable document which is used for the purpose of maintaining
commonly owned property and/or facilities.
PROPERTY — A piece of real estate made up of one (1) or more than
one (1) contiguous lots under a unity of ownership and use.
PROPERTY LINE — A legally recorded boundary of a lot.
PUBLIC PARK — Any public area created, established, designated,
maintained, provided, or set aside by the City for the purpose of public
rest, play, recreation, enjoyment, assembly, and all buildings, facilities,
and structures located thereon or therein.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — An electrical substation including but
not limited to transmission substations, distribution substations,
collector substations, converter substations, and switching stations.
Towers, poles, and traffic signal controllers shall not be considered
Public Utility Facilities. See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
defined in Section 491.030.
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A Missouri resident diagnosed with at least
one (1) qualifying medical condition as defined in Missouri State law
and possessing a Department issued Qualifying Patient or Qualifying
Patient Cultivation Identification Card.[Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:252
RAILROAD SWITCHING YARD — An area consisting of railroad track
used for the storage, sorting, and loading and unloading of railcars and
locomotives.
RECONTOURING — Manipulation of the existing contours on a site
plan as part of the design for re-grading the site surface.
RECREATION FACILITY — A facility established primarily for
amusement or recreational activities, which may serve alcohol. Terms
associated with Recreational Facility shall be defined as follows:
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INDOOR LIMITED — An indoor facility
established primarily for amusement or recreational activities, such as
pinball/video arcades, miniature golf, batting cages, and roller skating
rinks. This definition is intended to restrict the type of recreational use
allowed to those small-scale facilities that would be compatible with
typical buildings and uses in the District in which this use is allowed.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INDOOR UNLIMITED – An establishment
primarily engaged in operations and activities contained within largescale
gymnasium-type facilities such as for tennis, basketball,
swimming, indoor soccer, indoor hockey, or bowling.
RECREATION FACILITY, OUTDOOR LIMITED – An outdoor recreation
facility established primarily for amusement or recreational activities,
such as miniature golf, bumper boating, batting cages, and go-carts.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES — An establishment primarily
engaged in the sales, rental, leasing, and/or consignment of
recreational vehicles, including the incidental outdoor display, parking,
and indoor service thereof. Recreational vehicles shall include but are
not be limited to motorcycles, boats, scooters, all-terrain vehicles
(ATVs), personal watercraft, towable recreational vehicles, and
motorhomes.
RESEARCH CENTER — A facility or building dedicated to research,
generally with the focus on a specific area, not including laboratory
testing of animals.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where prepared food and beverages
are sold for consumption within the building or away from the premises.
RESUBDIVISION — Any change in the plat or description of an
approved or recorded subdivision, including a subdivision predating the
adoption of regulations controlling the division of land, if such change
affects any lot line, road layout or area reserved for public use.
RETAIL STORE — An establishment that operates as fixed point-ofsale
locations, which are designed to attract a high volume of walkin
customers and stores have extensive displays of new merchandise.
Retail does not include Restaurants, Used Merchandise Stores,
Pawnshops, Cash-For-Gold Operations, Warehouse Showroom Sales,
Pharmacies, Grocery Stores, any of the uses set forth under Automotive
Sales or Services, or any other such Use as defined in this Section
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:253
400.030. Terms associated with Retail Stores shall be defined as
follows:
RETAIL STORE, LARGE – A retail establishment over fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet.
RETAIL STORE, MEDIUM – A retail establishment containing more
than five thousand (5,000) square feet, but less than fifty thousand
(50,000) square-feet.
RETAIL STORE, SMALL – A retail establishment of five thousand
(5,000) square feet or less.
RETENTION POND — A drainage facility consisting of a wet pond
or lake designated to accept additional stormwater and release it
gradually at no greater rate than the pre-development flow rate (or
other approved release rate) to prevent flooding of adjacent land and
reduce stream erosion. (Also see DETENTION POND.)
RIGHT-OF-WAY (PUBLIC) — A public way established or dedicated by
duly recorded plat, deed, grant, governmental authority or by operation
of the law.
RUNOFF — Water flowing as a result of precipitation over a surface.
SCREENING — Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences or berms used as a
means of visual and/or noise control. Must be opaque in nature. A fence
with an opaque value of seventy percent (70%) or greater.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings with
controlled access that contains individual, compartmentalized, and
controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers’
property, merchandise, goods, or wares, which may include a truck and
trailer rental facility affiliated with and subordinated to the Self-Storage
Facility on the same property.
SERVICE CENTER, CUSTOMER — A facility accepting consumer calls
or visits for dispatch of personnel to provide services of same, including
utilities or communication systems.
SERVICE CENTER, REPAIR — An establishment providing repair or
replacement parts for motorized equipment, or appliances.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and
the nearest allowable portion of a building or structure.
SIGN — See Chapter 485.
SITE — An area of land with defined property boundaries.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:254
SITE DESIGN — The proposed development plans for a site which shall
incorporate all pertinent information relating to the development of the
site.
SITE DEVELOPMENT — The work of constructing a site in compliance
with design plans.
SITE PLAN — A plan to scale that shows uses and structures proposed
for a parcel of land as required by the City Code and regulations
involved. It includes, but is not limited to, lot lines, streets, building
sites, reserved open space, buildings, major landscape features, both
natural and manmade, and depending on requirements, the locations of
proposed utility lines.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The process whereby the City reviews the site
plans and maps of a developer to assure that they meet the stated
purposes and standards of the district. This shall include:
SLOPE ANGLE LIMIT — Extent of the angle from the horizontal of the
sloping face of a soil mass.
SMALL LOAN BUSINESS — Establishments which:
Providing for the necessary infrastructure and public facilities such
as roads and schools; and
1.
Protect and preserve topographical features and adjacent
properties through appropriate siting of structures and
landscaping.
2.
Artist rendering of proposed development. (Not required for
residential)
3.
Engage in the business of providing money to customers on a
temporary basis, wherein such loans are secured by post-dated
check, paycheck, or car title, or
1.
Are registered as lenders under State or Federal law. The
classification does not include Financial Institutions. Further, the
classification does not include establishments selling consumer
goods, including consumables, where the cashing of checks or
money orders is incidental to the main purpose of the business.
The classification, does include, but is not limited to, check cashing
stores, payday loan stores and car title loan stores.
2.
C. ST. LOUIS COUNTY D.R., R.D. The St. Louis County Department of
Revenue, Recorder of Deeds.
STABLE, PRIVATE — A detached building accessory to a residential
use for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises
and which shall not be used for any commercial purpose including the
boarding, hire, or training of horses.
STORAGE — A use or building function which protects products,
materials, or equipment from damage, theft or visibility.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:255
STORAGE STRUCTURE — An accessory building or structure used for
storage.
STREET — A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term
street includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar
designations, but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STREET (ARTERIAL) – A multi-lane facility designed for movement
of a relatively large volume of traffic. Arterials provide connections
between local and collector streets and the freeways.
STREET (COLLECTOR) – A street located within a neighborhood or
other integrated use area which collects from and distributes traffic to
local streets and connects arterial streets.
STREET (CUL-DE-SAC) – A street or a portion of a street with only
one (1) vehicular traffic outlet. The closed end having an adequate
turnaround.
STREET (FRONTAGE OR SERVICE STREET) – A street generally
parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
STREET (LOCAL/MINOR) – A street associated with low intensity uses
which represent small segments of an actual development area in a
portion of a neighborhood of activity.
STREET (PRIVATE) – A street not accepted by dedication or otherwise
by the Board of Aldermen.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns,
beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
STRUCTURE PARKING — Parking developed with a structure that may
be inside a building or in a separate structure developed primarily for
parking.
SUBDIVIDER — A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein,
either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — Any land which is divided or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites. Any other division
of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease,
conveyance or development.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:256
SUBDIVISION (MAJOR) – Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION (MINOR) – Any residential subdivision containing not
more than four (4) lots fronting on an existing road and meet the
requirements of this Section.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — A plan that illustrates the subdivision of parcels
into lots.
SURFACE PARKING — Parking developed on a site surface; usually
with some form of pavement.
SWALE — Open drainage channel with side slopes not steeper than 3:1.
The width of the bottom of the swale shall equal or exceed the depth. A
swale shall not be constructed in areas with continuous drainage.
TAVERN — An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation and
retail sale of alcoholic beverages with a City and State approved liquor
license for consumption on the premises. Typical uses include sports
bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, and similar uses at which less than
fifty percent (50%) of the total revenue is generated by food sales.
TOPOGRAPHY — The relief features or surface configuration of the
ground within an area.
TOURIST INFORMATION CENTER — An establishment providing
visitors with information on the area’s attractions, hotels, maps, and
other items relevant to tourism, not including motorist rest stops.
TRAFFIC PATH — The portion of a site surface dedicated to the
achievement of some travel, typically either as a footpath for
pedestrians or a driveway for vehicles.
TRUCK GARDEN — Produce/vegetable growing operation of which the
product is sold on premises.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility where freight is unloaded from
interstate trucks, intermodal trailers, and shipping containers before
being loaded onto local delivery trucks.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, occupied and/or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED — The purpose or activity which is allowed for use
or development within a zoning district.
USE, PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT — A use of property subject
to special controls and conditions in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter and subject to the restrictions applicable to that Zoning
District.
USED MERCHANDISE STORE — An establishment primarily engaged
in the retail sale of used or donated goods including clothing, furniture,
or appliances, but not including used cars or other motorized vehicles.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:257
VARIANCE — A granted deviance from the strict code application due
to presented and defensible undue hardships not brought on by the
applicant and shall relate to the lot size, topography, signage, setbacks
or other building size requirements of this Code that are applicable to
a particular lot or structure.
VISIBLE SITE — The viewed site consisting of the site surface and the
objects on it.
WALL —
WAREHOUSE — An establishment primarily engaged in the storage of
merchandise or commodities for distribution, which may or may not
include assembly of stored merchandise or commodities but does not
include Self-Storage Facilities.
WAREHOUSE SHOWROOM SALES — An establishment primarily
engaged in retail or wholesale sales and installation of residential
and commercial building materials. Warehouse Showroom Sales may
display, store, and perform light assembly of merchandise indoors.
WATERSHED — The area which contributes stormwater runoff to a
point as defined by its topographic ridges prior to and/or after
development.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to persons other than members of the
general public.
YARD — The open area or space that is unobstructed, except as
specifically permitted in this Code, and that is located on the same lot
as the principal building. The derivations of yard shall maintain the
following definitions.
YARD, FRONT – The front yard shall be that portion of a lot adjacent
to any street and bounded by the front lot line (or lines), the lot lines
intersecting the front lot line(s), and the Front Elevation Line.
YARD, REAR – The rear yard shall be that portion of a lot adjacent to
the Rear Lot Line (or lines) and bounded by the Rear Lot Line, the lot
lines intersecting the Rear Lot Line(s), and the Rear Elevation Line.
In cases where the Rear Elevation Line is overlapped by the Front
Elevation Line (such as Corner Lots or lots with buildings not parallel
with the Front Lot Line), the Rear Yard shall be bounded by the Rear
Lot Line, the lot lines intersecting the Rear Lot Line(s), and the Front
Elevation Line.
A vertical building face perpendicular to the horizontal view
between the base foundation and top of the wall at the roof line.
1.
An independent masonry or wood structure defining an enclosed
structure or accommodating a change in site grade.
2.
Section
400.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
400.030
AO:258
Chapter 405
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section 405.010. Members — Appointment — Terms — Vacancies —
How Filled. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-201949]
YARD, SIDE – The side yard shall be that portion of a lot between the
principal building and the adjacent lot line that is not considered a
front yard or back yard.
YARD, REQUIRED – The yard or portion of the yard located between
the lot line and the required setback established by the zoning district
in which the lot is located.
ZONE DISTRICT MAP — The map or any amendments thereto
designating zoning districts and incorporated into this Code by
reference.
ZONING ORDINANCE — A legally enforceable description of
limitations affecting usage of some portion of a political jurisdiction.
A. The Mayor with the consent and approval of the Board of Aldermen
(herein "Board") shall appoint a commission to be known as "The
Planning and Zoning Commission" (herein "Commission"). The
Commission shall have the duties as prescribed in the ordinances of the
City and the Statutes of the State of Missouri. Any references in the
Code of Ordinances in the City of Fenton to "Commission" shall mean
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Appointment, term and
vacancies shall be dealt with as follows:
1. Membership. The Commission shall consist of two (2) citizen
members from each ward of the City, the Mayor, if the Mayor
chooses to be a member within thirty (30) days of taking office, and
a member of the Board selected by the Board, if the Board chooses
49.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 405, Planning And Zoning Commission, containing Sections
405.010 through 405.090, was repealed 6-27-2019 by Ord. No. 3948.
Section
400.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.010
AO:259
Section 405.020. Chairman — Adoption Of Rules — Authorization Of
Expenses. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
Section 405.030. Commission To Furnish Board Of Adjustment With
Information. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
The Director shall serve as liaison to the Board of Adjustment for the
Commission and shall furnish such information to the Board of Adjustment
after conferring with the Commission and obtaining other pertinent
information as the Board of Adjustment may require.
to have a member serve on the Commission. If the Board does not
select a member to serve on the Commission, the Board may select
a Board member to attend the Commission meetings and report
back to the Board, provided that such Board member shall not be a
member nor count towards quorum of the Commission.
2. Term. The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four (4)
years, except that the terms of the citizen members first (1st)
appointed shall be for varying periods so that succeeding terms will
be staggered, and so that from and after the date of the
effectiveness of this Chapter, and on each anniversary of this
Chapter, the terms of two (2) members of the Commission shall
have expired. The term of the Mayor, if the Mayor chooses to be a
member, shall be two (2) years, said term to coincide with the term
of the office of the Mayor of the City of Fenton. The term of the
Board member, if the Board chooses to have a member serve on the
Commission, shall be one (1) year, said term to coincide with the
municipal general election, so that the Board shall decide whether
the Board shall have a member serve on the Commission at the first
regular Board meeting following the municipal general election or
as soon thereafter as practical.
3. Vacancy. Any vacancy in a citizen membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment of the Mayor and approval of the
Board. Any vacancy in a Board member, shall be filled by approval
of the Board for the unexpired term.
4. Removal For Cause. The Board may remove any citizen member for
cause stated in writing and after a public hearing.
A. The Commission shall select one (1) of its citizen members as
Chairman, one (1) as Vice Chairman and one (1) as Secretary.
B. The members of the Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations
as they deem necessary for the transaction of their business. Any
expense incurred by the Commission for clerical help, counsel,
engineers, consultants or otherwise shall be first authorized by the
Board.
Section
405.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
405.040
AO:260
Section 405.040. Commission To Recommend District Boundaries
And Regulations. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
Pursuant to Section 89.010 et seq., RSMo., it shall be the duty of the
Commission to recommend to the Board the boundaries of the various
districts and regulations pertaining thereto to the end that the Board may
enact a Zoning Code ordinance for the City.
Section 405.050. Comprehensive Development Plan — Purpose And
Intent. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
Section 405.060. Comprehensive Development Plan Map — Major
Street Plan. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
A. The Commission shall draw up a Comprehensive Development Plan, to
be known as "City of Fenton Comprehensive Development Plan," for
division of the City into districts of such number, size, shape and area as
may be best suited for zoning purposes and draw regulations for such
districts governing the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or use of buildings, structures or land.
B. The Comprehensive Development Plan referred to in Subsection (A)
shall be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the
adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks or
other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to
conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate
use of land throughout the City.
A. The Comprehensive Development Plan Map (herein "Plan Map") as
prepared in conjunction with the Comprehensive Development Plan,
referred to in Section 405.050, and under the direction of the
Chairperson of the Commission, approved by majority vote of the
Commission, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and a
copy of same duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of St.
Louis County pursuant to provisions of Section 89.360, RSMo.
Amendments to the Comprehensive Development Plan, including the
Plan Map, shall be made in accordance with the procedures for
adoption of the same pursuant to Section 89.360, RSMo.
B. All of the planning as shown on the Plan Map of the future development
for the City is hereby expressly approved and ratified and the through
streets shown on said Plan Map are duly approved and adopted by the
Board.
C. The streets as designated on the Plan Map are hereby designated and
adopted as the major street plan of the City, and all future development
Section
405.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.060
AO:261
Section 405.070. Commission To Draw Up Regulations. [Ord. No.
3948, 6-27-2019]
The Commission shall also draw up, pursuant to the plan referred to in
Section 405.050 and 405.060, regulations and restrictions on the height,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage
of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other spaces,
building lines, the density of population and the locations and uses of
buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residences or other
purposes within the districts established.
Section 405.080. Reports And Hearings. [Ord. No. 3948, 6-27-2019]
The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings
in accordance with law before submitting its final report to the Board.
Section 405.090. Additional Powers And Duties. [Ord. No. 3948,
6-27-2019]
Chapter 410
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 410.010. Establishment and Organization. [Ord. No. 3001
§1, 12-23-2008]
within the City shall be in accordance with said Plan Map as hereby
adopted and approved or as may be amended hereinafter in accordance
with the law.
A. Meetings. The Commission shall hold a regular monthly meeting at the
City Hall, City of Fenton, on such regular day each month as may be
established by resolution of the Commission from time to time. The
Community Development Department shall keep all records of the
Commission, be responsible for maintenance of all of the proceedings of
the Commission and shall make a written report to the Board monthly
covering the proceedings of the Commission. In addition to the regular
scheduled monthly meeting, such other meetings shall be held as may
be called by the Chairman or as directed by the Mayor or the Board.
B. Other Powers And Duties. The Commission shall have such other
powers and duties as are or may be prescribed by the laws of the State
of Missouri or the ordinances of the City.
A. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The word "Board", when
used in this Chapter, shall be construed to mean the Board of
Adjustment. The Board shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom
shall be residents appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of
Section
405.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
410.010
AO:262
Section 410.020. Meetings. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such
other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman, or in his absence
the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, and if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken
down by a certified court reporter employed by the Board for that purpose.
Aldermen. The term of office of the members of the Board shall be for
five (5) years, excepting that the membership of the first (1st) Board
appointed shall serve respectively for terms of one (1) for one (1) year,
one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four
(4) years and one (1) for five (5) years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of five (5) years each. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. Members shall be removed for cause by the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen upon written charges and after public
hearing.
B. The Board shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman who shall
serve for one (1) year. The Board shall adopt from time to time such
rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the
provisions of this Chapter.
C. In addition to the five (5) members of the Board of Adjustment, there
shall be three (3) alternate members, all of whom shall be residents,
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen. The
term of office of the alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall
be for five (5) years. Alternate members shall serve in the absence or
disqualification of the regular members. Alternate members shall be
removed for cause by the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen upon
written charges and after a public hearing.
D. The makeup of the Board of Adjustment shall be as follows: [Ord. No.
3381 §1, 1-23-201450]
1. Each of the City's wards shall be represented by two (2) of the eight
(8) total members and alternate members; and
2. Of the five (5) regular members, each ward shall be represented by
at least one (1) regular member.
50.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided that Subsection D would apply only to
appointments made after passage of this ordinance.
Section
410.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.030
AO:263
Section 410.030. Variance and Appeal Procedures. [Ord. No. 3001
§1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 3101 §1, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 3178 §1,
4-28-2011]
A. Variance requests and appeals to the Board of Adjustment on any
matter over which the Board is hereby specifically granted jurisdiction
may be filed by any person aggrieved, by any neighborhood
organization as defined in Section 32.105, RSMo., representing such
person, or by an officer, department or any board or bureau of the City
of Fenton affected by any decision of the Director. Such variance or
appeal shall be petitioned within thirty (30) days of such decision by
filing with the Director and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of
variance or appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from is taken.
B. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Director certifies to the Board after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment or a court of record on application or notice to the Director.
C. Notice For Hearing. The petition is to be filed at the Community
Development Department within at least thirty (30) days before a
meeting is scheduled, unless prior written approval is granted by the
Director. The Director shall review the petition as to form. Upon review
if it is deemed complete, the Director shall refer the matter to the Board
of Adjustment.
D. The petition shall be set for public hearing before the Board of
Adjustment within sixty (60) days. The Director shall cause public
notice of such hearing to be given. The notice procedure shall be as
follows:
1. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
variance or appeal, give not less than fifteen (15) days' public
notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation and post such
notice within the City and areas affected, as well as give due notice
to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable
time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or
by attorney. In addition, the City will be responsible for notifying all
owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject
property by mail of the application and hearing date. Said notice
shall be postmarked at least five (5) days prior to the scheduled
public hearing. In the event the petitioner seeks more than one (1)
continuance of any published or notified hearing, the petitioner
shall be responsible for reimbursement of any re-publication and/or
mailing notification costs prior to any action by the Board of
Adjustment.
Section
410.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
410.030
AO:264
Section 410.040. Powers. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
2. Such notice shall contain the approximate street location or
address, the name of the person seeking such variance, relief or
appeal, the present zoning classification and the relief from
hardship of strict interpretation of the Zoning Code regulations.
3. In addition to the above, the Director shall cause a sign or signs,
not less than two (2) feet high by three (3) feet wide, to be placed
on all parcels of land on which an application for a variance or an
appeal has been filed with the Board of Adjustment.
a. Sign or signs shall be placed on such parcels of land at a point
nearest to the right-of-way of any street or roadway abutting
such parcel and so as to be clearly visible to the traveled
portion of such street or roadway. The Director shall determine
the number of additional signs to be placed that may be
necessary to carry out the intent of this Code.
b. All signs shall have letters not less than two and one-half (2 1/
2) inches in height and not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch in
width with the following: "PUBLIC HEARING." [Ord. No.
3410 §1, 4-24-2014]
c. The Director may provide for such additional information to be
placed on any such sign which would serve to fully inform the
public as to the nature of such a variance or an appeal pending
before the Board of Adjustment.
d. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who
shall remove, mar, scratch, obliterate or in any manner deface,
hide from view or tamper with any such sign or signs shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
e. It shall not be necessary to publish notice or hold public
hearings on amendments to this Code pertaining to procedural
matters and to the duties and powers of officials, officers,
boards, commissions and bureaus in carrying out the
regulations of this Code.
E. A fee as set forth in Addendum "A" shall be paid at the time the notice of
appeal is filed.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of these Sections or of
any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto;
Section
410.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.040
AO:265
Section 410.050. Appeals To The Board. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
In exercising the above powers, the Board may, in conformity with the
provisions of this Title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and
to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken. In considering all appeals to this Chapter, the Board shall, before
making any finding in a specific case, first determine that the proposed
change will not constitute a change in the District Map and will not impair
an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or increase
congestion in public streets or increase the danger of fire or materially
diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area
or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the City of Fenton. Every change granted or denied by the Board
shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on sworn testimony
and evidence specifying the reason for granting or denying the variation.
The decision of the Board shall be made a part of any building permit in
which variation is allowed.
Section 410.060. Variations — Decision of The Board. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director or
to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under this Chapter or to effect any variation in this Title.
Section 410.070. Appeals From The Board's Decision. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
2. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under such ordinance;
3. In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
such ordinance, to vary or modify the application of any of the
regulations or provisions of such ordinance relating to the use,
construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of
land, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
A. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved, any neighborhood
organization as defined in Section 32.105, RSMo., representing such
person or persons, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality by any decision of the Board of Adjustment or any officer,
department, board or bureau of the City of Fenton may present to the
Circuit Court having jurisdiction in St. Louis County a petition, duly
verified, stating that such decision is illegal in whole or in part,
Section
410.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
410.070
AO:266
Chapter 415
ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 415.010. Classification Of Districts. [Ord. No. 3890,
1-24-201951]
specifying the grounds of the illegality and asking for relief therefrom.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
B. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of
certiorari directed to the Board for review of the data and records acted
upon or it may appoint a referee to take additional evidence in the case.
The court may reverse or affirm or may modify the decision brought up
for review.
C. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board, unless it shall appear to
the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with
malice in making the decision appealed from.
A. The purpose of classifying Districts is to regulate and/or restrict:
1. The location of trades, residences, and buildings and structures
designed for specific uses;
2. The height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally
altered;
3. The intensity of the use of the lot areas;
4. The areas of yards; and
5. Other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings and
structures.
B. To ensure that the City keeps within the spirit and intent of this Code,
the City is hereby divided into the following Districts:
"R-1" Single-Family Residential District
"R-2" Single-Family Residential District
"R-3" Single-Family Residential District
"R-4" Single-Family Residential District
"PG" Public and Governmental District
"PR" Parks and Recreation District
"OT-1" Olde Towne District
"OT-2" Olde Towne District
51.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 415, Zoning Districts, containing Sections 415.010 through
415.050, was repealed 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3890.
Section
410.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.010
AO:267
Section 415.020. Interpretation, Purpose, And Conflicts. [Ord. No.
3890, 1-24-2019]
Section 415.030. Scope Of Restrictiveness. [Ord. No. 3890,
1-24-2019]
"OT-3" Olde Towne District
"OT-4" Planned Olde Towne District
"OT-5" Olde Towne District
"BP-1" Business Park District
"BP-2" Business Park District
"BP-3" Business Park District
"BP-4" Planned Business Park District
"C-1" Commercial District
"C-2" Commercial District
"CP-1" Commercial Park District
"HP-1" Hospitality Park District
"IP-1" Industrial Park District
"PID" Planned Industrial Development District
A. The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Code shall
include that the provisions are to be held to the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity, and general welfare.
B. Wherever the regulations of this Code require a greater width or size of
yards, courts or other open spaces, or require greater percentage of lot
to be left unoccupied, or require a lower density of population, or
require a more restricted use of land, or impose other higher standards
than are required in any other order or regulations, these regulations
shall govern.
A. Alterations Of Buildings And/Or Land.
1. Except as provided within this Code, no building and/or land shall
be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or land be used except for a purpose
permitted in the zoning District in which the building or land is
located.
2. No building and/or land shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit
herein established for the zoning District in which the building and/
or land is located.
3. Except as provided within this Code, no building and/or land shall
be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
Section
415.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
415.030
AO:268
Section 415.040. Range Of Restrictiveness. [Ord. No. 3890,
1-24-2019]
For the purpose of this Code, the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District
is considered the most protective zoning District within the City and the
"IP-1" Industrial Park District is considered the least protective. The range
of restrictiveness follows the descending order of Districts as previously
mentioned.
Section 415.050. Official Zone District Map And Boundary
Regulations. [Ord. No. 3890, 1-24-2019]
altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the zoning
District in which the building and/or land is located.
4. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more
than one (1) principal building on one (1) lot except as otherwise
provided in this Code.
5. No building shall be erected or structurally altered except in
conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of
this Code.
B. Yard Regulations. The yard regulations and the density of population
provisions required by this Code are minimum regulations for each and
every building.
C. Conditions Of Use. Except as otherwise permitted herein or set forth in
other codes and ordinances of the City, all activities within a nonresidential
District shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed area,
except as allowed by permitted uses and use permitted under a Special
Use Permit.
A. The locations and boundaries of the approved Districts are shown upon
the City of Fenton's Official Zone District Map, attached hereto and
made a part of this Title. The Official Zone District Map, together with
all officially authorized notations, references, and other information
shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be part of this Title
and shall have the same force and effect as if the Official Zone District
Map, together with all notations, references and other information
shown thereon, were fully set forth and described herein.52
B. The Director or his/her designee shall maintain the Official Zone
District Map and shall be responsible for making any officially approved
changes thereto.
C. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the Board, the zoning District adjoining each side of each
street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center
52.Editor's Note: The Official Zone District Map is on file in the City offices.
Section
415.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.050
AO:269
of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended Districts.
D. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
Districts as shown on the Official Zone District Map, the following rules
shall apply:
1. Where the District boundaries are either streets or alleys unless
otherwise shown and where the Districts designated on the Official
Zone District Map are bounded approximately by street or alley
lines, the center line of such street or alleys shall be construed to
be the boundary of the District.
2. Where the District boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and
where the property has been or may be divided into blocks and lots,
the District boundary shall be construed to be the lot lines. Where
the Districts designated on the Official Zone District Map are
bounded approximately by lot lines, the said lot lines shall be
construed to be the boundary of the Districts unless the boundaries
are otherwise indicated on the Official Zone District Map.
3. In the case of unsubdivided property, the District boundary lines on
the Official Zone District Map shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on the Official Zone District Map.
E. All territory which may hereafter become a part of the incorporated
area of the City of Fenton, Missouri, by the annexation of any adjacent
or additional area shall be classified as lying and being in the zoning
Districts of the City of Fenton, Missouri.
F. Properties with zoning classifications under the St. Louis County
Zoning Code in effect at the time of annexation shall be the zoning
classification assigned by St. Louis County until such time that the City
rezones such newly annexed properties. When possible, the City shall
rezone such property at the same time the property is annexed into the
boundaries of the City of Fenton.
G. All areas within the boundaries of the City of Fenton, Missouri, which
are underwater and not shown as included with any District shall be
subject to all the regulations of the District which immediately adjoins
the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more Districts, the
boundaries of each District shall be construed to extend into the water
area and in a straight line until they meet the other Districts.
H. The City may from time to time formally amend the Official Zone
District Map of the City by ordinance as may be deemed appropriate in
the public interest. Such ordinance shall be adopted in accordance with
the mandatory requirements for amending zoning District boundaries
and regulations as set forth in Sections 89.050 through 89.060, RSMo.,
and once approved, the Director, or his/her designee, shall be
authorized to amend the Official Zone District Map accordingly. Any
revisions made to the Official Zone District Map thereafter by the
Section
415.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
415.050
AO:270
Chapter 420
ZONING DISTRICTS - GENERAL INFORMATION
Section 420.010. Non-Conforming Uses Or Structures. [Ord. No.
3865, 10-25-201853]
Director, or his/her designee, as authorized by this Section 415.050(H)
shall include the placement on the Map of the date to which the Map
has been revised.
A. In General. This Section governs non-conforming uses or structures, as
defined by Section 400.030.
B. General Provisions.
1. Structures may be built on lots of record that were made nonconforming
by this Code as to size, width or area; provided,
however, that such structures shall conform to setbacks and other
regulations of the Zoning District in which the property is located.
2. No non-conforming use shall be enlarged or extended unless such
use is changed to a permitted use and complies with the
requirements in the Zoning District in which the use is located. No
non-conforming structure shall be enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered unless it is brought into compliance with the
requirements in the Zoning District in which the structure is
located, except as otherwise provided herein.
3. No non-conforming structure or use shall be moved in whole or in
part for any distance whatsoever to any other location on the same
or any other lot unless the entire structure or use shall thereafter
conform to the provisions of the Zoning District in which it is
located after being moved.
4. The existence of any present non-conforming use or structure
anywhere in the City shall not be considered grounds for issuance
of a variance at another location.
5. The number of dwelling units in a non-conforming residential
dwelling shall not be increased.
6. If a non-conforming structure is damaged by fire, explosion, acts of
God or public rioting to the extent of sixty percent (60%) or less of
its reconstruction value as determined by data in the office of the
Assessor of St. Louis County, it may be restored and not lose its
non-conforming status; provided, however, that its restoration may
not result in the structure or its non-conformity being enlarged.
53.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 420, Zoning Districts — General Information, containing
Sections 420.010 through 420.040, was repealed 10-25-2018 by Ord. No. 3865.
Section
415.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.010
AO:271
Section 420.020. Procedures For Obtaining A Special Use Permit.
[Ord. No. 2865, 10-25-2018]
C. Ordinary Repair And Maintenance.
1. The normal maintenance and repair or the replacement,
installation, or relocation of non-bearing partitions, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing may be performed on any structure that is nonconforming
or that contains a non-conforming use. Neither this nor
any other provision of this Section shall be interpreted to authorize
any increase in the size or degree of the non-conforming use or
structure.
2. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring of a structure to a safe condition in
accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with
protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be
unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition.
D. Non-Conforming Accessory Uses. No use or structure which is
accessory to a principal non-conforming use or structure shall continue
after such principal use or structure ceases or is discontinued.
E. Discontinuance Of Non-Conforming Use Or Structure.
1. In the event the non-conforming use or use of a non-conforming
structure is discontinued for a period of nine (9) months, regardless
of an intent not to abandon or to again resume such use or occupy
or use such structure, any subsequent use or occupancy or use of
such structure shall comply with provisions of this Code including
those of the Zoning Districts in which the structure or use is
located.
2. Where no enclosed structure is involved, in the event the nonconforming
use or use of the non-conforming structure is
discontinued for a period of three (3) months, regardless of an
intent not to abandon or to again resume such use or occupy or use
such structure, any subsequent use or occupancy or use of such
structure shall comply with provisions of this Code including those
of the Zoning Districts in which the structure or use is located.
3. Nothing in this Code shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming
use or structure as authorized in this Code, unless a
discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life and property.
F. Transfer Of Ownership. A non-conforming use or structure or the
property on which such is located may be sold or transferred by its
owner or any future owner or owners, and such new and future owner
and owners shall be entitled to continue the non-conforming use or
structure in conformance with this Section.
Section
420.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
420.020
AO:272
A. Purpose. Certain land uses and developments present unique needs
with respect to their proper location and relationship to other land
uses. Within various Zoning Districts, certain uses may be permitted by
Special Use Permit after analysis and judgment of the consequences of
each such development by the Commission to ensure that the public
health, safety and general welfare are protected and preserved.
B. Procedure. The following procedure shall be implemented in the
consideration and determination of the issuance or non-issuance of the
Special Use Permit:
1. Applications for Special Use Permits shall be filed with the
Community Development Department at least thirty (30) days
before the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting, unless
prior written approval is granted by the Director upon good cause
shown by the applicant. The application shall be on City forms and
shall specify the locations of the building, the height, the area and
shall include a site plan for the lot. The site plan shall include a
legal description, lot and building footing dimensions, appropriate
zone district setbacks, landscaping and parking requirements,
contours and drainage ways, proposed or existing easements,
public improvements and, if possible or necessary, an artist's
rendering in the horizontal view. The application shall specify the
use sought to be permitted by the Special Use Permit. The Director
may require submittal of a traffic study when deemed appropriate.
The application shall further state why the use is needed and the
applicant's opinion as to the effect of the use on surrounding
properties. At the time that the application is filed, a fee shall be
paid to the City of Fenton. The fees for Special Use Permits shall be
set forth in Addendum "A" to Title IV.
2. Each such application shall be verified by at least one (1) of the
owners or authorized representatives of the owners of property
requesting the Special Use Permit, attesting to the truth and
correctness of all facts and information presented with the
application.
3. The Director Shall Review The Application As To Form. Upon the
determination by the Director that the form of the application is
appropriate and all required information has been provided, the
Director will present the matter to the Commission. The application
shall be set for hearing before the Commission within sixty (60)
days of the date of the filing of a complete application. The notice of
the hearing shall include the posting of public notice on the
affected property; publication for no less than fifteen (15) days
preceding the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within
the area of the City of Fenton. In addition, the City will be
responsible for notifying all owners of property within three
hundred (300) feet of the subject property by mail of the
application and hearing date. Said notice shall be postmarked at
least five (5) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. In the
Section
420.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:273
event the petitioner seeks more than one (1) continuance of any
published or notified hearing, the petitioner shall be responsible
for reimbursement of any re-publication and/or mailing notification
costs prior to any action by the Commission.
4. In addition to the above, the Director shall cause a sign or signs,
not less than two (2) feet high by three (3) feet wide, to be placed
on all parcels of land on which an application for a special permit
has been filed with the Commission.
a. Sign or signs shall be placed on such parcels of land, at a point
nearest to the right-of-way of any street or roadway abutting
such parcel and so as to be clearly visible to the traveled
portion of such street or roadway. The Director shall determine
the number of additional signs to be placed that may be
necessary to carry out the intent of this Code.
b. All signs shall have letters not less than two and one-half (2 1/
2) inches in height and not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch in
width with the following: "PUBLIC HEARING."
c. The Director may provide for such additional information to be
placed on any such sign which would serve to fully inform the
public as to the nature of such special permit pending before
the Commission.
d. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who
shall remove, mar, scratch, obliterate or in any manner deface,
hide from view or tamper with any such sign or signs shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
5. Failure to comply with any additional notice or posting
requirements of this Section which are greater than required by
State law shall not be a basis for invalidation of any approval or
enactment.
6. The Commission, after public notice, shall conduct a hearing at
which the applicant shall present such information, as the applicant
deems necessary, to substantiate its request for a Special Use
Permit. The Commission shall hear any person wishing to speak in
favor of the application after which time the Commission shall hear
any person wishing to speak in opposition to the application, after
which time the applicant may address or rebut any issues
presented by the opposition. The Commission shall then close the
public participation portion of the hearing. The Commission shall
thereafter conduct a deliberation and discussion of the application,
giving due consideration to the following:
a. Said use is designated, located and proposed to be operated in
a manner that the public health, safety and general welfare will
be protected.
Section
420.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
420.020
AO:274
b. Visual compatibility with adjacent land uses and surrounding
area, including building height, form, materials and
landscaping.
c. Accessibility of the property to police, fire, refuse collection
and other municipal services; adequacy of ingress to and
within the site; traffic control; adequacy of off-street parking.
d. Said use will not cause substantial injury to the value of
adjacent parcels or other property in the surrounding area.
e. The use authorized by Special Use Permit will conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is to be
located.
These discussions shall be in public forum, but no public participation
shall be allowed. After review and deliberation, a simple majority of
the Commission is required to pass the proposition. If the proposition
does not have a simple majority vote, the proposition fails and shall be
taken as a negative recommendation.
7. The Commission shall communicate the results of its vote to the
Board and may further communicate its reasons for recommending
approval and/or its reasons for making a negative recommendation.
The Commission shall also recommend special conditions, if any, to
the Board.
8. The failure of the Commission to act within ninety (90) days after
the date of submission of a complete application for the Special Use
Permit in proper form to the Director shall be deemed approval and
such application shall then be submitted directly to the Board.
9. After the Commission has advised the Board of its recommendation
of approval or negative recommendation, the Board shall review
the recommendation of the Commission, after which time the
Board shall consider the issuance of the Special Use Permit by
ordinance. Said ordinance shall be proposed and sponsored in the
manner of all other ordinances and shall require a majority of the
Board to enact. The Special Use Permit permitted by ordinance
shall contain the special terms and conditions of the Special Use
Permit which shall be strictly adhered to by the applicant.
10. The permitted special use shall be reviewed annually by the
Director to assure that the use and building are in compliance with
the terms of the Special Use Permit. If the Director determines noncompliance
with the Special Use Permit, notice of non-compliance
shall be forwarded to the holder of the Special Use Permit. Failure
to achieve compliance within a reasonable time, but not less than
ten (10) days' notice of the Director shall be deemed cause to
terminate the Special Use Permit. Upon thirty (30) days' notice, the
Commission may cause a hearing to be held to determine whether
or not the property or use is in compliance, and if deemed to be in
Section
420.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:275
Section 420.030. Procedures For A Change In Zoning. [Ord. No.
2865, 10-25-2018]
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare and good
zoning practice require, the Board may order, after a public hearing, report
thereon by the Commission and subject to the procedure provided in this
Code, an amendment, supplement or change in the regulations, zoning
district boundaries or classification of property. Amendment, supplement,
re-classification or change (including special permits) may be initiated by
the Chairperson of the Commission, the Director, the Board or by a verified
application of one (1) or more of the owners or authorized representatives
of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed.
Section 420.040. Petitions For Change, Filing Fee, Form And
Contents. [Ord. No. 2865, 10-25-2018]
non-compliance the Commission may recommend to the Board
termination of the Special Use Permit. The Board by ordinance may
terminate the Special Use Permit acting upon the recommendation
of the Commission.
A. Process For Filing Petitions. The following procedure shall be
implemented for filing a petition:
1. Petitions for any change of zoning, boundaries or any
reclassification of zones as shown on the official Zone District Map
shall be addressed to the Board and filed with the Community
Development Department at least thirty (30) days before the next
scheduled Commission meeting, unless prior written approval is
granted by the Director upon good cause shown by the applicant.
The petition shall specify the location of the proposed change in
zoning and as necessary include the height, area and site plan for
the lot. The site plan, if provided, shall include a legal description,
lot and building footing dimensions, appropriate zone district
setbacks, landscaping and parking requirements, contours and
drainage ways, proposed easements, public improvements and, if
possible or necessary, an artist's rendering in the horizontal view.
At the time the petition is filed, a fee shall be paid to the City of
Fenton. The fees for a change in zoning shall be as set forth in
Addendum "A" to Title IV.
2. The petition will be on City forms and accompanied by such data
and information which may be prescribed for by the Commission or
Director so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts
for the Commission to consider in their review. Upon receipt at the
department, the Director shall review the application as to form.
Upon determination of the Director that the form of the application
is appropriate and all necessary information is provided, the
Director will present the matter to the Commission.
Section
420.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
420.040
AO:276
3. Each such petition shall be verified by at least one (1) of the owners
or authorized representatives of the owners of property within the
area proposed to be changed, attesting to the truth and correctness
of all facts and information presented with the application.
B. Notice For Hearing. The petition shall be set for public hearing before
the Commission within sixty (60) days of the date of the filing of a
complete petition. The Director shall cause public notice of such
hearing to be given. The notice procedure shall be as follows:
1. Fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall
be published in at least one (1) newspaper having general
circulation within the City. In addition, for development-initiated
change of zoning petitions, the City will be responsible for notifying
all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the
subject property by mail of the application and hearing date. Said
notice shall be postmarked at least five (5) days prior to the
scheduled public hearing. In the event the petitioner seeks more
than one (1) continuance of any published or notified hearing, the
petitioner shall be responsible for reimbursement of any republication
and/or mailing notification costs prior to any action by
the Commission; For non-development-initiated changes in zoning
(i.e., text amendments or Zoning Code revisions), notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation at least fifteen (15) days in advance,
supplemented by announcement in the City's monthly newsletter
and/or website.
2. In addition to the above, the Director shall cause a sign or signs,
not less than two (2) feet high by three (3) feet wide, to be placed
on all parcels of land on which an application for a zoning change
has been filed with the Commission.
a. Sign or signs shall be placed on such parcels of land at a point
nearest to the right-of-way of any street or roadway abutting
such parcel and so as to be clearly visible to the traveled
portion of such street or roadway. The Director shall determine
the number of additional signs to be placed that may be
necessary to carry out the intent of this Code.
b. All signs shall have letters not less than two and one-half (2 1/
2) inches in height and not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch in
width with the following: "PUBLIC HEARING."
c. The Director may provide for such additional information to be
placed on any such sign which would serve to fully inform the
public as to the nature of such a zoning change pending before
the Commission.
d. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who
shall remove, mar, scratch, obliterate or in any manner deface,
hide from view or tamper with any such sign or signs shall be
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.040
AO:277
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
3. It shall not be necessary to publish notice or hold public hearings
on amendments to this Code pertaining to procedural matters and
to the duties and powers of officials, officers, boards, commissions
and bureaus in carrying out the regulations of this Code. Failure to
comply with any additional notice or posting requirements of this
Section which are greater than required by State law shall not be a
basis for invalidation of any approval or enactment.
4. Such notice shall contain the approximate street location or
address, the name of the person seeking such zoning change, the
present zoning classification and the zoning classification sought or
the nature and reason of such request.
C. Public Hearing And Decision. The Commission, after public notice, shall
conduct a hearing at which the applicant shall present such
information, as the petitioner deems necessary, to substantiate its
request for a change in zoning. The Commission shall hear any person
wishing to speak in favor of the petition, after which time the
Commission shall hear any person wishing to speak in opposition to the
petition, after which time the petitioner may address or rebut any
issues presented by the opposition. The Commission shall then close the
public participation portion of the hearing. The Commission shall
thereafter conduct a deliberation and discussion of the petition. This
discussion shall be in a public forum, but no public participation shall
be allowed. After review and deliberation, the Commission shall vote
whether to grant the change in zoning. A simple majority of the
Commission is required to pass the proposition. If the proposition does
not have a simple majority vote, the proposition fails and shall be taken
as a negative recommendation. The Commission shall communicate the
results of its vote to the Board and may further communicate its
reasons for recommending approval and/or its reasons for making a
negative recommendation. After the Commission has advised the Board
of its recommendation of approval or negative recommendation, the
Board shall review the recommendation of the Commission, after which
time the Board shall consider the petition by ordinance. Said ordinance
shall be proposed and sponsored in the manner of all other ordinances
and shall require a majority of the Board to enact.
D. Appeal/Protest. In case of written protest against any change in zoning
regulations, restrictions or boundaries signed and acknowledged by the
owners of thirty percent (30%) or more either of the areas of the land
(exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change or
within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to a two hundred fifty
(250) foot distance from the boundaries of the district proposed to be
changed, such amendment shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the full Board of Aldermen. The
provisions of this Section shall apply equally to all changes or
amendments.
Section
420.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
420.040
AO:278
Chapter 421
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 421.010. Scope of Provisions. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
This Chapter contains the regulations of the planned unit development
procedure. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
general regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title which are
incorporated as part of this Chapter by reference.
Section 421.020. Statement of Intent/Purpose. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
The intent of this Chapter is to provide a voluntary and alternate zoning
procedure in the "R-1", "R-2" and "R-3" Residential Zone Districts and the
"OT-1" Olde Towne Historic Zone District in order to permit flexibility in
building types and arrangements that would not be possible under the strict
application of the zoning district; encourage a creative approach to the use
of land and related physical facilities that results in better development and
design to preserve existing site topography, major tree cover and natural
water features on and adjacent to the development to the extent reasonably
possible; and contribute to enhancement of the City's urban design, with
particular attention to adaptation to abutting neighborhoods and roadway
systems under conditions of approved site and development plans.
Section 421.030. Applicable Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
The planned unit development procedure may be utilized for developments
containing not less than seven (7) acres in the "R-1", "R-2" and "R-3"
Residential Zone Districts and not less than four (4) units in the "OT-1" Olde
Towne Historic District.
Section 421.040. Authorized Developments and Limitations. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. The planned unit development procedure may authorize the following
development types and standards.
1. Any use permitted in the zoning district within which the planned
unit development lies, however, attached single-family homes with
no more than two (2) units per structure may be approved in the
"R-2" and "R-3" zoning districts or more than four (4) units in the
"OT-1" zoning district.
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
421.040
AO:279
2. Any use allowed by special use permit in the zoning district within
which the planned unit development lies provided a special use
permit is issued.
3. Lot area, yard setback and height requirements shall be as
established in the ordinance authorizing the planned unit
development with the following restrictions:
a. Setbacks along boundary lines of a planned unit development
and off-street parking requirements applicable in any district
shall in no event be diminished by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Said setbacks shall apply to all lots contiguous
with or within fifty (50) feet of the boundary line of the
development. For planned unit developments within the "R-2"
or "R-3" residential districts, a landscape buffer of not less than
thirty (30) feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to all
abutting residentially zoned property, wherein lots do not
comply with the minimum size of the underlying district. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may require that open
parking spaces be depressed below the grade of the remainder
of the property or screened by walls, fences or plant material
or by both methods in order to preserve and complement the
general character of any existing developments on adjacent
properties.
b. Primary access shall be from roads and walkways within the
development and the uses shall be oriented to and coordinated
with the total development.
4. The planned unit development shall not contain more units than
would be permitted under the regulations of the residential zone
district in which this development is allowed; however in no case
shall the minimum lot size in the "R-1" be less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; in the "R-2" less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet; in the "R-3" less than seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet or less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet in the "OT-1" Olde Towne Historic District.
a. The maximum number of lots or units allowable in residential
districts shall be calculated by dividing the net area of the
development by the minimum lot area requirement for a
residential unit of the zone district in which the subdivision is
located. The net area is the gross area of the development
minus the following:
(1) Land within special flood hazard areas inundated by a
100-year flood (i.e., plain and floodway Zones "A", "AE",
"AH", "AO", "A99") as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) All public or private street right-of-way.
Section
421.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
421.040
AO:280
Section 421.050. Planned Unit Development Procedures. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
(3) Area for detention areas as measured ten (10) feet back
from the high water elevation for any detention basin.
b. The maximum number of lots within the "OT-1" zone district
shall be dependent on each lot containing not less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet, exclusive of land area included
within above items (4)(a)(1), (2) or (3).
A. Procedures for filing, review and approval of the planned unit
development procedure shall be made on forms provided by the City
and shall be accompanied by the required plats and documents as
follows:
1. Pre-application procedures. Prior to filing an application for an
approval of a planned unit development, the developer may request
an informal meeting with the Director, City Administrator and other
City Officials as appropriate to discuss the proposed development.
The pre-application conference is not mandatory and does not
require formal application, fees or filing of a planned unit
development plat. The items to be discussed may include the
following:
a. General site information. Data regarding site conditions, land
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities,
existing covenants and other related general information about
surrounding land uses.
b. Sketch plan. A drawing in simple sketch form showing the
proposed location and extent of the land uses, major streets,
lots and other features as they relate to the City.
c. Legal description. A property survey and legal description of
the site proposed for development.
2. Preliminary plat procedures. Application for a planned unit
development for a specific tract of land shall be initiated by the
filing of a verified application by the owner or owners of record, or
owners under contract of a lot or tract of land or their authorized
representatives. Application shall be addressed to the City of
Fenton Planning and Zoning Commission and submitted to the
Community Development Department upon forms prescribed for
such purpose and accompanied by the following:
a. Fees include change of zoning and subdivision review per
requirements of Addendum "A", Fees.
b. Copies of the proposed plat in the quantities required shall be
submitted including the details and supporting information
Section
421.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
421.050
AO:281
listed in Section 480.060(E) of the City of Fenton subdivision
ordinance and shall also include the following:
(1) The name, address, seal and signature of the preparer of
the plat.
(2) The locator number, zoning, acreage, graphic scale, north
arrow, location and date.
(3) Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not
more than five (5) feet referred to sea level datum.
(4) The location of all watercourses including lakes and ponds
within two hundred (200) feet including the 100-year
floodplain and the floodway where applicable.
(5) The location of existing and proposed water lines, sanitary
sewer lines and stormwater drainage lines and structures,
gas, electric, cable, telephone and other utility
connections.
3. Preliminary plat public hearing. A public hearing on the petition
shall be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the same
manner and with the same public notice procedures as required for
the change of zoning (Section 420.040) and preliminary plat
requirements (Section 480.060(D)(2)) and landscaping
requirements (Section 445.020) of the Fenton Municipal Code. The
public hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of verification
that the application meets the minimum application requirements
as determined by the Director.
4. Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Following the aforesaid public hearing and review of the
preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting data for
conformity with these regulations, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, within sixty (60) days, recommend approval,
modification or disapproval of the proposal. The recommendations
shall state the reasons underlying their decision and a report
documenting the findings shall be issued on behalf of the Planning
and Zoning Commission by the Director. The Planning and Zoning
Commission's recommendation shall be based upon whether the
planned unit development proposal is:
a. Consistent with good general planning practice and with good
site planning;
b. Can be constructed and operated in a manner that is not
detrimental to the permitted uses in the district;
c. Would be visually compatible with the uses within the
surrounding area; and
Section
421.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
421.050
AO:282
d. Is deemed desirable to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the City of Fenton.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also
consider the architectural, landscape and other
relationships which may exist between the proposed
development and the character of the surrounding
neighborhood and shall prescribe and require such
physical treatment such as screening, buffers or other
features as will, in its opinion, enhance the
neighborhood character.
5. Board of Aldermen action on the preliminary plat.
a. The Director shall write a recommendation on behalf of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen based upon the review of the preliminary plans and
supporting documents filed with the plans. The report shall
include the recommendation including any conditions of
approval or reasons for denial. The Board of Aldermen may
uphold or reverse the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
b. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen, after receipt of the
preliminary plat and recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission, shall, within sixty (60) days, approve or
disapprove the preliminary plat and, if approved, shall pass an
ordinance authorizing the planned unit development. Said
ordinance shall authorize the development and outline the
parameters and conditions allowing the development. In case
of disapproval the Commission shall communicate its reasons
to the Board of Aldermen, and the Board, by vote of not less
than two-thirds (2/3) of its entire membership, may overrule
the disapproval and, upon the overruling, the Board or the
appropriate board or officer may proceed, except that if the
public facility or utility is one the authorization or financing of
which does not fall within the province of the Board, then the
submission to the Commission shall be by the Board having
jurisdiction, and the Commission's disapproval may be
overruled by that Board by a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/
3) of its entire membership.
6. Effect of the preliminary plat approval.
a. Approval of a preliminary plat for a planned unit development
shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be
deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on
the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final
plat, or if development is to be staged, of the first (1st) stage of
the final plat.
Section
421.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
421.050
AO:283
Section 421.060. Site Improvement Plans. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
b. The developer shall submit the final plat within one (1) year
after approval of the preliminary plat for approval by the City
and subsequent recording upon fulfillment of the requirements
of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary plat
approval. The final plat shall be approved as the final land use
if it conforms to the preliminary plat and corresponding
ordinance. The preliminary plat and final plat may be filed and
approved simultaneously if all requirements hereof are met.
c. Preliminary plat approval does not constitute acceptance of
roads or other land or facilities to be dedicated nor can
building permits be issued for any structure. In general,
preliminary plat approval shall conform to the requirements of
Section 480.060(D)(3).
A. Improvement plans are to be submitted to the Director for review and
conformance with the approved preliminary plat. Construction plans for
the planned unit development shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals
fifty (50) feet on sheets the same size as the plat with the following
information:
1. Profiles of centerline elevations of existing and proposed roads;
approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents and central
angles of all streets;
2. Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross sections
of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
drainage easements, rights-of-way, fire hydrants, manholes and
catch basins; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and
proposed stormwater drains and sanitary sewers including
connections to existing or proposed systems; and the location and
size of water lines, gas lines or other underground utilities,
detention basin location, size and hydraulic calculations and site
distance calculations for all entrance and exit roads;
3. A site grading, explosive removal and erosion control plan;
4. The above improvement plan shall be accompanied by appropriate
hydraulic cut and fill calculations and soil reports including depth
of rock; and
5. A soil report will be issued addressing soil conditions at the site and
corrective measures to be implemented for development and
roadway construction.
B. The plans shall be retained on file by the Community Development
Department.
Section
421.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
421.070
AO:284
Section 421.070. Final Plat Procedures. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
A. Final Plat Procedure.
1. The purpose of the final plat is to designate with particularity the
land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of
other lands, not so subdivided, into common open areas and
building sites. The preliminary plat shall generally locate buildings,
whereas the final plat shall show the exact location of each
building. Thus, the final planned unit development plat and, if the
development is to be staged, all staged final development plans
shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved.
2. The final plat is to provide a final record of the subdivision of land
and related improvements including all of the information on the
approved preliminary plat such as streets, water lines and sanitary
and storm sewers and incorporation of any subsequent changes
approved by the City. Final plat approval may only be requested
after compliance with Sections 480.060(G) and (H) of the Fenton
Municipal Code.
3. Applications for approval of the final plat may be submitted in
stages, with each stage reflecting a portion of the approved
preliminary plat which is proposed to be recorded and developed;
provided however, that such portion must conform to all
requirements of these regulations. The procedures for filing,
review and approval of the final planned unit development plat
shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development
Department.
4. The final plat and supporting documentation shall be submitted to
the Community Development Department for certification that the
final plat is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement
with the approved preliminary plat. The report of the Director shall
be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and
Board of Aldermen within thirty (30) days after submission by the
developer.
B. Recording.
1. Upon approval of the final plat by the Board of Aldermen, the
owner(s) shall, within sixty (60) days of the approval date, record
the plan with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds as a planned
unit development. Failure to record the final plat within the time
specified shall cause the approval to expire. An extension of
recording time may be granted by the Director for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days from the date of approval by the Board of
Aldermen if notified by the owner/representative fourteen (14) days
in advance of the expiration date. The Director may grant up to two
(2) extension periods totaling no more than sixty (60) additional
days in which to record the plan.
Section
421.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
421.070
AO:285
Section 421.080. Changes in Approved Planned Unit Developments.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 421.090. Failure To Submit Final Plat or Construction On
Schedule. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
2. Part of the recording requirement shall include in each warranty
deed or conveying instrument a permanent lot size or language
further restricting resubdivision of individual parcels.
A. The planned unit development project shall be developed only
according to the approved and recorded final plat and all supporting
data. The recorded final plat and supporting data, together with all
recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the use of
premises (including the internal use of buildings and structures) and
location of structures in the planned unit development project as set
forth therein. All changes to the final plat shall be recorded with the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds as amendments to the final plat or
reflected in the recording of a new corrected final plat.
1. Major changes. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the
planned unit development, including increases in density, increases
in the height of buildings, of proposed open space. Changes in the
sequence of development, changes in road standards or changes in
the final governing agreements, provisions or covenants may be
approved by submission of a new preliminary plat and supporting
data and following the "preliminary approval" steps and
subsequent amendment to the final planned unit development plat.
2. Minor changes. The Director may approve minor changes in the
planned unit development which do not change the concept or
intent of the development without going through the "preliminary
approval" steps. "Minor changes" are defined as any change not
defined as a major change.
A. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall consider the planned unit
development subject to revocation if substantial construction fails to
commence within one (1) year of filing of the final plat or construction is
not completed within five (5) years from approval of the final plat. The
developer shall be notified in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to any
revocation hearing.
B. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may grant an extension to
commence construction for not more than one (1) additional year. As
used in this Chapter, "substantial construction" shall mean final grading
for roadways necessary for first (1st) approved plat or phase of
construction and commencement of installation of sanitary and storm
sewers.
Section
421.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
421.090
AO:286
Section 421.100. Dedications For Public Schools and Public Parks.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
C. In the event the final plat is not submitted or substantial construction
has not commenced within the prescribed time limits, the planned unit
development shall terminate and the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall within forty-five (45) days recommend initiation of a new public
hearing to revert the property to its prior classification in accord with
the proceedings specified in Section 420.040. Where rezoning has been
granted in conjunction with a planned unit development and said
planned unit development has terminated, no building permit shall be
issued on that property in accord with the provisions of the above-noted
Section.
A. A planned unit development may include land designated for public
school or public park use, which land may be considered part of the
gross acreage of the development in computing the maximum number
of lots that may be created or dwelling units that may be authorized,
provided that:
1. The area of the proposed planned unit development is at least thirty
(30) acres in the case of a public school dedication and sixty (60)
acres in the case of a public park dedication.
2. No tract of less than five (5) acres is designated for dedication for
public school use or ten (10) acres for public park use. However, a
tract of land less than this minimum may be accepted for dedication
for public school or public park use if it is an addition to an existing
or proposed park or school site respectively or is recommended by
the Department of Parks and Recreation as part of a system of
hiking and riding trails.
3. The proposed school site is compatible with a generalized plan for
school locations published by the school district.
4. Prior to approval by the Board of Aldermen of a final plat indicating
a public park or public school site, a written statement shall be
received from the Department of Parks and Recreation
recommending approval of the proposed park dedication; or a
written notification shall be received from the school district that
the school district has agreed to accept the public school site
dedication.
5. Prior to approval of a final plat, a written agreement between the
petitioner and the school district shall be submitted to the Board of
Aldermen for review. The agreement shall indicate who is
responsible for the installation of required improvements adjacent
to or affecting the school site and when the improvements will be
installed.
Section
421.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
421.100
AO:287
Section 421.110. Trust Indentures and Warranty Deeds. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
6. The proposed site is dedicated to a public school or public park use
in a manner approved by the Board of Aldermen as to the legal form
prior to recording of the final plat.
7. The final plat identifies the boundaries of the dedicated tract within
the planned unit development.
8. The deed of dedication for public park or public school use shall
provide that in the event the property shall no longer be used for
that purpose, it will revert to the trustees of the subdivision in
which it is located as common land. The trust indenture required in
the next Section (Section 421.110) shall provide for the manner in
which the common land shall be treated, so that the provisions of
Chapter 440 of the Zoning Code are complied with.
A. In developments where common areas, which may include open spaces,
recreational areas or other common grounds, are provided on the
acreage or which is included in the gross acreage for density
calculation purposes, a trust indenture shall be recorded
simultaneously with the record plat. The indenture shall provide for the
proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of said common
land by trustees to be selected and to act in accordance with the terms
of such indenture and the common land shall be deeded to the trustees
under said indenture by general warranty deed. The trust indenture
and warranty deed shall comply with the requirements established in
Chapter 440 Subdivision Indentures. In addition, the trust indenture
shall contain the following provisions:
1. The common areas, including open spaces, recreational areas or
other common grounds, shall be for the sole benefit, use and
enjoyment of the lot or unit owners, present and future, of the
entire planned unit development or that the common areas may
also be used by residents outside the planned unit development. If
residents outside the planned unit development are permitted to
use the common areas, the indenture shall contain provisions
which shall provide, in essence, the following:
a. No resident of the planned unit development shall be denied
the use of the open space, recreational facilities or other
common ground for any reason related to the extension of such
privilege to non-residents of the planned unit development.
b. All rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the
indenture with respect to residents of the planned unit
development shall be applied equally to the residents.
Section
421.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
421.110
AO:288
Chapter 425
ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 425.010. Enforcement of The Code. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
Section 425.020. Violation of The Code and Penalties. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
c. All rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the
indenture with respect to non-residents of the planned unit
development shall be applied equally to the non-residents.
d. At any time after the recording of the indenture, a majority of
the residents of the planned unit development, by election duly
called, may elect to allow or disallow usage of the open space,
recreational facilities or other common grounds by nonresidents
of the planned unit development.
2. The indenture shall contain provisions for the maintenance of all
common areas and facilities and the means of collecting
assessments necessary for the maintenance thereof.
A. All Code enforcement and review shall be performed by the Community
Development Department. The Director as a part of expected duties
shall review any zoning application forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission by the petitioners relative to special use permits,
zoning change, modifications and classification of land use. The
Director shall perform such other duties as may be delegated or
authorized by law and other ordinances of the City of Fenton. It shall be
the duty of the Director to ensure that the City enforces this Zoning
Code.
B. Permits. No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed or
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such manner as to
prolong the life of the building, nor shall the uses of any land be
changed without first obtaining a permit issued by such officer or
official except that no permit shall be required for ordinary repairs on
conforming use structures. Such permits shall be issued only when the
request is in conformity with this Code.
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., or this Title or of
any ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
Section
421.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.020
AO:289
Chapter 430
APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 430.010. Forms For Applications and Permits. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Prior to obtaining a building permit, a zoning approval form shall be
completed by the applicant and approved by the Community Development
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure
or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or
about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by an officer
empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be
inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any
condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision
of the regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140,
RSMo.
B. In addition to any other remedies or fines provided by law, the owner or
general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any
provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist, or the
lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such
violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent,
lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such
violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be subject to a
Municipal Ordinance Violation under Section 100.060(E) of the
Municipal Code. [Ord. No. 3632 § 1, 10-27-2016]
C. Any such person who having been served with an order to remove any
such violation shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days
after such service or shall continue to violate any provision of the
regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.,
in the respect named in such order shall also be subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
D. In addition to the above procedure, the City Attorney is empowered to
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent violations of
this Zoning Code, to restrain, correct or abate such violations, to
prevent the occupancy of buildings, structures or land, or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. An
appropriate action or proceeding shall include, but not be limited to,
injunctive relief and any other appropriate action at law or in equity.
Section
425.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
430.010
AO:290
Department for any construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration,
enlargement or extension of any building or structure within the City.
Section 430.020. Certificate of Occupancy Requirements. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. Each application for an occupancy permit for the use of land shall be
accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon or used, the size, shape and
location of the building to be erected and such other information as may
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this Code. A record of
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the Community
Development Department.
B. No change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or
occupancy in existing buildings other than for single-family dwelling
purposes shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Director. Every
certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupant shall comply
with all provisions of this Code.
C. No permit for excavation of, or the erection or alteration of, any
building shall be issued before the application has been made and
approved for a certificate of occupancy and compliance and no building
or premises shall be occupied until such certificate and permit is issued.
D. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the Community Development Department. Copies shall be furnished
on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
land or buildings affected by such certificate of occupancy.
E. All occupancy permits shall be obtained prior to such premises being
occupied.
1. Certificate of occupancy.
a. Residential.
(1) An occupancy permit shall be required for all new
residential buildings constructed in the City.
(2) No occupancy permit shall be required for the occupancy
of residential dwellings in the City other than the new
residential buildings located in the City.
(3) Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidental
with the application for a construction permit for the
construction of new residential dwellings and shall be
issued within ten (10) days after the lawful erection of the
building is completed and the required sewage treatment
facilities are installed in accordance with the provisions of
Section
430.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.020
AO:291
minimum sanitary requirements for building and
occupancy permits.
b. Construction.
(1) As soon as practical after construction has begun, but no
later than the roofing of the structure, a sign shall be
posted in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of
the structure and shall read as follows: "Before this
structure may be occupied, an occupancy permit must be
obtained from the City by the occupier of this structure."
(2) The lettering on said sign shall not be less than three (3)
inches in length and the width of the stroke making said
lettering shall not be less than one-half (½) inch. The width
of said letters shall not be less than one and one-half (1½)
inches. The said sign shall have red lettering on a white
background.
(3) If at any time the sign becomes damaged, discolored or
made in any way illegible, it shall be replaced immediately.
If the Code Enforcement Officer shall designate a sign
illegible, it shall be replaced immediately.
c. Commercial and industrial. All commercial and industrial
buildings located in the City, whether new construction or one
that has been previously occupied, shall at any time when new
occupants propose to occupy such buildings require the
issuance of an occupancy permit prior to such buildings being
occupied for any purpose whatsoever.
d. Temporary certificates of occupancy. The Director may issue a
temporary occupancy permit before the completion of the
entire work covered by the final occupancy permit provided
that such portion or portions of the structure shall be occupied
safely prior to the full completion of the structure without
endangering life or public welfare.
No temporary occupancy permit may be issued if the portion
of the work to be completed includes fixing Code violations
or such structural defects which would endanger safety and
public welfare.
If the Director determines that a temporary occupancy permit
can be issued, the builder or developer (hereinafter "builder")
shall be required to do the following prior to the temporary
occupancy permit being issued:
(1) The builder shall prepare a comprehensive list of items
that must still be completed. This list must indicate the
item, location and date of anticipated completion. This list
shall be reviewed by the potential purchaser (hereinafter
Section
430.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
430.020
AO:292
"purchaser") and the Director. This list shall be signed by
the purchaser, the Director and the builder. This list must
state clearly the intentions of the builder to complete the
items on the list within the designated time frame.
(2) In addition to the list, the builder must issue a
performance bond to secure that the items on the list will
be completed by the builder to the reasonable satisfaction
of the purchaser and the Director within the agreed upon
time frame. This performance bond shall be in a form
acceptable to the City of Fenton. The City and the
purchaser must be the signatories for the release of the
bond.
(3) The City has the sole discretion to accept, in lieu of a
performance bond, an escrow account set up by the
purchaser's mortgage lender. This escrow account must be
in the purchaser and the City's name and shall be released
either to the purchaser or the City if the builder does not
perform pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter or
any other Chapter of the Fenton Municipal Code.
(4) If the builder does satisfactorily perform under this
provision, then the bond proceeds or escrow shall be
released back to the builder after the City's authorized
representative and purchaser sign to release the funds to
the builder.
(5) Any violation of these provisions are subject to all the
penalties and enforcement provisions of Chapter 425 of
the Fenton Municipal Code.
e. Landscaping. Prior to issuance of an occupancy or a
reoccupancy permit, all required landscaping shall be
completed in accord with approved plans.
2. Fees. The fees for an occupancy permit are set forth in Addendum
A.
F. The fees for plan review and zoning approval shall be as set forth in
Addendum A.
G. Temporary, Alternate Occupancy due to Natural Disasters and/or
Emergency Situations. [Ord. No. 3716 § 1, 7-27-2017]
1. Special Use Permit. During or following a natural disaster and/or
emergency, as determined by the Director, the Director may waive
the requirement for a special use permit for a use to temporarily
relocate within a district when such use would require a special use
permit when said use is legally in operation at the time of the
natural disaster and/or emergency, subject to the following
conditions:
Section
430.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.020
AO:293
Chapter 435
SUBDIVISION ESCROW AGREEMENT
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 435.010. Escrow Procedures. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
a. The required occupancy permit for the relocation is obtained;
b. Such use is only relocated during the time needed to repair the
structure for which the special use permit originally was issued
and which structure was damaged by the natural disaster and/
or emergency not to exceed a period of six (6) months unless
an extension of time is approved by the Board; and
c. All applicable conditions of the special use permit issued for
the damaged structure, if any, shall remain in full force and
effect for the use at its temporary location unless a specific
condition is inapplicable or infeasible at the temporary location
as determined by the Director.
2. Mobile or Prefabricated Structure. During or following a natural
disaster and/or emergency, as determined by the Director, the
Director may authorize a use to temporarily relocate to a mobile or
prefabricated structure in the City when said use is legally in
operation at the time of the natural disaster and/or emergency,
subject to the following conditions:
a. The required occupancy permit for the relocation is obtained;
b. The mobile or prefabricated structure is located in a manner
that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected on
the same lot as the occupancy permit was issued before the
natural disaster and/or emergency; and
c. Such use is only relocated during the time needed to repair the
structure for which the occupancy permit was issued and
which structure was damaged by the natural disaster and/or
emergency not to exceed a period of six (6) months unless an
extension of time is approved by the Board.
3. Procedure. Any time a natural disaster and/or emergency occurs,
as determined by the Director, notification shall be provided to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Aldermen
explaining what has been approved and the reasons why.
A. Prior to approval of the final plat by the Planning and Zoning
Commission Chairperson, the developer, contractor and/or owner of the
property must certify that all required subdivision improvements are in
Section
430.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
435.010
AO:294
place in accord with the approved plans. This certification shall be in
the form that is acceptable to the City of Fenton.
B. Prior to the approval of the final plat the developer, contractor and/or
owner of the property shall enter into an escrow agreement that is
acceptable to the City and shall be in accord with provisions of this
Section.
C. The escrow agreement shall be prepared and executed on forms
furnished by the City and shall be submitted, reviewed and approved
according to the procedures adopted by the Board of Aldermen. Every
escrow agreement shall be approved by the Board of Aldermen.
1. Escrow guarantee. Every escrow agreement shall require that the
developer, contractor and/or owner of the property to guarantee a
specific amount of money with a bona fide escrow holder by either:
a. Depositing a said amount in lawful money of the United States
of America with a bona fide escrow holder;
b. By issuing an irrevocable letter of credit under an acceptable
deposit agreement with the City. This commitment shall be
from a lending institution approved by the City and shall
guarantee the availability and upon demand a sum of money
which shall be stated in the approved escrow agreement; or
c. By posting a land subdivision bond to guarantee the
construction of said subdivision improvements.
The City shall determine which monetary guarantee
will be appropriate and acceptable.
2. Release of escrow funds. The escrowed funds shall be held in the
escrow account and shall be released only by written authorization
from the City's designated representative. The designated
representative shall be approved by the Board of Aldermen and
shall be stipulated in the escrow agreement. The method for
approval for the release of the escrow funds shall be approved by
the Board of Aldermen.
a. Any such authorization for release of escrow funds shall occur
only upon receipt by the City of a written request from the
developer, contractor and/or property owner and;
b. In no case shall the City's designated representative authorize
the release of more than ninety-five percent (95%) of the
amount held in an escrow account until all the improvements
have been completed, approved by the City and accepted or
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
c. Any escrow amount held by the City shall be released within
thirty (30) days of completion of each category of improvement
or utility work to be installed, minus a maximum retention of
Section
435.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
435.010
AO:295
five percent (5%) which shall be released upon completion of
all improvements and utility work. Any such work shall be
deemed to be completed upon certification by the Board of
Aldermen that the project is complete in accordance with the
ordinances of the City of Fenton, including the filing of all
documentation and certifications.
d. The release shall be deemed effective when the escrow funds
are duly posted with United States Postal Service or other
agreed upon delivery service or when the escrow funds are
hand delivered to an authorized person or place as specified by
the owner or developer.
e. If the City has not released the escrow funds within thirty (30)
days after approval by the Board of Aldermen, the City shall
pay the owner or developer, in addition to the escrow funds
due, interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per
month calculated from the expiration of the thirty (30) day
period until the escrow funds have been released.
3. Term of the escrow guarantee.
a. The term of an escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2)
years. The developer, contractor and/or owner of the property
shall guarantee that all required utilities and improvements
will be installed, constructed and completed within two (2)
years from the date of the approval of the final plat.
b. At the end of the two (2) year period, the Board may extend the
term of the escrow agreement for a period not to exceed one
(1) additional year. In the event that the developer, contractor
and/or owner of the property shall abandon the project or fail
to complete the improvement within two (2) years from the
date of the City's approval of final plat, whichever shall occur
first, the City may complete or have completed the said
improvements and the escrow holder shall disburse the escrow
amount to the City as ordered and directed by the City.
c. In the event the escrow holder fails to remit the amount
required within thirty (30) days after written request by the
City, the Director shall recommend that the City Attorney take
immediate action to secure the payment of the amount
required.
d. In the event the term of the escrow agreement is not extended
by the Board of Aldermen or the escrow holder fails to remit
the amount required by the City, the City shall withhold all
permits for any new dwelling with the subdivision or plat
thereof until authorized by the Board of Aldermen.
4. Approval of escrow holder and audit. All escrow holders shall be
approved by the City's Attorney. All escrow holders shall be subject
Section
435.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
435.010
AO:296
to spot audits by the City. If the escrow holder fails to comply
with any provision of the escrow agreement, the holder may be
prohibited from acting as an escrow holder in the City for a period
of two (2) years.
5. Slopes and waterway modifications.
a. For the purposes of this Chapter, "waterway" is defined as any
natural swale, watercourse, creek or drainage area not
otherwise regulated by ordinances of the City of Fenton.
b. "Slope" shall mean any hill, hillside, rise, change in the natural
terrain having a change of two percent (2%) or more from the
base grade of the subdivision.
c. In addition to escrow funds pursuant to the development of
subdivision plats as required by the ordinances of the City, if
upon review of the subdivision plat by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Director so determine further escrow
funds may be required to guarantee the completion of
improvements and a creation of a maintenance guarantee for
slopes and waterway modifications.
d. If a review of the site and the subdivision plat indicate that
modification of an existing slope and/or waterway is required,
then the Director shall reasonably determine the cost of such
modification.
e. Upon determination of such cost for the guarantee of
completion of such improvements and modifications, the
developer, contractor and/or property owner shall establish an
escrow sum with a bona fide escrow holder by either:
(1) Depositing a said amount in lawful money of the United
States of America with a bona fide escrow holder;
(2) By issuing an irrevocable letter of credit under an
acceptable deposit agreement with the City. This
commitment shall be from a lending institution approved
by the City and shall guarantee the availability and upon
demand a sum of money which shall be stated in the
approved escrow agreement; or
(3) By posting a land subdivision bond to guarantee the
construction of such improvements to the land, completion
and installation of the improvements to the slopes and
waterways as shown on the approved improvements plans.
f. The City shall determine which monetary guarantee will be
appropriate and acceptable.
g. The improvement and/or completion period shall be approved
by the Board of Aldermen and shall not exceed three (3) years.
Section
435.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
435.010
AO:297
h. During this escrow period the developer, contractor and/or
owner of the property shall maintain the slope and/or
waterway modifications.
i. Should the slope and/or waterway modifications suffer from
structure or maintenance deficiency in the opinion of the
Director prior to the expiration of the escrow period, then the
Director shall provide a written notice of such deficiencies to
the developer, contractor and/or owner of the property.
j. Upon failure by the developer, contractor and/or owner to
correct such structure or maintenance deficiency within fortyfive
(45) days of the date of written notice, the City may correct
the structure or maintenance deficiency and draw against the
escrow funds.
k. The escrow sum, letter of credit and/or bond hereby provided
for in this Section shall be subject to all City ordinances
pertaining to subdivision bonds and the release thereof.
6. Landscaping escrow guarantee. For the purpose of landscaping
and related activities, the developer, contractor and/or owner of the
property shall be required to deposit a reasonable escrow sum
which shall be determined by the Director into an escrow account.
Upon determination of such cost for the guarantee of completion of
such landscaping, the developer, contractor and/or owner shall
establish an escrow sum with a bona fide escrow holder by either:
a. Depositing a said amount in lawful money of the United States
of America with a bona fide escrow holder;
b. By issuing an irrevocable letter of credit under an acceptable
deposit agreement with the City. This commitment shall be
from a lending institution approved by the City and shall
guarantee the availability and upon demand a sum of money
which shall be stated in the approved escrow agreement; or
c. By posting a land subdivision bond to guarantee the
construction, installation and completion and of such
landscaping as shown on the approved plans.
D. The City shall determine which monetary guarantee will be appropriate
and acceptable.
E. The escrow sum, letter of credit and/or bond hereby provided for in this
Section shall be subject to all City ordinances pertaining to subdivision
bonds and the release thereof.
Section
435.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
435.010
AO:298
Chapter 440
SUBDIVISION INDENTURES
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 440.010. Establishment of The Subdivision Indenture. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 440.020. Recording of The Trust Indenture. [Ord. No. 3001
§1, 12-23-2008]
A. In any case where the establishment of common land (including
pedestrian walkways/bikeways and cul-de-sac islands), private street
lighting, drainage facilities such as detention basins and drainage pipe
and ditches or any other improvement that requires continuous
maintenance, a trust indenture shall be established and recorded
simultaneously with the record plat. The indenture shall provide for
proper maintenance and supervision by the trustees who are selected
to act in accordance with the terms of such indenture and the
applicable provisions of this Chapter.
B. For single lot developments and developments with no common ground,
the Board of Aldermen may accept script certifying the means of
maintenance on the record plat. Common land shall be conveyed by the
owner in fee simple absolute title by warranty deed to trustees whose
trust indentures shall provide that the common land be used for the
benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot or unit owners, present and future,
shall be the maintenance responsibility of the trustees of the
subdivision and that no lot or unit owner shall have the right to convey
his interest in the common land except as an incident of the ownership
of a regularly platted lot.
A. Any trust indenture required to be recorded or recorded for the
purpose of compliance with provisions of this Chapter shall provide for
not less than the following representation of purchasers of developed
lots among the trustees: one-third (1/3) of the trustees shall be chosen
by purchasers of developed lots or units after fifty percent (50%) of the
lots or units have been sold; two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees shall be
chosen by purchasers of developed lots or units after ninety-five
percent (95%) of the lots or units have been sold; all of the trustees
shall be chosen by purchasers of developed lots after all of the lots have
been sold.
B. Each trust indenture and warranty deed shall be accompanied by a
written legal opinion from an attorney licensed to practice in the State
of Missouri setting forth the attorney's legal opinion as to the legal form
and effect of the deeds and trust indenture.
Section
435.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
440.020
AO:299
Section 440.030. Term of The Indenture. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
Chapter 445
ADDITIONAL USE, HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AND
EXCEPTIONS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 445.010. In General. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 445.020. Landscape Standards and Procedures. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
C. The deeds and indenture shall be approved by the Director and the City
Attorney prior to being filed with the Recorder of Deeds, simultaneously
with the recording of the record plat.
A. Term of indentures for all types of subdivisions shall be for the duration
of the subdivision. In the event the subdivision is vacated, fee simple
title shall be vested in the then lot or unit owners as tenants in common.
The rights of the tenants shall only be exercisable appurtenant to and in
conjunction with their lot or unit ownership. Any conveyance or change
of ownership of any lot or unit shall convey with its ownership in the
common land and no interest in the common land shall be conveyed by
a lot or unit owner except in conjunction with the sale of a lot or unit.
The sale of any lot or unit shall carry with it all the incidents of
ownership of the common land although such is not expressly
mentioned in the deed; provided however, that no right or power
conferred upon the trustees shall be abrogated.
B. Provision shall be made for the trustees to be vested with the power to
dedicate the streets to a public body.
1. Any amendment to the trust indenture shall be approved by the
Commission.
2. Provision shall be made that prohibits the subdivider from
assessing lot owners for items or matters that are within the
required installation of the subdivision.
A. The district regulations hereinafter contained in this Section qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Code.
B. This Code prohibits the placement of single or multiple-dwelling
residential buildings within non-residential districts, i.e., commercial/
industrial or the business park district.
Section
440.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
445.020
AO:300
A. It is the purpose of this Section to provide reasonable minimum
standards for the preservation of areas of natural tree cover and other
unique characteristics of the landscape within the City, to facilitate new
development in harmony with intrinsic environmental values, establish
appropriate buffer areas between various development types and
individual parcels, encourage interspersion of landscaped nodes within
parking areas and to, in an orderly manner, establish a visually pleasing
and functional streetscape.
1. General requirements. Anything in the Fenton City Code to the
contrary notwithstanding, all new development within the City,
except for detached single-family homes on platted lots and
including an addition or exterior reconstruction of any existing nonresidential
building or the development enlargement or
reconfiguration of any parking lot, shall comply with the provisions
of this Section.
a. There shall be a landscape plan prepared and submitted which
enumerates plantings size and species with their location
which will present the development's specific criteria
regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover,
buffers and shade trees. This plan will be presented for review
and approval by the Director and, when otherwise be required
by this Chapter, for review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Board of Aldermen.
b. No street tree shall be planted closer than forty (40) feet from
any street corner measured from the point of intersecting
property lines. No tree shall be planted closer than ten (10)
feet to any fire hydrant. Trees planted on any public property
shall be selected from the City's designated list of acceptable
street trees. A list of acceptable street trees shall be
maintained on file with the Community Development
Department.
c. The City may plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants
and shrubs within any City rights-of-way or public ground as
may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street tree, park
tree or other tree on public property. As used in this paragraph,
"top" means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to
such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and to disfigure
the tree.
e. Property owners of trees severely damaged by storms, natural
causes, human accidents or trees impairing the use of utility
wires or presenting an unusual obstruction where other
Section
445.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
445.020
AO:301
pruning practices are impractical shall notify the Public Works
Department for permission to properly trim or remove the tree.
f. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
in the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall
not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view
of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear
space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or
sidewalk. Such owner shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The City may prune any tree
or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper
spread of light along the street from a street light or with the
visibility of any traffic control device or sign to a height of
twelve (12) feet above edge of pavement.
2. General community tree conservation.
a. Projects requiring site plan review shall demonstrate that the
design has been accomplished to preserve the existing natural
landscape character of the site to the extent that it is
reasonably feasible. A conservation plan which includes
specific dimensions and/or quantities of landscaping materials
to be added or removed, plant species impacted or to be used
and construction protection methods for trees will be required
for preserving an existing tree or planting a replacement
tree(s) as a condition of site plan approval.
b. If required, the conservation plan should clearly set forth all
trees over six (6) inches in diameter at a height of twelve (12)
inches above average grade with an indication of which trees
will be removed and which trees will be retained. All trees
removed which are six (6) inches in diameter (caliper) or
greater shall be replaced with equal caliper inches of similar
type trees. Planting plans shall provide calculations to
demonstrate that the caliper inch replacement is in accordance
with conservation plan. All utility installations, stormwater
retention/detention areas or ponds shall be undertaken with a
minimum amount of tree removal. Specimen trees, those of
predominant stature and species and those important to
wildlife are to be retained to the maximum extent possible.
c. Erosion control plans are required for utilizing the existing
trees and vegetation to the maximum extent possible to reduce
runoff, control flooding or stabilize the soil.
d. The grade of land within the dripline of a tree designated to
remain shall not be raised or lowered more than six (6) inches
unless a well or retaining wall is used.
Section
445.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
445.020
AO:302
e. A written statement of reasons for clearing the trees on an
undeveloped site must be presented to the City for review and
approval.
f. No trees shall be removed within twenty-five (25) feet of the
riparian (stream bank) corridor without written permission
from the City.
g. Tree protection during construction. During any construction
operations on the property, the contractor or builder will erect
suitable protective barriers around all trees to be preserved.
The builder or contractor will make sure that the trunks,
branches and root structures are not damaged by construction
equipment.
3. Residential development.
a. In reviewing any proposed subdivision plan, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall strictly adhere to a policy of
requiring the preservation of the maximum number of existing
trees or planting of new tree stock as the replacement for
removing the existing trees in common grounds.
b. The owner or developer of a proposed subdivision shall submit
a plan, along with the preliminary plat, depicting the limit of
grading or clearance and including a notation that all trees
beyond the limit of grading shall remain.
c. No trees shall be removed or grading begun until the
preliminary plat has been approved.
d. The subdivider of any residential subdivision shall plant trees
on all streets between the sidewalk and the street curb, unless
a specific variance is requested with application and approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. There shall be at
least two (2) trees planted in front of each lot with one hundred
(100) feet or less of frontage. Where the lot is located at the
intersection of two (2) or more lots, the "frontage" means all
sides which face each street. If the frontage is more than one
hundred (100) feet, a tree shall be planted every forty (40) feet.
The size and type of tree shall be identified on the plan and
submitted to the City for approval; a minimum two (2) inch
caliper tree is required. (Refer to Subsection (2)(b) of this
Section for additional requirements.)
e. Any individual developing a detached single-family lot shall
meet all of the above requirements for tree planting.
f. For any attached single-family development or within any
multiple-family residential development a tree shall be planted
every forty (40) feet along all streets. In addition, one (1) shade
tree shall be planted per sixteen hundred (1,600) square feet of
Section
445.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
445.020
AO:303
gross floor area of each building. The City may require
evergreen trees as a buffer between the multiple-family and
single-family residential districts.
4. Commercial/industrial development. Commercial and industrial
development are commonly characterized by larger building
exposure to public thoroughfares, more extensive site coverage,
sizeable parking areas and frequent provision of major parking
areas in front of the building parallel to the street. Accordingly,
additional landscaping issues must be considered. Thus, to help
assure implementation of the objectives of this Section, the
following standards will also be applicable to any new building or
additions to any existing building in any commercial or industrial
zoning district or any institutional building in any other zoning
district.
a. Preservation of existing trees. A premium will be placed on the
preservation of the natural tree cover or other special
landscape characteristic. An effort should be made to maintain
any natural on-site amenity which contributes to distinguishing
the site as an attractive setting for business. Site development
plans should attempt to take full advantage of present natural
vegetation.
b. Setbacks from preserved wooded areas. Building lines and the
edges of roads and parking or service areas will be set back at
least thirty (30) feet from the drip line (branch) edge of the
windrows or forested areas to be preserved.
c. Use of preserved wooded or natural areas. The use of the
wooded or natural areas for walking paths, picnic areas and
bench placement will be encouraged. The layout of paths will
be clearly defined by gravel or asphalt paving or by defined
edges of stone, timber or plantings. Areas for picnic tables and
benches will be distributed so as to prevent the concentration
of use in any single part of the wooded area. The intent of these
requirements is to avoid compaction of ground surfaces at the
bases of trees and to preserve the natural undergrowth.
d. New planting. All ground with the exception of walks, drives,
parking facilities and service areas will be landscaped in a
manner that is complementary to the approved architecture.
This Subsection provides that the required screening forms an
attractive transition to the natural landscape features of the
site. Lawn will be created in the area between the street curb
and the first "solid" edge developed at the street frontage
(whether it is a building, planting screen or wall). The intent is
to establish a consistent and well-maintained street edge
throughout the property. Proposed departures from this
guideline will be evaluated by the City on the basis of their
effect on the desired visual consequence.
Section
445.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
445.020
AO:304
e. Requirements of site landscaping. The owner or occupant must
install landscaping for any new building or area effected by any
addition to an existing building subject to these regulations in
accord with the following:
(1) Each building site shall be landscaped to a minimum depth
of thirty (30) feet inside the property boundary line along
the street, except as otherwise provided in that zoning
district. The remainder of any required front setback may
be used for automobile parking (not including commercial
service vehicles) or the same or different type of landscape
treatment.
(2) Landscaping shall be required on each building site in side
setback areas that are not otherwise used for automobile
parking. Landscaping will be provided in conformance
with those regulations of the appropriate zoning district.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no formal
landscaping shall be required in the rear setback areas
that are unpaved except that a dust-free surface shall be
maintained. In the event that the rear property line is
contiguous with a property line of any "R", "PG" or "PR"
zoning district, a landscaped area of not less than twentyfive
(25) feet in width shall be maintained adjacent to said
property line. Such landscaped area shall contain an
approved variety of trees and shrubs not less than seven
(7) feet in height unless a greater height is required by the
zoning district.
(4) Further subject to the provisions of this Section, if any
parking lot includes more than twenty (20) parking spaces,
there shall be a requirement for interior landscaping. This
type of landscaping is intended to minimize and reduce the
apparent size of parking areas. In addition to the general
landscaped areas required by this or any other Section, a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the total square footage of
parking area shall be landscaped.
(5) Each separate interior landscaped area with an area of one
hundred (100) square feet or more shall include at least
two (2) deciduous shade trees. Also, no tree planting area
shall be less than six (6) feet in any dimension.
(6) All commercial properties adjoining property in a noncommercial
district shall provide along any such common
property lot line a continuous berm with a minimum height
of four (4) feet or planting of evergreen trees or shrubs
approved by the Director to prevent the direct light from
automobile headlights from being cast on adjacent
residential units.
Section
445.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
445.020
AO:305
5. Parking lot landscaping. In all zoning districts parking lots shall
provide landscaping in accord with the following:
a. Parking lot landscape islands shall be provided in all parking
lots with twenty (20) or more parking spaces. Such islands
shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet in length by ten (10)
feet in width. One (1) such island shall be installed and
maintained for each twenty (20) vehicular parking spaces
provided on the site and at the terminus of each row of parking
stalls adjoining an access drive. With the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, landscaped areas may be
substituted in lieu of landscaped islands that equal ten percent
(10%) of the total parking area (less driveway and aisles) in
parking areas only. This shall be in addition to any other
required setbacks or landscape requirements.
b. Where off-street parking on the building site is located
between the building and the street, the parking area shall be
partially screened from the street by the construction and
landscaping of a berm a minimum of three (3) feet in height in
the required setback space. The height and treatment of the
berm shall be shown on the required landscape plan and must
be approved by the City.
6. Lawns. In all zoning districts required landscaped and green areas
adjacent to streets and the front sixty (60) feet of all side setbacks
shall be considered as lawn. Aside from required trees, shrub and
other support landscaping, all such lawn areas shall be established
by sodding with a high quality sod blend and not by seeding. In
addition, in all non-residential districts landscaping adjacent to
each building entrance shall be a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
lawn interspersed with plantings.
7. Rights-of-way. Any unpaved areas lying within adjacent street
rights-of-way shall be landscaped and maintained to the finished
curb line of the street by the owner or occupant of the adjacent
property. Replacement and/or maintenance of this landscaping will
be required after any manmade or natural disturbance of the rightof-
way.
8. Vacant lots or open spaces. Any vacant lot or open spaces not being
used for any purpose within the City of Fenton shall be seeded or
sodded. All such areas with a general slope in excess of ten percent
(10%) shall be sodded unless approved by the Director.
9. Plant size/quality schedule.
Section
445.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
445.020
AO:306
Section 445.030. Yards. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No.
3631 § 2, 10-27-2016]
PLANT SCHEDULE
Type Minimum Size Location/Spacing
Shade tree 3 inches diameter Entrance roads
property frontage (25
feet centers)
Flowering tree 6 feet height Lawn
Evergreen tree 6 feet height Screening (10 feet
center)
Deciduous shrubs 3 feet height Buildings/lawn (3 feet
center)
Evergreen shrubs 3 feet height Buildings/lawn (3 feet
center)
Broadleaf
evergreens
3 feet height Lawn (4 feet center)
Ground cover 2 inch pots Buildings/signs (6
inches center)
10. Maintenance guarantee. The owner of the property or his
representative shall file a written statement with the City
guaranteeing the maintenance or replacement of any dead trees or
bushes for a period of one (1) year from the release of all escrows
pertaining to site development.
11. Violations. In the event that the landscaping is not completed in
accordance with the submitted plan within one (1) year of the
completion of the construction or occupancy of the building on the
premises, the City's Code Enforcement Officer, on behalf of the
City, shall notify the owner, occupant or lessee of such failure to
complete the landscaping in accordance with the submitted plan
and this Section. This notice shall provide a statement of the
deficiencies and the deadline for the correction of such deficiencies
not more than thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. The
notice shall also provide the date, time and place of the hearing at
which the Board of Aldermen will consider whether or not to direct
the City Public Works Department to landscape the premises in
accordance with the submitted plan with the cost chargeable
against the cash or escrow deposit held for such landscaping.
A. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed
unless otherwise provided within this Title IV or in the following
circumstances:
Section
445.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
445.030
AO:307
Section 445.040. (Reserved)54
Chapter 447
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Section 447.010. Site Plan Review And Requirements. [Ord. No.
3567 § 1, 1-28-2016]
1. The ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt course, cornices,
and ornamental features may project into the required yard not
more than twelve (12) inches.
2. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairway
and balconies opening upon fire towers may project into a required
yard not more than five (5) feet.
3. Roof overhangs may project into a required yard not more than
eighteen (18) inches provided that the overhang is at least five (5)
feet from any property line.
4. The ordinary projections of chimneys and flues not exceeding
seventy-two (72) inches in width may project into the required yard
not more than twenty-four (24) inches.
5. Uncovered or covered, unenclosed porches may project into the
required front yard not more than ten (10) feet.
6. Uncovered, unenclosed decks and porches that are two hundred
(200) square feet or less in size may project into the required rear
yard provided that the deck or porch is setback from all lot lines a
minimum distance equal to that of the required side setback of the
applicable Zoning District.
7. Cantilevered interior spaces, such as bay windows, may project
into the required rear or front yard not more than two (2) feet plus
a one (1) foot roof overhang provided that the cantilevered space is
not more than ninety-six (96) inches in width. Cantilevered interior
spaces shall not project into the required side yard.
8. Accessory Buildings, Structures and Accessory Uses. See Chapter
460.
A. Purpose. This Chapter sets forth site plan requirements, process and
review standards for all new building construction, building additions
or building alterations for certain uses within all zoning districts in the
City of Fenton. Except as provided in Subsection (B) below, all
applications for new construction, building additions or building
alterations shall include a site plan to be filed with the City to be
54.Editor’s Note: Former Section 445.040, Other Exceptions and Rules, which derived from
Ord. No. 3001 § 1, 12-23-2008, was repealed 10-27-2016 by § 2 of Ord. No. 3631.
Section
445.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
447.010
AO:308
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review and
recommendations and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
B. Exceptions. Unless otherwise provided for within this Title, this
Chapter does not apply to the following:
1. Single-family or two-family residential buildings and associated
residential accessory buildings, structures or uses.
2. Exterior building remodels, including, but not limited to, new or
replacement roofs, windows, exterior building materials (facade),
doors and dock doors, when the building height and/or gross floor
area of the building is not altered.
3. Signage (See Section 485.100).
4. New and replacement decks, canopies, awnings, patios, porches,
sidewalks, stairs and dock ramps.
5. Fencing not required under a special use permit for outdoor
storage.
6. Driveway or parking lot resurfacing, replacement or expansions.
7. Retaining walls under eight (8) feet in height.
8. Interior remodels and finishes.
9. Accessory buildings, structures or uses under two hundred (200)
square feet and associated with a non-residential use.
This exception to site plan review set forth above does not
exempt those activities from other applicable requirements of this
Code nor from obtaining all necessary permits.
C. Off-Site Considerations. The site plan must be reviewed to understand
how it will affect the surrounding development area, its spin-off
development, traffic congestion, adjacent parcels, pavements and lot
size.
D. On-Site Considerations. The site plan must be reviewed to understand
land constraints and development factors, including the effect of the
site's natural features such as wetlands, soils, slope, drainage,
vegetation, etc.
E. Application Submission Requirements For Site Plan Review. An
application for site plan review shall be submitted on forms provided by
the City, along with the application fee in accordance with Addendum A.
Said application may be filed by any person submitting proof of a
financial, contractual or proprietary interest in the property to be
developed according to the submitted plan and shall contain the
following information:
1. Signature of applicant (with name and address).
Section
447.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
447.010
AO:309
Chapter 448
OUTDOOR DINING
Section 448.010. Requirements And Standards For Outdoor Dining.
[Ord. No. 3854, 9-27-2018]
2. Name of project and phase.
3. Zoning district in which the project is located.
4. Zoning districts adjoining project area.
5. Density compatible with district guidelines.
6. North directional device on plan map.
7. Location of site in relation to surrounding buildings, uses.
8. Location, size and use of each building on the site with building
lines showing side setback, rear setback and other setbacks.
9. Height, number of stories and form of the proposed buildings.
10. Dimensions of the lot.
11. Ratio of floor area to the site area (FAR)/percent lot coverage.
12. Location of all existing trees over six-inch caliper.
13. Landscape materials to be placed on site.
14. Location, general design and width of driveways, curb cuts and
sidewalks.
15. Existing and proposed site grades at a minimum of two (2) feet
contour intervals. If a site has less than five (5) feet of elevation
change, one (1) foot contours shall be required; contour lines shall
extend fifty (50) feet off site.
16. An erosion and stormwater runoff control plan.
17. Location, area and number of parking spaces that are required
within this Chapter.
18. Existing and proposed on-site utilities including stormwater
collection and detention, gas, electricity, cable service and
telephone lines or substations.
19. Location of signs with sign dimensions.
A. It is the purpose of this Section to provide reasonable minimum
standards for the permitted accessory use of Outdoor Dining, as defined
under Section 400.030 of this Code, to control and limit any adverse
Section
447.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
448.010
AO:310
impact on pedestrian traffic and other uses on the premises and
adjoining properties. Outdoor Dining may be permitted by Special Use
Permit under the provisions of Section 420.020.
B. Standards, Criteria, And Conditions. In addition to any conditions
established by the City under the Special Use Permit, the following
standards, criteria, and conditions shall apply to the establishment and
operation of Outdoor Dining:
1. Outdoor Dining areas must be located on the same premises and
adjacent to the establishment in which it is related, such as on a
sidewalk or patio area.
2. Outdoor Dining areas must be located within the required building
setback of the lot in which it is located, or as otherwise provided in
Section 445.030. Additionally, Outdoor Dining areas shall not be
located within five (5) feet of any lot line.
3. Outdoor Dining areas shall allow a free flow of pedestrian access
and shall not have a negative impact on traffic flow or any adjacent
parking areas or establishments.
4. All tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other permissible objects
provided shall be maintained with a clean appearance and shall be
in good repair.
5. Outdoor Dining areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
appearance, clear of litter and debris, and provisions shall be made
for adequate trash control on-site.
6. No tables, chairs, or any other parts of the Outdoor Dining area
shall be attached, chained, or in any manner affixed to any tree,
post, sign, or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk in or near the
permitted area.
7. Outdoor Dining seating shall be included when determining the
parking requirements for the related establishment.
8. The storage of dishes, silverware, or other Outdoor Dining
equipment, other than tables and chairs, shall only be allowed
during hours of operation.
9. Times of operation, including hours and days of operation and/or
seasonal operations, shall be determined by the City in conjunction
with the Special Use Permit.
10. The Commission and Board of Aldermen may require bollards,
fencing and/or landscaping around the Outdoor Dining when it is
deemed necessary to provide a buffer for adjacent uses and/or
safety and welfare of the Outdoor Dining patrons.
11. No live entertainment, speakers, televisions, or other audio
admitting devices shall be permitted in the Outdoor Dining area
Section
448.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
448.010
AO:311
Chapter 450
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICES
Section 450.010. Requirements And Standards For Drive-Through
Services. [Ord. No. 3853, 9-27-201855]
unless otherwise approved by the City under the Special Use
Permit.
12. Lighting of the Outdoor Dining area shall not disturb any adjacent
establishment, property, or public right-of-way.
13. Should alcohol be served in the Outdoor Dining area, a liquor
license will be required pursuant to Chapter 600 of the Municipal
Code.
A. In addition to other applicable provisions in this Title, all Drive-Through
Services shall be governed by the provisions in this Chapter.
1. Site Plan Review.
a. Site Plan Review shall be required for all Drive-Through
Services in conjunction with a permitted use or use allowed by
Special Use Permit in a non-residential District.
b. Site Plan Review shall not be required for free standing ATM
Facilities. In applicable Districts, free standing ATM Facilities
shall be permitted under the provisions of Section 420.020.
c. Site Plan Review applications for Drive-Through Services shall
comply with all requirements and procedures set forth in this
Chapter 450. In addition, the Director may require the
petitioner to submit, at petitioner's cost, a sealed traffic study,
acceptable to the City, with the Site Plan Review application
when the layout of the property or proposed Drive-Through
Services or the existing traffic on the property is deemed to
potentially have an adverse impact on traffic or parking
conditions on the property or adjacent public and private
streets and access ways. The traffic study shall include the
following:
(1) Time required to serve a typical customer;
(2) Arrival rate of customers, including peak hours of demand;
and
(3) Opinion as to likely impact Drive-Through Services will
have on parking and traffic circulation congestion, both
55.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 450, Drive-Through Facilities, containing Section 450.010
was repealed by Ord. No. 3853.
Section
448.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
450.010
AO:312
on-site and on adjacent public and private streets and
access ways.
d. Any Lot that changes its Principal Use must submit, and
receive approval of, a new Site Plan Review prior to operating
new Drive-Through Services.
2. Design Standards. All Drive-Through Services shall adhere to the
following site design standards:
a. Each queuing lane shall be designed to prevent parking and
traffic circulation congestion, both on-site and on adjacent
public and private streets and access ways.
b. Queuing lanes shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet,
unless otherwise waived by the Commission or Board based on
the findings of a traffic study.
c. Queuing lanes that obstruct the pathway between the off-street
parking areas and entries into the building shall be designed
with a pedestrian crossing that is delineated by raised or
delineated pavement and signage.
d. No Drive-Through Services shall be located across the street
from or adjacent to a Lot used for residential purposes, unless
the intervening street is an arterial roadway.
e. The Commission or Board may require additional landscaping
and/or fencing be provided for Drive-Through Services when it
is deemed necessary to provide a visual buffer for adjacent
uses.
3. Queuing Space Requirements.
a. Each queuing space shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22)
feet, unless otherwise waived by the Commission or Board
based on the findings of a traffic study.
b. Queuing spaces for Drive-Through Services shall be provided
as follows:
Section
450.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
450.010
AO:313
Chapter 455
MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Land Use Queuing Spaces*
Financial Institutions 4 queuing spaces per service
window or automated teller
unit
Restaurants, with pick-up
window and separate order
board and/or pay window
5 queuing spaces, plus 3
queuing spaces from order
board to pay window (if
provided) plus 2 queuing
spaces to pick-up window. If
no separate pay window is
provided, a total of 10
queuing spaces shall be
provided.
Restaurants, with pick-up
window only
5 queuing spaces
General Retail Use and
Personal and Business
Service Shops
3 queuing spaces per service
window
ATM facilities 3 queuing spaces
Other Uses If the Land Use is not
provided above, the City shall
determine the required
queuing spaces based on the
traffic report submitted with
the Site Plan Review
application and/or analysis of
an existing comparable
facility within or in near
proximity of the City.
Exceptions The City may reduce or
increase required queuing
spaces for a Land Use
provided above based on the
traffic study submitted with
the Site Plan Review
application and/or analysis of
an existing comparable
facility within or in near
proximity of the City.
Section
450.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
455.010
AO:314
Section 455.010. State License Required. [Ord. No. 3917,
4-25-2019]
All Medical Marijuana Businesses must have the appropriate license and
any other required authorization to operate the Medical Marijuana Business
from the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to operate in
the City. Applicant may seek zoning approval upon showing of a submitted
application for a State license, but no final approval shall be given until
such State issued license has been obtained and satisfactory proof of such
licensure has been provided to the City. Continued operation in the City
shall always require such licensure to remain valid.
Section 455.020. Spacing Requirement For Medical Marijuana
Businesses. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
Section 455.030. Standards For Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Facilities. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
A. No Medical Marijuana Business shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any then-existing Academic School, Day-Care Center, or
Church. For the purposes of this Chapter, "then-existing" shall mean
any Academic School, Day-Care Center, or Church, with a building
permit from the City to be constructed, or under construction, or
completed and in use at the time the Medical Marijuana Business
applies for zoning authorization.
B. No Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any other Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facility.
C. For purposes of this Chapter, the above spacing requirement shall be
measured as follows:
1. In the case of a freestanding facility, the distance between the
facility and the Academic School, Day-Care Center, or Church shall
be measured from the property line of the facility to the closest
point of the property line of the Academic School, Day-Care Center,
or Church.
2. In the case of a facility that is part of a larger structure, such as an
office building or strip mall, the distance between the facility and
the Academic School, Day-Care Center, or Church shall be
measured from the property line of the Academic School, Day-Care
Center, or Church to the facility's entrance or exit closest in
proximity to the Academic School, Day-Care Center, or Church.
3. Measurements shall be made along the shortest path between the
demarcation points that can be traveled by foot.
A. No building or area of land shall be constructed, altered, or used for a
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility without complying with the
following regulations and all general requirements of the "IP-1" District,
Section
455.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
455.030
AO:315
including obtaining a Special Use Permit in compliance with Chapter
420.
1. Outdoor Operations Or Storage. All operations and all storage of
materials, products, or equipment shall be within a fully secured
area inside the main building structure or outside of the main
structure in a separate, fully secured, and enclosed structure.
2. On-Site Usage Prohibited. No Marijuana may be smoked, ingested,
or otherwise consumed or Administered on the premises of any
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility.
3. Display Of Licenses Required. The Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Facility License issued by the State of Missouri and all licenses or
permits issued by the City shall be displayed as required by State
regulations.
4. Site Plan Review Required. Any plans for a Medical Marijuana
Cultivation Facility shall meet the standard construction
requirements of the "IP-1" Industrial Park District outlined in this
Title and approved subject to the standard procedures of Chapter
447 of the Code of the City.
5. Odor And Non-Residential District Regulations. Every Medical
Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall have and maintain an odor
control system at least as stringent as that which is required by
State regulations and shall at all times operate in compliance with
all provisions of Chapter 470, "Additional Non-Residential District
Regulations," and Chapter 215, "Nuisances."
6. Security. Every Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall have
and maintain security systems and procedures at least as stringent
as that which is required by State regulations.
7. Additional Requirements. All Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Facilities shall comply with all provisions of Article XIV, Section 1 of
the Missouri Constitution as well as any and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and Senior
Services for the State of Missouri regulating medical Marijuana
including but not limited to security requirements, lighting,
parking, and patient verification requirements.
8. A Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility may be: (1) a completely
indoor facility and growing operation; (2) a completely outdoor
facility and/or growing operation; or (3) a "greenhouse"/hybrid
method facility and growing operation so long as such operation
complies with all regulations of the "IP-1" district, all regulations of
this Title, all regulations of Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri
Constitution, and any rules or regulations of the Missouri
Department of Health and Senior Services relating to medical
Marijuana.
Section
455.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
455.040
AO:316
Section 455.040. Standards For Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
Section 455.050. Standards For Medical Marijuana-Infused
Products Manufacturing Facilities. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
A. No building or area of land shall be constructed, altered, or used for a
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility without complying with the
following regulations and all general requirements of the relevant
"C-1," "OT-2," or "HP-1" District, including obtaining a Special Use
Permit in compliance with Chapter 420.
1. Outdoor Operations Or Storage. No outdoor operations or storage
shall be allowed.
2. On-Site Usage Prohibited. No Marijuana may be smoked, ingested,
or otherwise consumed or Administered on the premises of any
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility.
3. Display Of Licenses Required. The Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facility License issued by the State of Missouri and any and all
licenses or permits issued by the City shall be displayed as required
by State regulations.
4. Site Plan Review Required. Any plans for a Medical Marijuana
Dispensary Facility shall meet the standard construction
requirements of the relevant "C-1," "OT-2," or "HP-1" District
outlined in this Title and approved subject to the standard
procedures of Chapter 447 of the Code of the City.
5. Drive-Through. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facilities must
follow all requirements found in Chapter 450 of the Code of the City
should they wish to utilize a drive-through.
6. Odor And Non-Residential District Regulations. Every Medical
Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall at all times operate in
compliance with all provisions of Chapter 470, "Additional Non-
Residential District Regulations," and Chapter 215, "Nuisances."
7. Security. Every Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall have
and maintain security systems and procedures at least as stringent
as that which is required by State regulations.
8. Additional Requirements. All Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities shall comply with all provisions of Article XIV, Section 1 of
the Missouri Constitution as well as any and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and Senior
Services for the State of Missouri regulating medical Marijuana
including but not limited to security requirements, lighting,
parking, and patient verification requirements.
Section
455.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
455.050
AO:317
Section 455.060. Standards For Medical Marijuana Testing
Facilities. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
A. No building or area of land shall be constructed, altered, or used for a
Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing Facility without
complying with the following regulations and all general requirements
of the "IP-1" District, including obtaining a Special Use Permit in
compliance with Chapter 420.
1. Outdoor Operations Or Storage. All operations and all storage of
materials, products, or equipment shall be within a fully secured
area inside the main building structure or outside of the main
structure in a separate, fully secured, and enclosed structure.
2. On-Site Usage Prohibited. No Marijuana may be smoked, ingested,
or otherwise consumed or Administered on the premises of any
Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing Facility.
3. Display Of Licenses Required. The Medical Marijuana-Infused
Products Manufacturing Facility License issued by the State of
Missouri and all licenses or permits issued by the City shall be
displayed as required by State regulations.
4. Site Plan Review Required. Any plans for a Medical Marijuana-
Infused Products Manufacturing Facility shall meet the standard
construction requirements of the "IP-1" Industrial Park District
outlined in this Title and approved subject to the standard
procedures of Chapter 447 of the Code of the City.
5. Odor And Non-Residential District Regulations. Every Medical
Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing Facility shall have and
maintain an odor control system at least as stringent as that which
is required by State regulations and shall at all times operate in
compliance with all provisions of Chapter 470, "Additional Non-
Residential District Regulations," and Chapter 215, "Nuisances."
6. Security. Every Medical Marijuana-Infused Products
Manufacturing Facility shall have and maintain security systems
and procedures at least as stringent as that which is required by
State regulations.
7. Additional Requirements. All Medical Marijuana-Infused Products
Manufacturing Facilities shall comply with all provisions of Article
XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution as well as any and all
rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Health
and Senior Services for the State of Missouri regulating medical
Marijuana including but not limited to security requirements,
lighting, parking, and patient verification requirements.
A. No building or area of land shall be constructed, altered, or used for a
Medical Marijuana Testing Facility without complying with the
following regulations and all general requirements of the "IP-1" District,
Section
455.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
455.060
AO:318
Section 455.070. Standards For Medical Marijuana Transportation
Facilities. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
including obtaining a Special Use Permit in compliance with Chapter
420.
1. Outdoor Operations Or Storage. No outdoor operations or storage
shall be allowed.
2. No Marijuana may be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed or
Administered on the premises of any Medical Marijuana Testing
Facility except for testing purposes utilizing methods and
standards certified by the Department of Health and Senior
Services for the State of Missouri or other appropriate agency.
3. Display Of Licenses Required. The Medical Marijuana Testing
Facility License/Certification issued by the State of Missouri and all
licenses or permits issued by the City shall be displayed as required
by State regulations.
4. Site Plan Review Required. Any plans for a Medical Marijuana
Testing Facility shall meet the standard construction requirements
of the "IP-1" Industrial Park District outlined in this Title and
approved subject to the standard procedures of Chapter 447 of the
Code of the City.
5. Odor And Non-Residential District Regulations. Every Medical
Marijuana Testing Facility shall at all times operate in compliance
with all provisions of Chapter 470, "Additional Non-Residential
District Regulations," and Chapter 215, "Nuisances."
6. Security. Every Medical Marijuana Testing Facility shall have and
maintain security systems and procedures at least as stringent as
that which is required by State regulations.
7. Accreditation, Standards, And Procedures. Every Medical
Marijuana Testing Facility shall at all times maintain in good
standing their accreditation as required by State regulations and
utilize standards and procedures for personnel and for the testing
of medical marijuana in all forms which are at least as stringent as
those which are required by State regulations.
8. Additional Requirements. All Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities
shall comply with all provisions of Article XIV, Section 1 of the
Missouri Constitution as well as any and all rules and regulations
promulgated by the Department of Health and Senior Services for
the State of Missouri regulating medical Marijuana and the testing
and safety requirements thereof including but not limited to
security requirements, lighting, parking, and patient verification
requirements.
Section
455.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
455.070
AO:319
Chapter 456
REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 456.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
A. No building or area of land shall be constructed, altered, or used for a
Medical Marijuana Transportation Facility without complying with the
following regulations and all general requirements of the "IP-1" District,
including obtaining a Special Use Permit in compliance with Chapter
420.
1. Outdoor Operations Or Storage. No outdoor operations or storage
shall be allowed unless otherwise authorized by State regulations.
2. No Marijuana may be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed or
Administered on the premises of any Medical Marijuana
Transportation Facility.
3. Display Of Licenses Required. The Medical Marijuana
Transportation Facility License/Certification issued by the State of
Missouri and all licenses or permits issued by the City shall be
displayed as required by State regulations.
4. Site Plan Review Required. Any plans for a Medical Marijuana
Transportation Facility shall meet the standard construction
requirements of the "IP-1" Industrial Park District outlined in this
Title and approved subject to the standard procedures of Chapter
447 of the Code of the City.
5. Odor And Non-Residential District Regulations. Every Medical
Marijuana Transportation Facility shall at all times operate in
compliance with all provisions of Chapter 470, "Additional Non-
Residential District Regulations," and Chapter 215, "Nuisances."
6. Security. Every Medical Marijuana Transportation Facility shall
have and maintain security systems and procedures at least as
stringent as that which is required by State regulations.
7. Additional Requirements. All Medical Marijuana Transportation
Facilities shall comply with all provisions of Article XIV, Section 1 of
the Missouri Constitution as well as any and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and Senior
Services for the State of Missouri regulating medical Marijuana
including but not limited to security requirements, lighting,
parking, and record retention and maintenance requirements.
Section
455.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
456.010
AO:320
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE; ADULT NOVELTY STORE; ADULT VIDEO STORE — A
commercial establishment that has as a substantial or significant portion of
its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one
(1) or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment
that regularly features live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities or
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or disks, slides or other photographic
reproductions in which a substantial or significant portion of the total
presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized
by specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or disks, slides or other visual
representations that are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
1.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed or marketed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one (1)
of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental
for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. It shall be presumed that a commercial establishment
falls within this definition when the establishment holds itself out or
advertises itself as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store or where more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the retail value
of merchandise offered for sale consists of the materials described
herein or where more than ten percent (10%) of its display space is
used for the materials described herein.
2.
Section
456.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
456.010
AO:321
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or disks,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a
substantial or significant portion of the total presentation time is devoted to
the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment in which a substantial or significant portion of the
presentation time is devoted to the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or to specified sexual activities.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:
MASSAGE PARLOR — A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, massage, alcohol, rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic
treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or disks, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
1.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours; or
2.
Allows a tenant or occupant of the sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel.
3.
The opening or commencement of a sexually-oriented business as a new
business;
1.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexuallyoriented
business, to any sexually-oriented business;
2.
The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing
sexually-oriented business; or
3.
4. The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
Section
456.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
456.010
AO:322
administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by
a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or
similar professional person licensed by the State. This definition does not
include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon,
spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the
human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment
other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations which, for any form of consideration, provides a place
where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in
connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where
a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional
person licensed by the State engages in sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, massage parlor or
sexual encounter establishment.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE — Instruments, devices, gifts or
paraphernalia that are designed or marketed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or clothing that graphically depicts or exposes
specified anatomical areas or books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or disks,
slides or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
Bare human male or female genitals, buttocks, anus or pubic area with
less than opaque clothing covering.
1.
The female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola,
or a simulation thereof, at its highest point with less than fully opaque
clothing covering. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing or swim suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part; or
2.
3. The covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
1.
Section
456.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
456.010
AO:323
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS —
An increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twentyfive
percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on the date this Chapter took
effect (December 16, 2002).
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Any of the following:
Section 456.020. Location of Sexually-Oriented Businesses. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
2.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (1) through (2) above.
3.
1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
2.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
3.
A. A person may operate or cause to be operated a sexually-oriented
business in accordance with the following regulations:
1. A sexually-oriented business may only be operated in "IP-1", "BP-1",
"BP-2" and "HP-1" zoning districts as those districts are defined in
the Municipal Code and the Zone District Map of the City of Fenton.
2. A sexually-oriented business shall not be operated within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the following:
a. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used for religious worship and related religious activities;
b. A public library or a public or private educational facility
including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery
schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities; school includes the school grounds;
c. A boundary of a residential zoning district as defined in the
Municipal Code of the City of Fenton and its Zone District Map;
d. A public park or recreational area which has been designated
for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to,
a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir,
Section
456.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
456.020
AO:324
athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle
paths, wilderness areas or other similar public land within the
City of Fenton;
e. The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use;
f. An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment; or
g. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the State.
For purposes of this provision, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used as the part
of the premises where a sexually-oriented business is
conducted to the nearest property line of the premises
of one (1) of the above-listed uses. Presence of a City,
Municipal Code of the City of Fenton or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of
calculating and applying the distance requirements of
this provision.
3. A sexually-oriented business shall not be operated, established,
substantially enlarged or undergo transfer of ownership or control
within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually- oriented
business. For purposes of this provision, the distance between any
two (2) sexually- oriented businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
4. A person shall not cause or permit the operation, establishment or
maintenance of more than one (1) sexually-oriented business in the
same building, structure or portion thereof or the increase of floor
area of any sexually-oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another sexually-oriented business.
5. Any sexually-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective
date of this Chapter (December 16, 2002) that is in violation of this
Chapter shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The nonconforming
use will be permitted to continue for a period not to
exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
Such non-conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually-oriented businesses are
within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually-oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
Section
456.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
456.020
AO:325
Section 456.030. Hours of Operation. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open
at any time between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M.
Section 456.040. Exterior Portions of Sexually-Oriented Businesses.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 456.050. Signage. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
conforming use and the later-established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
A. Sexually-oriented merchandise or activities of the sexually-oriented
business shall not be visible from any point outside such business.
B. The exterior portions of a sexually-oriented business shall not have
flashing light or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations of any manner except to the
extent permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.
C. The exterior portions of a sexually-oriented business shall be painted a
single achromatic color; however, this provision shall not apply to the
business if the following conditions are met:
1. The business is part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business,
are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a
way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or
pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the painting of an
otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an enterprise.
A. Any person operating a sexually-oriented business shall comply with
the signage requirements set forth in the Municipal Code of the City of
Fenton. However, the following requirements apply to signage for
sexually-oriented businesses and supersede any conflicting provisions
in the Municipal Code of the City of Fenton:
1. Only one (1) on-premises properly permitted sign is allowed to
advertise the sexually-oriented business.
2. Signs shall be a flat plane rectangular in shape and have no more
than two (2) display surfaces. Each display surface shall not exceed
seventy-five (75) square feet in area and shall not exceed ten (10)
feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
Section
456.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
456.050
AO:326
Section 456.060. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
3. No sign shall contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of any manner and may only contain the
following:
a. The name of the business; and/or
b. One (1) or more of the following phrases:
(1) Adult Arcade
(2) Adult Bookstore
(3) Adult Novelty Store
(4) Adult Video Store
(5) Adult Cabaret
(6) Adult Motel
(7) Adult Motion Picture Theater
(8) Adult Theater
(9) Escort Agency
(10) Massage Parlor
(11) Adult Encounter Establishment
c. Signs for adult movie theaters may contain the additional
phrase "Movie Titles Posted Inside Premises".
4. Each letter forming a word on a sign shall be of a solid color and
each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a
primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
A. Misdemeanor. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a municipal ordinance violation and shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day or
ninety (90) days imprisonment, or both. Each and every day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Persons Liable. The owner or general agent of any such land, building,
structure or premises where a violation of these provisions has been
committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any entire building
or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall
exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the
building or premises in which the violation has been committed or shall
exist, or the owner, general agent, architect, builder or contractor or
any other person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such
Section
456.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
456.060
AO:327
Section 456.070. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Enforcement of this Chapter shall be responsibility of the Community
Development Department. The office of the City Attorney shall be
responsible for prosecuting these cases or pursuing other legal remedies
for the violations of the Chapter.
Chapter 457
REGULATIONS FOR SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS USED AS A
GROUP HOME OR FOSTER HOME
Section 457.010. Single Family Dwellings Used as a Group Home or
Foster Home. [Ord. No. 3549 §4, 10-22-2015]
violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such
violation shall exist shall be guilty of a municipal ordinance violation
and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day or ninety (90) days imprisonment, or both. Each
and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. Inspection/Notice. The Director or his/her duly authorized
representative shall have the power to cause any land, building,
structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order
in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein in
violation of this Chapter. If the Director or his/her duly authorized
representative finds that the use of any building, structure or land or
the work on any building or structure violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter, the Director or his/her duly authorized representative
shall sign and issue a written order so stating. With respect to uses that
violate this Chapter, the written order shall direct that such use(s) be
stopped within ten (10) days. With respect to work on buildings or
structures that violate this Chapter, the written order shall direct that
such work be stopped immediately. The written order shall be served
upon the owner and (where appropriate) the tenant or lessee or
occupant of the building, structure or land that is the subject of the
violation, as well as on any person doing work on buildings or
structures in violation of this Chapter.
D. Actions To Abate. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to limit
the ability of the City of Fenton or other affected persons to pursue any
other remedies available, including a suit for injunction, in order to
enforce the provisions of this act or prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises.
A. Purpose. It is necessary and desirable to ensure suitable sites for group
homes and foster homes in residential areas, provided that, in
furtherance of the goal of deinstitutionalization, group homes and
foster homes are integrated fully into the community in which they seek
Section
456.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
457.010
AO:328
Chapter 460
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
Section 460.010. General Requirements For Accessory Buildings,
Structures And Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 3631 § 3, 10-27-201656]
to locate, seamlessly adhering to the character and aesthetics of the
neighborhood. Additionally, group homes should not be unduly
concentrated in neighborhoods so as to ensure that mentally or
physically disabled persons are afforded the opportunity to be fully
assimilated into the community.
B. Regulations.
1. Group homes. In order to promote deinstitutionalization and
dispersal of group homes, no group home may be located within
five hundred (500) feet of another group home, measured by the
straight line distance between the nearest points of the exterior
walls (exclusive of overhangs) of the buildings within which the
relevant facilities or uses are located; or
a. Adjoin any lot upon which another group home already exists,
or
b. Be separated from any lot upon which an existing group home
already exists only by a street or roadway.
To achieve the deinstitutionalization and dispersal goals
referenced herein, owners and operators of group homes must
register the facility with the Community Development
Department on forms provided for that purpose. Owners and
operators of group homes must also notify the Community
Development Department of any change of use, transfer or
termination of a group home use and revise the facility
registration as appropriate. No fees will be associated with
the registration.
2. Foster home and group homes. For any single family dwelling used
as a foster home or group home, the exterior appearance of the
home and real property shall be in keeping with the character of
the other single-family dwellings in the immediate neighborhood,
and shall comply with applicable Building Code occupancy limits,
signage regulations and other standards applicable to single-family
dwellings shall apply.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary,
any individual, group or entity may make a request for reasonable
accommodation from the provisions of this Section pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 245.070 of this Code.
Section
457.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
460.010
AO:329
A. For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "accessory use" shall also
include accessory buildings and structures. As set forth in the
definitions, to be considered an accessory use, a use, building or
structure must be incidental to, subordinate in size or purpose, and
customary in conjunction with the principal building, structure or
principal use and is located on the same lot as the principal building,
structure or principal use.
B. Permitted accessory uses, include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Detached private garages.
2. Detached carports.
3. Greenhouses (non-commercial).
4. Swimming pools (in-ground and above ground), including hot tubs
and elevated pool decks.
5. Tennis, basketball, volleyball, and other similar sport courts.
6. Storage structures.
7. Private stables located in the "R-1" Zoning District.
8. Accessory uses related to a permitted farm use located in the "R-1"
Zoning District.
9. Home occupations — See Section 460.030 below.
10. Qualifying Patient Medical Marijuana Cultivation — See Section
460.040, below. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
C. A permit is required for any accessory building or structure, except
accessory uses that are:
1. Unattached to the ground and less than one hundred twenty (120)
square feet in size; or
2. A home occupation.
3. Qualifying Patient Medical Marijuana Cultivation as authorized by
Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri Constitution. [Ord. No.
3917, 4-25-2019]
Exemptions from the permit requirement shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any accessory use to be constructed and
maintained in violation of this Chapter, the Zoning Code or any
other laws or ordinances of the City.
56.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 460, Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses, containing
Sections 460.010 — 460.020, which derived from Ord. No. 3268 § 1, 6-28-2012, was
repealed 10-27-2016 by § 3 of Ord. No. 3631.
Section
460.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
460.010
AO:330
D. All accessory uses shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter as
necessary to ensure the public's safety and general welfare.
E. All accessory uses shall be adequately attached to the ground and shall
be erected in a secure and wind-resistant manner.
F. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be used for dwelling
purposes.
G. Storage structures may be erected upon a lot in a Residential District
prior to the construction of the principal structure provided that said
storage structure does not encroach the required front setback of the
Zoning District and has a minimum setback of five (5) feet from all other
lot lines.
H. The height or size of an accessory use shall not exceed the height or
size of the principal building; except in the "R-1" District where the
principal use of the property is residential, the height of the accessory
use may exceed the height of the principal building but shall not be
permitted to exceed twenty (20) feet in height. [Ord. No. 3824,
7-26-2018; Ord. No. 3840, 8-23-2018]
I. No more than one (1) storage structure shall be permitted on any lot in
the Residential Zone Districts. [Ord. No. 3840, 8-23-2018]
J. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (H) above, detached private
garages and detached carports associated with a residential use shall
not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, or the height of the principal
building, whichever is less. [Ord. No. 3824, 7-26-2018; Ord. No.
3840, 8-23-2018]
K. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (H) above, storage
structures associated with a residential use shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet in height. [Ord. No. 3824, 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 3840,
8-23-2018]
L. No accessory use, except detached private garages, detached carports,
sport courts and swimming pools, shall be larger than ten percent
(10%) of the rear yard of the lot. In no event shall the total square
footage of all accessory uses on a lot exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
total rear yard area.
M. Except as otherwise provided within this Title IV or in the following
circumstances, accessory uses may only be located within the principal
building or within the rear yard of any lot and have a minimum setback
at least five (5) feet from any adjacent lot line.
1. Temporary roadside stands offering for sale farm products
produced on a lot within a Residential District may be located
within the front yard.
Section
460.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
460.010
AO:331
Section 460.020. Additional Requirements For Non-Residential Use
And Multiple-Family Dwelling Accessory Structures, Buildings And
Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 3631 § 3, 10-27-2016; Ord. No. 3824,
7-26-2018]
Section 460.030. Additional Requirements For Home Occupations.
[Ord. No. 3631 § 3, 10-27-2016]
2. Temporary lemonade stands or similar temporary stands operated
by minors on a lot within a Residential District may be located
within the front yard.
3. Retaining walls may be located in any yard of the lot in which it is
constructed.
4. Outdoor Displays, Sales and Storage — See Chapter 461. [Ord.
No. 3851, 8-23-2018]
N. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the regulations of this Chapter, the
following are regulated elsewhere in this Title IV.
1. Fencing — see Chapter 462.
2. Driveways — see Chapter 495.
3. Off-Street Parking and Loading — see Chapter 496.
4. Outdoor Displays, Sales and Storage of Merchandise — See
Chapter 461.
5. Signs — see Chapter 485.
6. Solar Energy Systems — See Chapter 464.
7. Outdoor Dining — See Chapter 448. [Ord. No. 3854,
9-27-201857]
8. Other accessory uses not specifically regulated shall comply with
the use regulations requirements of the applicable Zoning District
in which they are located.
A. Accessory buildings or structures that are two hundred (200) square
feet or more in size shall require Site Plan Review (See Chapter 447).
B. Enclosed accessory buildings that are two hundred (200) square feet or
more in size shall have exterior building materials that are compatible
with the with the principal building to which it is related.
A. Home occupations are allowed as an accessory use, provided that the
home occupation meets the definition provided in Section 400.030(B) of
this Code and that:
57.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 3854 also renumbered former Subsection (N)(7), which
immediately follows, to be Subsection (N)(8).
Section
460.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
460.030
AO:332
Section 460.040. Additional Requirements For Qualifying Patient
Medical Marijuana Cultivation. [Ord. No. 3917, 4-25-2019]
1. No person not a resident on the premises is employed.
2. No stock-in-trade or commodities shall be displayed on the
premises.
3. No internal or external alterations or special construction of the
premises is involved.
4. No equipment or materials shall be used which creates offensive
noise, vibrations, sound, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, x-ray or
electrical disturbance to radio or television instruments.
5. No generation of unreasonable volumes of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or parking demand is created nor shall the traffic create a
nuisance nor block or interfere with the regular flow of traffic.
Additionally, no commercial vehicle shall be used in connection
with the home occupation for delivery of goods to or from the
premises, nor parked on the property. This provision does not
preclude the delivery of mail or packages by the Postal Service or
by private or public shipping and courier services. Home
occupations shall not generate more than an average of one (1)
truck delivery per day.
6. Equipment or materials used in the home occupation may not be
stored outdoors.
B. Within the above requirements of Subsection (A), a home occupation,
includes, but is not limited to, the following: Art studio; babysitting
limited to four (4) children at one (1) time; dressmaking; millinery;
office of a physician or dentist for consultation or emergency treatment,
but not for general professional practice; professional office of a real
estate agent, insurance agent or similar occupation; and teaching
limited to not more than four (4) pupils at one (1) time. A home
occupation shall not be interpreted to include barbershops, beauty
shops, auto repairing, antique shops, sign painting, restaurants,
electrical appliance shops or any light manufacturing or assembling
operations.
A. Qualifying Patient Medical Marijuana Cultivation. On any lot in the City,
a person holding a current, valid Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Identification Card issued by the State of Missouri may have as an
accessory use Medical Marijuana Cultivation as permitted by Article
XIV, Section 1.7(9) of the Missouri Constitution so long as all of the
following conditions are met:
1. The accessory use must take place only in a facility that is enclosed,
locked, and equipped with security devices (the "Cultivation Area"),
all of which shall be designed in such a way as to permit access only
by the Qualifying Patient or by such patient's Primary Caregiver
Section
460.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
460.040
AO:333
Chapter 461
OUTDOOR DISPLAYS, SALES AND STORAGE
and in conformance with all Federal and Missouri laws and
regulations.
2. The State-issued Medical Marijuana Cultivation Identification Card
or Cultivation Authorization must be clearly displayed within the
Cultivation Area and in close proximity to the marijuana plants.
3. The accessory use must have an odor control system that is at least
as stringent as that which is required by Missouri regulations.
4. No marijuana may be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed or
Administered on the lot except by a Qualifying Patient.
5. One (1) Qualifying Patient, or the Primary Caregiver for that person
on their behalf, may cultivate up to six (6) Flowering Marijuana
Plants and six (6) non-flowering marijuana plants at any given time
in a single, enclosed, locked facility.
6. Two (2) Qualifying Patients, who both hold valid Medical Marijuana
Cultivation Identification Cards, may share one (1) enclosed, locked
facility but no more than twelve (12) Flowering Marijuana Plants
and twelve (12) non-flowering marijuana plants may be cultivated
in a single, enclosed, locked facility, except when one (1) of the
Qualifying Patients, as a Primary Caregiver, also holds a Medical
Marijuana Cultivation Identification Care for a third Qualifying
Patient, in which case that Primary Caregiver may cultivate six (6)
additional Flowering Marijuana Plants and six (6) additional nonflowering
marijuana plants for a total of eighteen (18) Flowering
Marijuana Plants and eighteen (18) non-flowering marijuana plants
in a single, enclosed, locked facility.
7. All cultivated Flowering Marijuana Plants in the possession of a
Qualifying Patient or Primary Caregiver shall be clearly labeled
with the Qualifying Patient's name.
8. All Medical Marijuana Cultivation must cease immediately upon
the expiration, suspension, or revocation of a State-issued Medical
Marijuana Cultivation Identification Card.
9. Nothing in this Section shall convey or establish a right to cultivate
medical marijuana in a facility or premises where State or Federal
law or a private contract would otherwise prohibit doing so.
Section
460.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
461.005
AO:334
Section 461.005. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3851, 8-23-201858]
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide regulations for outdoor displays,
sales, and storage related to non-residential establishments in the City of
Fenton.
Section 461.010. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 3851, 8-23-2018]
Section 461.020. Outdoor Displays Or Sales Of Merchandise. [Ord.
No. 3851, 8-23-2018]
Section 461.030. Outdoor Storage Areas And Outdoor Storage Bins.
[Ord. No. 3851, 8-23-2018]
A. Accessory Use. Unless otherwise provided for within this Title, outdoor
displays, sales, Storage Areas, and Bins are deemed to be an accessory
use related to a permitted non-residential use, must be located on the
same premises of the establishment, and must be subordinate in size or
purpose to the Principal Structure or Use.
B. Maintenance; Enforcement. Outdoor displays, sales, Storage Areas, and
Bins are to be located on a paved surface and maintained in a safe, neat
and orderly manner. If the Director or authorized representative
determines an outdoor display, sale, Storage Area, Container or Bin to
be unsafe or in violation of the standards set forth for exterior areas
(Chapter 505), such shall be deemed a code violation subject to
penalties and enforcement set forth in Section 100.060. The Director
may immediately shut down any display or sale that is determined to be
an immediate health and safety hazard.
C. No Interference. Outdoor displays, sales, Storage Areas, and Bins shall
not encroach, interfere and/or obstruct vehicular access from
designated fire lanes, drive aisles and/or impede the flow of pedestrian
traffic on sidewalks or be located where the required number of parking
spaces for the Principal Use of the premises is diminished.
A. Outdoor displays or sales of merchandise are permitted when located
adjacent to the front or side building elevation of the establishment to
which it is related.
B. Outdoor displays or sales of merchandise not located adjacent to the
front or side building elevation of the establishment in which it is
related, as reasonably determined by the Community Development
Director, but on the same premises, requires approval by the Special
Use Permit.
A. Special Use Permit. Outdoor Storage Areas and Bins are permitted in
all Business Zoned Districts, except the "BP-4" District, subject to
58.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 461, Outdoor Displays, Sales And Storage Of Merchandise,
containing Sections 461.005 — 461.040, was repealed 8-23-2018 by Ord. No. 3851.
Section
461.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
461.030
AO:335
Chapter 462
FENCING
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 462.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
This Chapter contains the regulations concerning fences, fencing and
fencing materials installed, constructed and erected within the City of
Fenton. These regulations may be supplemented and qualified by additional
general regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title which are
incorporated as part of this Chapter by reference.
Section 462.020. Requirements. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Special Use Permit approval and compliance with the following
regulations:
1. Outdoor Storage Areas or Bins shall be located behind the Front
Elevation Line of the Principal Building and confined to the Side or
Rear Yard of the Property.
2. No Outdoor Storage Area or Bin shall be within five (5) feet of any
Side or Rear Lot Line.
3. When an Outdoor Storage Area or material contained in an
Outdoor Storage Bin is visible from a street, Blind Fencing as
specified in Section 462.020 of this Title shall be provided.
Additional landscaping material may be required to achieve
necessary screening
4. Additional Blind Fencing and/or landscaping material may be
required when deemed necessary to shield visibility of the Outdoor
Storage Area or Bin from adjacent properties.
B. Exception. Outdoor Storage Areas and Bins are permitted in the "IP-1"
District, without obtaining a Special Use Permit, but subject to approval
of an Outdoor Storage Permit by the Director when in compliance with
Subsection (A)(1 — 4) above. The Director may approve an alternative
surface material for outdoor storage areas in the "IP-1" District.
A. Fencing on any property within the City shall be regulated as follows:
1. All fencing shall be constructed with the structural or supporting
members facing toward the area to be enclosed or in such a
manner as to present the least conspicuous view of these members
to the public.
2. All fencing for security or property demarcation shall be no greater
than six (6) feet in overall height. Fencing in excess of six (6) feet
may be allowed after giving due consideration for the public safety,
Section
461.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
462.020
AO:336
health and welfare of the City by the Director, or as otherwise
provided for within this Chapter.
3. All fencing used for security or property demarcation shall be on or
inside the rear and side property lines and shall not extend towards
the street beyond the front of the building, except as otherwise
provided for within this Chapter. For these purposes, the front of
the building is considered the side of the building facing towards
the street. On corner lots, the front shall be where the entrances to
the building are located.
4. Fencing four (4) feet or less in height may be considered by the
Director beyond the front line of the main building in the front
setback area if it is needed for safety concerns related to pools,
water parks, retaining wall, detention basins, etc.
5. No fence shall be constructed on any portion of the lot within thirty
(30) feet of the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
6. Fences must be kept in good repair and properly preserved. The
property owner shall repair, paint, remove or otherwise attend to
any fence if it becomes unsightly or a menace to public health,
safety and welfare. The Director is hereby empowered to issue
notices to property owners to comply with this Section. Owners will
be given a reasonable time to comply with this Section but not to
exceed forty-five (45) days except that a longer period may be given
at the discretion of the Director if such compliance would cause an
undue hardship.
7. Allowable materials for fencing, except where otherwise provided
for in this Title, may include wood, plastic or other synthetic
materials, woven fabric, chain-link or masonry elements.
8. The replacement of existing damaged fencing, including the height,
material and location of original construction, shall not be
prohibited by any provision within this Chapter.
B. Fencing on any property used for commercial, industrial or multi-family
residential purposes shall further be regulated as follows:
1. Blind fencing for Outdoor Storage Areas or Bins where required
within this Title, may exceed six (6) feet in overall height to block
and shield visibility of Outdoor Storage Areas and Bins from the
adjacent streets or properties. The materials used for blind fencing
shall be of high durability, quality and require low maintenance.
Any chain-link fencing with slats used to screen Outdoor Storage
Areas or Bins must be vinyl-coated and be of an earth-tone color.
[Ord. No. 3851, 8-23-2018]
2. Where chain-link fencing is needed to enclose the activities of an
accessory use so as to protect participants and the public, it shall
be vinyl-coated and the height of the fencing shall not exceed ten
Section
462.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
462.020
AO:337
Chapter 463
SPECIAL EVENT PROCEDURES
Section 463.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3918, 4-25-201959]
The purpose of this Chapter is to define, establish procedures and provide
basic standards for special events.
Section 463.020. Special Events Defined. [Ord. No. 3918,
4-25-2019]
(10) feet so long as the accessory use does not take up more than
thirty-five percent (35%) of the front yard area. Netting suspended
beyond the height of the fence enclosing the activity in order
to protect the safety to the traveling public from recreational
activities next to roadways such as volleyball courts, golf courses,
driving ranges, baseball diamonds, soccer fields, tennis courts and
athletic/fitness centers will be allowed as permitted in the
appropriate zone districts.
3. Blind fencing or screening of brick or concrete block must be
installed around dumpster areas where they are visible from the
street. In addition, gates for dumpster areas must provide
screening, be constructed of wood, vinyl or vinyl-coated chain-link
fencing with slats and should be oriented away from direct view
from the street if possible. Where dumpster areas are not visible
from the street, non-brick or non-block materials including vinylcoated
chain-link fencing with slats may be used.
4. Fencing may extend beyond the front of the building in the "IP-1"
Industrial Park Zoning District where the Director deems it
necessary for the operation of business.
C. Permit Required. Prior to construction, all fencing and fencing
materials will be reviewed and approved by the Director.
A. The term "special event," as referenced in this Chapter, shall mean a
temporary use of land or structures for one (1) or more of the following
types of activities:
1. Non-Commercial Events. Any fund-raising and/or not-for-profit
event held outside an enclosed permanent structure; except as
provided for in Chapter 610: Parades, Processions and Organized
Physical Activities or exempted by Section 463.030 of this Chapter.
2. Commercial Events. Any commercial event held outside an
enclosed permanent structure with the intent to sell, lease, rent or
59.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 463, Special Events Procedures, containing Sections
463.010 through 463.100, was repealed 4-25-2019 by Ord. No. 3918.
Section
462.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
463.020
AO:338
Section 463.030. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 3918, 4-25-2019]
Section 463.040. Authorization. [Ord. No. 3918, 4-25-2019]
promote specific merchandise, services, product lines or other
aspects of a business, including, but not limited to, tent sales, arts
and craft sales, trade shows or product demonstrations; except as
provided for in Chapter 461: Outdoor Displays, Sales and Storage
of Merchandise.
3. Public Attractions. Any public event intended primarily for
entertainment or amusement such as carnivals, concerts, festivals,
barbeques or picnics; except as exempted by Section 463.030 of
this Chapter.
A. The following events are exempt from the terms and conditions of this
Chapter.
1. Any non-commercial or public attraction event, including, but not
limited to, barbeques, picnics, car washes or baked good sales, that
are less than forty-eight (48) hours in duration and in which no
mechanical amusement devices, inflatables or mechanical game
equipment are involved, provided that the City has been given
advance notification of the event of not less than seven (7) days,
including evidence of notification to the Fenton Fire District and St.
Louis County Police Department, 5th Precinct.
2. Any event held by the City.
3. Any event held within a public park, provided that the event
complies with all provisions of the City of Fenton Code and any
other requirements of the City regulating conduct in the parks and
recreation areas and are held under a permit authorized under
Code Section 220.170.
4. Residential yard sales as regulated by Section 250.020 of the City
of Fenton Code.
5. Any event held at a private dwelling, including, but not limited to,
private gatherings, open houses, weddings, showers and wakes.
6. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. The Director shall issue a permit for any special event, as referenced
herein, within any zoning district, unless otherwise provided for within
this Chapter. This permit shall not waive the requirement for any
building permit, operating permit, special use permit, tent permit,
liquor license, St. Louis County or other permit or license required by
law for the proposed activity, facility or use associated with the special
event. Additionally, the Director, or, if applicable, the Board may
establish any reasonable conditions deemed necessary to ensure
Section
463.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
463.040
AO:339
Section 463.050. Standards For Special Event Permits. [Ord. No.
3918, 4-25-2019]
compatibility with adjacent land uses and to minimize potential adverse
impacts on adjacent properties and uses including, but not limited to:
1. Event-specific restrictions on the hour(s) and day(s) of the week of
the operation at a specific location, duration of the event, size of
the activity or other operational characteristics, including limited
duration and the health, safety and welfare of the community;
2. Provisions for traffic control or security personnel to ensure the
public safety and convenience;
3. Temporary arrangements for on-site rest room facilities, parking
and traffic circulation;
4. Requirements for screening/buffering and guarantees for site
restoration and cleanup following the special event. The Director
or, if applicable, the Board may establish that said guarantees
require the posting of a performance bond to help ensure that the
operation of the event and the subsequent restoration of the site
are conducted according to required special event standards and
conditions of approval.
A. Except as provided in Section 463.060(A), the Director shall issue a
permit, as provided herein, when, after consideration of the application
and other information as may otherwise be required, he/she finds that:
1. Land-Use Compatibility. Any special event, as defined in this
Chapter, shall be conducted on private property and shall not
involve the use of public right-of-way. The special event will be
consistent with the intent of this Chapter and will not impair the
normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the
same site nor endanger or be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare or injurious to any adjacent property.
2. Hours Of Operation. The hours of operation of a special event,
including setup and take down, shall be limited between the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00
A.M. to 11:00 P.M. Friday and Saturday.
3. Duration. The duration of special event will not exceed ten (10)
consecutive days.
4. Frequency. The maximum frequency of a special event at the same
address shall be four (4) times per calendar year. Although
different types of special events may be concurrent and treated as
one (1) event. There must be a minimum of at least thirty (30) days
between each event held at the same address. Multiple event types
can be combined and issued under one (1) permit.
Section
463.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
463.050
AO:340
Section 463.060. Additional Requirements. [Ord. No. 3918,
4-25-2019]
5. Traffic Circulation. The special event will not cause undue traffic
congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and
the design of adjacent streets, intersections, parking and traffic
controls.
6. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking will be provided to meet the
needs of the special event and the event will not create a parking
shortage for any other use. All off-street parking surfaces used for
the special event shall be concrete or asphalt, unless an acceptable
alternative is approved by the Director. Grass or lawn surfaces will
not be accepted as a parking surface.
7. Area Of Parking Lot Dedicated To Outdoor Special Events. No
drives or maneuvering areas may be utilized within the special
event area unless such drives or maneuvering areas are directly
adjacent to the approved special event area, are not required for
emergency access and are not deemed necessary by the Director to
provide proper circulation through the lot.
8. Public Safety, Conveniences And Litter Control. Where applicable,
adequate on-site rest room facilities and solid waste containers
have been provided. The applicant shall calculate the demand for
such facilities and specify how the need will be addressed.
9. Appearances And Nuisances. The event shall not generate
excessive noise, dust, smoke, glare, spillover lighting or other
forms of environmental or visual pollution. Exterior illumination
shall not be greater than one (1.0) foot-candle at any property line
adjoining a nonresidential district or greater than one-tenth (0.1) at
any property line adjoining a residential district.
10. Site Location. No portion of the event shall be located within
twenty-five (25) feet of a street right-of-way or fifteen (15) feet of
any side or rear property line adjoining a non-residential district or
within twenty-five (25) feet of any side or fifty (50) feet of any rear
property line adjoining a residential district.
11. Insurance Coverage. Proof of general liability insurance coverage,
in an amount required by the Director based on the size and
characteristics of the event, shall be provided to the Director.
12. Signs. The Director shall review all signage in connection with the
issuance of the special event permit. All signs shall be subject to
Chapter 485: Sign Regulations.
13. Compliance With Other Regulations. The special event shall comply
with all applicable City, County, State and Federal health, safety,
environmental and other applicable requirements.
Section
463.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
463.060
AO:341
Section 463.070. Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 3918,
4-25-2019]
A. City Services Or City Owned Property.
1. If the applicant requests the City to provide extraordinary services
or equipment or if the Director otherwise determines that
extraordinary services (including, but not limited to, traffic control
or security personnel) or equipment are required to protect the
public health, safety or general welfare, the special event permit
application shall be submitted to the Board for consideration. If the
Board approves the requested permit with City provided services,
the applicant shall be required to reimburse the City for the cost of
those services. The Board may require the applicant to submit a
security deposit or other form of surety, in an amount and form
approved by the City Attorney, prior to the event to guarantee that
the City will be reimbursed for the cost of such extraordinary
services.
2. If the applicant requests, or seeks to use, City owned property for
the special event, including use of City ROW if not expressly
exempt by this Chapter, the special event permit application shall
be submitted to the Board for consideration. As a condition of
approval for a special event on City owned property, the applicant
shall at minimum be required to obtain insurance at the then
current sovereign immunity limits and name the City as an
additional insured on such policies and execute an indemnification
and waiver of liability agreement. In approving such special event
permit, the Board may impose additional conditions to protect the
public health, safety or general welfare.
B. Restoration Of Site. Within forty-eight (48) hours of cessation of the
event, the site shall be returned to its previous condition (including the
removal of any temporary structure, all litter, signage, attentionattracting
devices or other evidence of the special event and return of
all ground cover that may have been disturbed or, in the alternative,
measures to control erosion).
C. Permit To Be Displayed Or Made Available. The applicant shall post or
otherwise display a valid special event permit on the premises at all
times during the duration of the event.
A. Any person seeking the issuance of a special events permit as herein
required shall file an application with the Director, on forms provided
by the Community Development Department, not less than thirty (30)
days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the special
event. The application shall set forth the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
seeking to conduct the special event. If the special event is
proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization,
Section
463.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
463.070
AO:342
Section 463.080. Notice To Other Officials. [Ord. No. 3918,
4-25-2019]
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the Director shall send a
copy of the application to the City Administrator, Public Works Director,
Fenton Fire Protection, St. Louis County Police Department, 5th Precinct
and any other entity deemed appropriate by the Director.
Section 463.090. Prohibition Of Transfer Of Permits. [Ord. No.
3918, 4-25-2019]
No special event permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
assigned or transferred to any other person or business or transferred to
another location.
the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible leaders of
such organization.
2. Description of the nature or type of special event to be conducted.
3. The address/location and date(s) and time(s) of the special event.
4. Number of people expected to attend the event.
5. The name, address and telephone number of the persons who will
be special event chairperson or managing officer and who will be
responsible for its conduct.
6. Three (3) copies of a site plan drawn to scale showing the layout of
the event, such as where interactive inflatable equipment, games,
food tables, tents, etc., will be placed on the property.
7. If inflatables are used, they shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in
height, measured from the ground and shall not be allowed on the
rooftop of structures. In addition, the following information must
be provided:
a. How the inflatable will be tethered to the ground.
b. How power will be supplied to the inflatable and the safety
measures taken to protect the public from being injured.
8. If the special event is to be held by, on behalf of or for any person or
persons other than the property owner, the applicant for such
permit shall file with the Director a communication, in writing,
from the property owner authorizing the applicant to hold the
special event.
9. Any additional information that the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued.
Section
463.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
463.100
AO:343
Section 463.100. No Vested Right Created; Revocation Of Permit.
[Ord. No. 3918, 4-25-2019]
Because the intention of this Chapter is to allow for the temporary use
of property under specific controlled conditions, the City's issuance of a
special event permit is not intended to, and expressly does not, create a
vested property right in any use of property allowed by the City's grant of a
special event permit nor does it create a right or expectation in the property
owner to the City's issuance of a subsequent special event permit for the
same special event. The Board may, at its sole discretion based upon the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and the community
as a whole, revoke an existing special event permit for violation of its terms
or other exigent circumstances or decline issuance of further permits. The
Director shall have the authority to stop or otherwise halt the conduct of
any special event that is at any time presenting a threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
Chapter 464
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section 464.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3348 §1, 9-26-2013]
The purpose of this Section is to provide standards for the installation
and use of solar energy systems as accessory uses. This Section seeks to
protect properties from incompatible uses in the interest of property values,
public health and the welfare of the community while promoting the use
of alternative energy sources, where appropriate. This Section provides a
process to facilitate the use of these systems in a manner that minimizes
adverse impacts and the potential for nuisance.
Section 464.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3348 §1, 9-26-2013]
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall mean:
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather
than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
architectural or structural component of the building which contributes to
the design of the building, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic or hot
water solar systems contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights
and awnings.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
affixed to either a principal or accessory structure on a lot.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that is not attached to another structure and is affixed to the ground.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — The component of a solar energy system
containing the flat plate or tube or other devices that absorb energy from
the sun when exposed to sunlight.
Section
463.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
464.020
AO:344
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — The solar energy collectors, electronics,
disconnect, valves, and other appurtenances associated with a solar energy
system.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A building- or ground-mounted photovoltaic,
hot air, or hot water collector device or other type of energy system, which
relies upon solar radiation as the source for the generation of electricity, or
transfer of stored heat.
Section 464.030. Accessory Use. [Ord. No. 3348 §1, 9-26-2013]
Solar energy systems shall be considered a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts, subject to the provisions of this Section.
Section 464.040. Requirements. [Ord. No. 3348 §1, 9-26-2013]
A. The requirements set forth in this Section shall govern the construction
and/or installation of all solar energy systems:
1. Solar Energy Systems, General.
a. Solar energy collectors shall be located in the least visible
location from perspectives outside the property lines where
panels would be reasonably, though not necessarily optimally,
functional.
b. Solar energy collectors shall be documented by the
manufacturer as being non-reflective pursuant to recognized
engineering standards showing reflectivity of less than thirty
percent (30%) or shall be placed such that concentrated
sunlight or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties
or streets.
c. Building-integrated solar energy systems shall be allowed
regardless of visibility, provided the building-integrated system
meets all required setback, height and land use requirements
for the district in which the building is located.
2. Solar Energy Systems, Residential.
a. Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
i. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall only be
located in the side or rear yard of a property. Groundmounted
solar energy systems are not permitted in the
front yard of a property.
ii. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must have a
minimum five-foot setback from the rear lot line and
maintain the same side setback as required for the zoning
district in which they are located.
Section
464.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
464.040
AO:345
iii. Ground-mounted solar energy systems and supporting
structures may not exceed a total height of ten (10) feet as
measured from the average grade at the base of the
supporting structure to the highest edge of the system.
iv. Collectively, all ground-mounted solar energy systems on
the property shall not be greater than one-half (½) the
square footage of the footprint of the principal structure or
six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is greater.
v. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
substantially screened from public view (including
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way) by fencing,
walls, plantings, or other architectural feature or any
combination thereof; provided, however, that the
screening shall not be required to be so dense, so tall, or
so located as to render the equipment essentially nonfunctional.
b. Building-mounted solar energy systems.
i. Building-mounted solar energy collectors installed in
residential zoning districts shall be:
1) Installed in the plane of the roof (flush mounted); or
2) Made part of the roof design (capping or framing
compatible with the color of the roof or structure); or
3) A building-integrated system. Mounting brackets shall
be permitted to be placed on the slope of a rear-facing
roof if the applicant can demonstrate that the existing
pitch of the roof would render the solar energy
equipment ineffective or incapable of reasonable
operation.
ii. When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, as viewed
from a fronting street. In cases of corner lots or lots with
more than one (1) street frontage, the side roof fronting a
street shall be considered a front-facing roof.
iii. Solar energy systems shall not project vertically above the
peak of a sloped roof to which it is attached.
iv. When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be positioned in a symmetrical fashion and centered
on the plane of the roof on which they are located.
v. When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be set back at least two (2) feet from any outside
edge, ridge, or valley of the roof.
Section
464.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
464.040
AO:346
vi. All exterior electrical or plumbing lines must be painted in
a color scheme that matches as closely as possible the
color of the structure and the materials adjacent to the
lines when visible from the street.
3. Solar Energy Systems, Non-Residential.
a. Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
i. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall only be
located in the side or rear yard of a property. Groundmounted
solar energy systems are not permitted in the
front yard of a property.
ii. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must have a
minimum five-foot setback from the rear lot line and
maintain the same side setback as required for the zoning
district in which they are located.
iii. Ground-mounted solar energy systems and supporting
structures may not exceed a total height of twenty (20)
feet as measured from the average grade at the base of the
supporting structure to the highest edge of the system.
iv. Collectively, all ground-mounted solar energy systems
located on the property shall not be greater than one-half
(½) the square footage of the footprint of the principal
structure.
v. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
substantially screened from public view (including
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way) by fencing,
walls, plantings or other architectural feature or any
combination thereof; provided, however, that screening
shall not be required to be so dense, so tall or so located as
to render the equipment essentially non-functional.
b. Building-mounted solar energy systems.
i. Building-mounted solar energy systems installed in nonresidential
zoning districts shall be installed:
1) In the plane of the roof (flush mounted); or
2) Made part of the roof design (capping or framing
compatible with the color of the roof or structure); or
3) A building integrated system. Mounting brackets shall
be permitted if the applicant can demonstrate that the
existing pitch of the roof would render the solar
energy equipment ineffective or incapable of
reasonable operation.
Section
464.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
464.040
AO:347
Section 464.050. Permit Requirements. [Ord. No. 3348 §1,
9-26-2013]
A building permit is required prior to the installation of any solar energy
system. The owner of a solar energy system shall ensure that it is installed
and maintained in compliance with applicable building, fire and safety
codes adopted by the City and any other State or Federal agency of
competent jurisdiction. All wiring associated with a renewable energy
system shall be underground or contained within a raceway that
complements the building materials of the principal structure.
Section 464.060. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 3348 §1, 9-26-2013]
Any solar energy systems that are noticeably in disrepair without repair or
restoration procedures substantially underway shall be removed from the
property and the structure and/or site shall be restored.
Section 464.070. (Reserved)
Section 464.080. Alternative Compliance. [Ord. No. 3348 §1,
9-26-2013]
In unusual circumstances arising from the unique location or character
of the proposed site and/or surrounding land uses or structures, if sitespecific
alternative standards would provide results that are equal to or
ii. When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, as viewed
from a fronting street. In cases of corner lots or lots with
more than one (1) street frontage, the side roof fronting a
street shall be considered a front-facing roof.
iii. Solar energy systems shall not project vertically above the
peak of a sloped roof to which it is attached.
iv. When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be set back at least two (2) feet from any outside
edge, ridge, or valley of the roof.
v. Solar energy collectors installed on a flat roof may exceed
the height of the building up to five (5) feet.
vi. Solar energy collectors installed on the roof-top deck of
parking facilities may exceed the height of the exterior
wall of the structure up to twenty (20) feet if a minimum
setback of five (5) feet from the outside face of the
structure is provided.
vii. All exterior electrical or plumbing lines must be painted in
a color scheme that matches as closely as possible the
color of the structure and the materials adjacent to the
lines when visible from the street.
Section
464.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
464.080
AO:348
superior to those which would be provided by the standards in this Section,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve an applicant's request
for alternative standards if in the Commission's judgment the purpose of
these regulations will be satisfied and the alternative standards will have no
adverse impact on any other property or unreasonably disturb the peaceful
occupancy of adjoining or nearby property.
Chapter 465
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 465.010. "R-1" Residential District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-201960]
A. Procedure. An application for alternative compliance standards shall be
reviewed in accordance with the requirements for a special use permit,
as set forth in Section 420.020 of this Title. The proposed alternative
standards shall clearly identify and discuss the modifications and
alternatives proposed and the ways in which the plan will better
accomplish the intent of these design standards than would an
approach which complies with the design standards of this Chapter.
B. Review Criteria. To approve an alternative approach, the Planning and
Zoning Commission must find that the proposed alternative approach
accomplishes the intent of these standards equally well or better than
would an approach which complies with these standards and the
alternative standards will have no adverse impact on any other property
or unreasonably disturb the peaceful occupancy of adjoining or nearby
property.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulation for the "R-1" Residential
District (hereinafter "R-1" District). The purpose of the "R-1" District is
to allow for large-lot residential settings (i.e., open space, wooded lots,
scenic views, and privacy), as large-lot residential development
patterns minimize the impact of development on "environmentally
sensitive" land in Fenton. The "R-1" District's environmentally sensitive
areas are characterized by steep slopes (> 7%), critical drainage
courses or watersheds, heavy woods, and shallow soils. These
regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional regulations
appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
60.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 465, Residential Zone Districts, containing Sections
465.010 through 465.060, was repealed 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3891.
Section
464.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
465.010
AO:349
Section 465.020. "R-2" Residential District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback; except, whenever a lot of record existing on the
date of this Title has a width of seventy-five (75) feet or less,
the side setback may be reduced to a width of not less than ten
percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it
be less than five (5) feet.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
rear setback.
2. Lot Area.
a. Permitted Uses must be located on a lot containing at least one
(1) acre or forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet, with a minimum lot width of one hundred (100)
feet at the required building line.
b. Uses allowed by Special Use Permit must be located on a lot
containing at least three (3) acres.
3. Flag Lots. Flag lots are prohibited, provided flag lots in existence
before November 20, 2017, are permitted but shall not be further
subdivided.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty (40) feet.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulation for the "R-2" Residential
District (hereinafter "R-2" District). The purpose of the "R-2" District is
to provide residential subdivisions with smaller lots than the "R-1"
District, but more spacious than those provided in the "R-3" District.
These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum (50) foot front
setback, unless forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on
one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is
Section
465.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
465.020
AO:350
Section 465.030. "R-3" Residential District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
improved with buildings that have observed a front projection
beyond the average front setback so established but this
regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front setback of
more than one hundred (100) feet.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum ten (10) foot side
setback; except, whenever a lot of record existing on the date
of this Title has a width of seventy-five (75) feet or less, the side
setback may be reduced to a width of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be less
than four (4) feet.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum rear setback of
thirty-five (35) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the lot depth,
whichever amount is greater, but it need not exceed fifty (50)
feet.
2. Lot Area.
a. Permitted Uses must be located on a lot containing at least
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, with a minimum lot
width of eighty (80) feet at the required building line.
b. Uses allowed by Special Use Permit must be located on a lot
containing at least three (3) acres.
3. Flag Lots. Flag lots are prohibited, provided flag lots in existence
before November 20, 2017, are permitted but shall not be further
subdivided.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty (40) feet.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "R-3" Residential
District (hereinafter "R-3" District). The purpose of the "R-3" District is
to provide traditional residential subdivision layouts with smaller lot
sizes than the "R-1" and "R-2" Districts but large enough lot sizes to
accommodate contemporary living and housing desires and needs, such
as decks or swimming pools. These regulations are supplemented and
qualified by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
Section
465.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
465.030
AO:351
Section 465.040. "R-4" Residential District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum front setback of
(30) feet, unless forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on
one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is
improved with buildings that have observed a front setback
with a variation in depth of not more than ten (10) feet, in
which case no building shall project beyond the average front
setback line so established, but this regulation shall not be
interpreted to require a front setback of more than fifty (50)
feet.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum eight (8) foot side
setback; except, wherever a lot of record exists on the date of
this Chapter having a width of fifty (50) feet or less, the side
setback on each side of a building may be reduced to a width of
not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but in no
instance shall it be less than four (4) feet.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a rear setback of not less
than thirty (30) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot, whichever amount is larger, but it need not exceed forty
(40) feet.
2. Lot Area.
a. Permitted Uses must be located on a lot containing at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, with a minimum lot width of
sixty (60) feet at the required building line.
b. Uses allowed by Special Use Permit must be located on a lot
containing at least three (3) acres.
3. Flag Lots. Flag lots are prohibited, provided flag lots in existence
before November 20, 2017, are permitted but shall not be further
subdivided.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty (40) feet.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "R-4" Residential
District (hereinafter "R-4" District). The purpose of the "R-4" District is
to accommodate Riverside subdivision, the City's first (1st) subdivision.
Originally built for Chrysler employees, Riverside was developed with
single-family dwellings on eight thousand (8,000) square-foot lots. Just
north of the subdivision, along Wolfner Drive, two-family dwellings
were developed to create a buffer between the industrial uses north of
Wolfner Drive and the single-family dwellings located in Riverside. Lots
and residential uses of this size form a necessary component in the
City's land use strategy as a separation of dissimilar uses. These
Section
465.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
465.040
AO:352
regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional regulations
appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
front setback, unless forty percent (40%) or more of the
frontage on one (1) side of the street between two (2)
intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have
observed a front setback with a variance in depth of not more
than ten (10) feet, in which case no building shall project
beyond the average front setback so established, but this
regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front setback of
more than fifty (50) feet.
b. Side Setback.
(1) Each lot shall have a minimum six (6) foot side setback;
except wherever a lot of record existing on the date of this
Title has a width of fifty (50) feet or less, the side setback
may be reduced to a width of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be
less than four (4) feet.
(2) Exception. Lots located on the southside of Wolfner Drive,
and described as Lots 1-19 of Block 4 of I-44 Industrial
Park Plat No. 1 as recorded in Book 152, Page 62 in the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds Office, may have one (1)
side setback of zero (0) feet to accommodate the common
wall of an attached single-family dwelling unit.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum rear setback of
thirty (30) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is larger, but it need not exceed forty (40)
feet.
2. Lot Area.
a. Permitted Uses must be located on a lot containing at least
eight thousand (8,000) square feet, with a minimum lot width
of sixty (60) feet at the required building line.
b. Uses allowed by Special Use Permit must be located on a lot
containing at least three (3) acres.
Section
465.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
465.040
AO:353
Section 465.050. "PG" Public And Governmental District
Regulations. [Ord. No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
Section 465.060. "PR" Parks And Recreation District Regulations.
[Ord. No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
c. Exception. Lots located on the southside of Wolfner Drive, and
described as Lots I-19 of Block 4 of I-44 Industrial Park Plat No.
1 as recorded in Book 152, Page 62 in the St. Louis County
Recorder of Deeds Office, may have a minimum lot area of five
thousand three hundred (5,300) square feet, with a minimum
lot width of forty (40) feet at the required building line to
accommodate an attached single-family dwelling unit.
3. Flag Lots. Flag lots are prohibited, provided flag lots in existence
before November 20, 2017, are permitted but shall not be further
subdivided.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty (40) feet.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "PG" Public and
Governmental District (hereinafter "PG" District). The purpose of the
"PG" District is to provide for public and governmental uses such as
City Hall public libraries, and Police, and Fire stations. These
regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional regulations
appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
side setback.
2. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, with a minimum lot width of eighty (80) feet at the
required building line.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet.
Section
465.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
465.060
AO:354
Chapter 466
OLDE TOWNE DISTRICTS
Section 466.010. "OT-1" Olde Towne District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-201961]
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "PR" Parks and
Recreation District (hereinafter "PR" District). The purpose of the "PR"
District is to provide open spaces for parks and recreational activities,
including City parks, golf courses, bicycles trails, and the Meramec
Greenway Trail. Development within this area is restricted as it is
located in the floodplain of the Meramec River. These regulations are
supplemented and qualified by additional regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
side setback.
2. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, with a minimum lot width of eighty (80) feet at the
required building line.
E. Building Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulation for the "OT-1" Olde Towne
District (hereinafter "OT-1" District). Due to the District's location in the
heart of Olde Towne Fenton, the purpose of the "OT-1" District is to
encourage a mix of commercial and residential uses, while maintaining
the rich heritage and history of Fenton as well as a sense of pedestrianoriented
character. These regulations are supplemented and qualified
by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
61.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 466, Olde Towne Commercial Zone Districts, containing
Sections 466.010 through 466.050, was repealed 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3891.
Section
465.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
466.010
AO:355
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "OT-1" District shall be a minimum of fifteen
(15) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. A front setback is not required.
b. Side Setback. A side setback is not required.
c. Rear Setback. A rear setback is not required.
2. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building
shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the lot area.
3. Minimum Requirements. All lots containing an area of eight
thousand (8,000) square feet or more shall have a minimum width
at the building line of fifty (50) feet.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass or architectural pre-cast concrete. Primary
building materials shall not be less than eighty percent (80%),
excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. The following accent building
materials are permitted when in a color compatible with the
primary building material.
(1) Architecturally designed metal panels.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS), when
located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Buildings that are listed on the Missouri National Register
of Historic Places or have obtained a historic preservation
tax credit may utilize the same material as initially utilized
on the exterior of the building for repair or alterations.
Section
466.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
466.010
AO:356
Section 466.020. "OT-2" Olde Towne District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
(3) Residential Dwellings are exempt from the exterior
building material requirements.
(4) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
G. Parking Regulations. See Chapter 496 for off-street parking and loading
requirements; however, due to the small lot sizes and to boost business
development, shared parking with other businesses is permitted.
Contractual proof of shared dedicated parking arrangements must be
provided. Additionally, required parking regulations for a property may
be reduced when deemed appropriate by the City. Said reduction in
parking may be requested by Special Use Permit and meeting the
applicable requirements thereof.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "OT-2" Olde
Towne District (hereinafter "OT-2"). Due to the District's location to
State Highway 141 and Highway 30, the purpose of the "OT-2" District
is to provide a variety of commercial uses that serve a regional market
area. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "OT-2" Olde Towne District shall be a
minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum (30) foot front
setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Required setbacks shall include a landscaped buffer
area.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
Section
466.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
466.020
AO:357
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre or forty-three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass or architectural pre-cast concrete. Primary
building materials shall not be less than eighty percent (80%),
excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. The following accent building
materials are permitted when in a color compatible with the
primary building material.
(1) Architecturally designed metal panels.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS), when
located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Buildings that qualify for historic building rehabilitation
tax credit may utilize the same material as initially utilized
on the exterior of the building for repair or alterations.
(3) Exterior finishes deemed prototypical in building design
that must be maintained for corporate or market identity
may be authorized under Site Plan Review, in accordance
with Chapter 447.
(4) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
G. Parking Regulations. See Chapter 496 for off-street parking and loading
requirements; however, due to the small lot sizes and to boost
commercial development, shared parking with other commercial uses is
permitted. Contractual proof of shared dedicated parking
arrangements must be provided. Additionally, required parking
Section
466.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
466.020
AO:358
Section 466.030. "OT-3" Olde Towne District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
regulations for a property may be reduced when deemed appropriate
by the City. Said reduction in parking may be requested by Special Use
Permit and meeting the applicable requirements thereof.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "OT-3" Olde
Towne District Regulations (hereinafter "OT-3" District). Due to the
District's location to S. Old Highway 141 and nearby neighborhoods,
the purpose of the "OT-3" District is to provide a mix of commercial and
service-oriented uses that serve a local market area. These regulations
are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations
contained elsewhere in this Title and made a part of this Section by
reference.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "OT-3" District shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum (30) foot front
setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Required setbacks shall include a landscaped buffer
area.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre or forty-three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
Section
466.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
466.030
AO:359
Section 466.040. "OT-4" Planned Olde Towne District Regulations.
[Ord. No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass or architectural pre-cast concrete. Primary
building materials shall not be less than eighty percent (80%),
excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. The following accent building
materials are permitted when in a color compatible with the
primary building material.
(1) Architecturally designed metal panels.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS), when
located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Buildings that are listed on the Missouri National Register
of Historic Places or have obtained a historic preservation
tax credit may utilize the same material as initially utilized
on the exterior of the building for repair or alterations.
(3) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "OT-4" Planned
Olde Towne District (hereinafter "OT-4" District). The purpose of the
"OT-4" District is to provide a high-density residential living community.
These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Reserved.
D. Height Regulations. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet, except that a building with twenty percent (20%) or
less coverage of the land area may be erected to a height not to exceed
fifty-five (55) feet.
Section
466.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
466.040
AO:360
E. Area Regulations.
1. Setback. No building shall be erected within forty (40) feet of any
property line.
2. Intensity Of Use. The aggregate gross area of the building or
buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the entire lot
area and with a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of lot area per family.
F. Procedure To Establish.
1. The "OT-4" District shall be designed as a whole, unified, single
project. The owner of any parcel of land may submit to the Board a
plan for the use and development of all or part of such parcel for
the purpose of providing an integrated design and appropriate
locations for/of buildings, landscaping, access ways and parking
areas.
2. The plan shall be referred to the Commission for public hearing,
study and report and shall be filed in such manner and
accompanied by payment of such fee as provided in the fee
schedule for a building permit and with notice and procedures as
therein provided.
3. After public hearing, the Commission shall consider such plan with
particular regard to the City's Comprehensive Plan, the effect upon
traffic, congestion and fire hazards, the character of the
neighborhood, the building distances and yard limitations for their
aesthetic value to the community, whether such proposed plan
would overtax public facilities and utilities and the general welfare
of the community.
4. The Commission shall report thereon to the Board within sixty (60)
days of notification, or if no report within said time, the Board may
take action without awaiting said report.
5. The Board shall consider the "OT-4" District with particular regard
to the criteria mentioned above and hereafter mentioned in this
Section and take such action as it believes to be in the best
interests of the City. The Board may, if it finds it to be in the best
interest of the orderly development of the City, provide for certain
single-family or two-family dwellings to be included in said plan,
subject to all regulations herein contained.
G. Landscaping Regulations.
1. Any part of the project area not used for buildings or other
structures or for parking, loading or access ways shall be
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs and, where needed,
pedestrian walks.
Section
466.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
466.040
AO:361
Section 466.050. "OT-5" Olde Towne District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
2. Reasonable additional requirements as to landscaping, lighting,
screening, access ways, building distances and yard limitations
may be imposed by the for protection of adjoining residential
property, for conformity to the general welfare of the City and its
inhabitants.
H. Street Regulations.
1. All roads, parking areas and walks shall be paved or built with
asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete or any approved
materials as may be specified by the Commission.
2. All roads, streets and access ways shall be a minimum of thirtyeight
(38) feet in width centered within a minimum sixty (60) feet
right-of-way and shall be through the whole project area with
minimum change to the traffic flow on the surrounding areas.
I. Additional Regulations.
1. No expansion or conversion of existing structures shall be
permitted except on the basis of a detailed site plan to be approved
by the Board showing the relationship of yards, off-street parking
and other open spaces to surrounding property and shall comply
with these regulations as in the case of new construction.
2. If the Board believes proof of financial responsibility of the
applicant or developer is in the best interest of the City, the Board
may require such applicant to submit such proof.
3. Any "OT-4" District development shall be subject to all of the terms,
conditions and requirements of the Subdivision Regulations under
Chapter 480 and all of the terms and provisions thereof.
4. The Board may vary or modify the requirements of this Section, the
strict enforcement of which would entail unusual or real difficulties
in carrying out the intent of this Title.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "OT-5" Old Towne
District (hereinafter "OT-5" District). Due to the District's location in the
heart of Olde Towne Fenton, the purpose of the "OT-1" District is to
encourage a mix of commercial and residential uses, while maintaining
the rich heritage and history of Fenton as well as a sense of pedestrianoriented
character. These regulations are supplemented and qualified
by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
Section
466.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
466.050
AO:362
D. District Regulations. The "OT-5" Zone Districts shall be a minimum of
twenty (20) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. A front setback is not required.
b. Side Setback. A side setback is not required.
c. Rear Setback. A rear setback is not required.
2. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building
shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the lot area.
3. Minimum Requirements. All lots containing an area of eight
thousand (8,000) square feet or more shall have a minimum width
at the building line of fifty (50) feet.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not to exceed
forty-five (45) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass or architectural pre-cast concrete. Primary
building materials shall not be less than eighty percent (80%),
excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. The following accent building
materials are permitted when in a color compatible with the
primary building material.
(1) Architecturally designed metal panels.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS), when
located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Buildings that are listed on the Missouri National Register
of Historic Places or have obtained a historic preservation
tax credit may utilize the same material as initially utilized
on the exterior of the building for repair or alterations.
(3) Residential Dwellings are exempt from the exterior
building material requirements.
Section
466.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
466.050
AO:363
Chapter 467
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section 467.010. "C-1" Commercial District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-201962]
(4) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
G. Parking Regulations. See Chapter 496 for off-street parking and loading
requirements; however, due to the small lot sizes and to boost
commercial development, shared parking with other commercial uses is
permitted. Contractual proof of shared dedicated parking
arrangements must be provided. Additionally, required parking
regulations for a property may be reduced when deemed appropriate by
the City. Said reduction in parking may be requested by Special Use
Permit and meeting the applicable requirements thereof.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "C-1"
Commercial District (hereinafter "C-1" District). Due to the District's
location to State Highway 141 and Highway 30, the purpose of the
"C-1" District is to provide a variety of commercial uses that serve a
regional market area. These regulations are supplemented and
qualified by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "C-1" District shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum thirty (30) foot
front setback.
b. Side Or Rear Setback. No side or rear setback is required;
except where a side or rear lot line abuts a residentially zoned
lot, then a minimum twenty (20) foot setback and buffer area
shall be provided.
62.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 467, Commercial Zone Districts, containing Sections
467.010 through 467.020, was repealed 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3891.
Section
466.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
467.010
AO:364
2. Buffer Area. Fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area shall be
devoted to landscaped/greenspace areas. Of these areas, a
minimum twenty (20) foot buffer area along any lot line adjacent to
MoDOT right-of-way and a minimum ten (10) foot wide buffer area
along any lot line adjacent to any other right-of-way shall be
provided. Landscaped/greenspace areas in front of buildings and
parking islands may substitute for up to one-half (1/2) of the
required buffer areas along rights-of-way.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be three-quarters (3/4) of an
acre or thirty-two thousand six hundred seventy (32,670) square
feet.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass panels or architectural pre-case concrete. The
primary building materials shall not be less than eighty-five
percent (85%), excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. Architecturally designed metal
panels, in a color compatible with the primary building
material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Exterior finishes deemed prototypical in building design
that must be maintained for corporate or market identity
may be authorized during Site Plan Review, in accordance
with Chapter 447.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
(3) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
Section
467.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
467.020
AO:365
Section 467.020. "C-2" Commercial District Regulations. [Ord. No.
3891, 1-24-2019]
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "C-2"
Commercial District (hereinafter the "C-2" District). Due to the
District's location to State Highway 141 and nearby neighborhoods, the
purpose of the "C-2" District is to provide a mix of commercial and
service-oriented uses that serve a local market area to provide local
neighborhood convenience and shopping. These regulations are
supplemented and qualified by additional regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "C-2" District shall be a minimum of ten (10)
contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot
front setback.
b. Side Or Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum ten (10)
foot side and rear setback; except where a side or rear lot line
abuts a residentially zoned lot, then a minimum twenty (20)
foot setback and buffer area shall be provided.
2. Landscaping. Fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area shall be
devoted to landscaped/greenspace areas. Of these areas, a
minimum twenty (20) foot buffer area along any lot line adjacent to
MoDOT right-of-way and a minimum ten (10) foot wide buffer area
along any lot line adjacent to any other right-of-way shall be
provided. Landscaped/greenspace areas in front of buildings and
parking islands may substitute for up to one-half (1/2) of the
required buffer areas along rights-of-way.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be three-quarters (3/4) of an
acre or thirty-two thousand six hundred seventy (32,670) square
feet.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
Section
467.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
467.020
AO:366
Chapter 470
ADDITIONAL NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 470.010. Scope. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
The regulations of this Chapter shall pertain to the following non-residential
zoning districts: "HP-1" Hospitality Park; "BP-1" Corporate Business Park;
"BP-2" Business Park; "BP-3" Multi-Use Business Parks; "BP-4" Planned
Business Park; "C-1" Commercial Zone; "C-2" Neighborhood Commercial;
"IP-1" Industrial Park; "CP-1" Auto-Related Commercial Park; "OT-1" Olde
Towne Historical; "OT-2" Olde Towne Family Entertainment; "OT-3" Olde
Towne Mixed Use Commercial; "OT-4" Olde Towne Planned Multi-Family
Residential; and "OT-5" Olde Towne Marina Zoned District, except where
otherwise provided for in this Title.
Section 470.020. Landscape/Design Regulations. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet. Additional building height may be granted by
Special Use Permit.
2. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials. Brick and other brick-like
masonry, glass panels or architectural pre-case concrete. The
primary building materials shall not be less than eighty-five
percent (85%), excluding windows and doors, of any wall.
b. Accent Building Materials. Architecturally designed metal
panels, in a color compatible with the primary building
material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Exterior finishes deemed prototypical in building design
that must be maintained for corporate or market identity
may be authorized during Site Plan Review, in accordance
with Chapter 447.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
(3) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
Section
467.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
470.020
AO:367
Section 470.030. Parking and Loading Facility Requirements. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
See Chapter 496 for off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section 470.040. Environmental Performance Standards. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. This Section addresses landscape/design regulations for all nonresidential
districts within the City of Fenton.
B. Landscape. See Section 445.020 Landscape Standards and Procedures
for landscape regulations. For other landscape provisions, check
specific zone district regulations.
C. Fences. See Chapter 462 for fencing regulations. For other fence
provisions, check specific zone district regulations and Section 445.020
Landscape Standards and Procedures.
D. Signs. See Chapter 485 for sign regulations.
A. This Section addresses environmental regulations for all nonresidential
districts within the City of Fenton.
1. Every use, activity or structure permitted within all non-residential
districts shall comply with the provisions of the City of Fenton's and
other governmental regulating bodies' environmental and safety
hazard ordinances, laws or acts which pertain to noise and
vibration; smoke, odorous matter, toxic matter; radioactive
materials; and fire, explosives, humidity, heat and glare.
2. It is the intent of this Section to provide that all activities by
developers or property owners minimize or eliminate activities/
construction which may potentially create conditions that are
offensive and/or hazardous. These activities should be in
compliance with all City, County, State and Federal environmental
laws, Statutes or regulations. For that purpose compliance with the
items presented in this Section is required.
3. Each developer is responsible for informing the City of all
environmental laws and regulations that are applicable to the
particular site and that all appropriate permits are in order before
a building permit is issued and construction begins. Each developer
will also identify a single individual with the authority to
communicate with the Administrator on any of the environmental
items within this Section.
B. Awareness Of Environmental Constraints. For an awareness of
environmental constraints when building within non-residential
districts, reference is made to the Land Management Plan (Fenton
Master Plan) for the Fenton Development Corridor, Fenton
Comprehensive Plan, Fenton, Missouri. The 1995 Physical Land
Section
470.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
470.040
AO:368
Constraints within the Fenton Development Corridor Area shows
especially sensitive areas relating to flood-prone soils, wetlands,
archaeological sites, streams, wellhead protection zones and
stormwater management areas. (Document held by the City of Fenton's
Community Development Department.)
C. Noise And Vibrations.
1. In dealing with possible noise impacts, non-residential districts will
be defined as Class B land as defined under the State of Missouri
Noise Pollution Control Regulations. Ground vibration at any
perimeter of the property shall not exceed a peak velocity of 0.05
in/sec when measured at or below ground level.
2. When construction activities are occurring near the perimeter of
the property, related ground vibration shall not exceed 0.5 in/sec.
This should be adhered to during construction of buildings
adjoining developed areas within the district. Noise levels shall not
exceed sixty-five (65) decibels at any point on the lot line of the lot
on which the use is located with the exception of the "IP-1" District
in which noise levels shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels.
D. Odors And Air Emissions.
1. Odors from any use shall not be discernible at any perimeter of the
property. The values given in Table II (Odor Thresholds), Chapter 5
"Physiological Effects" in the "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" by
the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
shall be used as standard in case of doubt concerning the character
of odors emitted. In such case, the smallest value given in Table III
shall be the maximum odor permitted.
2. Particulates and all other emissions generated by a property
owner's activities shall be licensed via the Prevention of Significant
Deterioration (PSD) permit, if applicable by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources (DNR). In any case, particulate
emissions will be regulated in accordance with State and/or
Federal law. No fugitive particulates from material piles including
raw material, products, by-products and waste piles will be
allowed.
3. Also, no emissions containing hazardous wastes/materials as
defined by RCRA, TOSCA and FIFRA or subsequent revisions of the
Acts will be allowed from any source.
E. Site Drainage.
1. Each lot's stormwater drainage system will be allowed to flow
unrestricted and runoff water will not be allowed to make contact
with potential sources of contamination related to a developer's or
parcel owner's operations. Construction and site grading activities
will require drainage and erosion control which will be
Section
470.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
470.040
AO:369
implemented prior to construction and exposed soil shall be
replanted at the earliest possible date after the completion of such
grading. However, excessive application of fertilizers and biocides
will not be allowed.
2. All erosion and siltation control devices shall be regularly inspected
and maintained during development and be in accordance with all
applicable Department of Natural Resources guidelines. Where fill
is necessary to attain the approved finished grade of any lot in the
Fenton Business Park, it shall be free of waste materials and shall
not contain noxious materials that will give off odors of any kind.
No topsoil shall be allowed to be stripped from any lot within a nonresidential
district and removed from within the boundaries of the
City of Fenton without the express written consent of the Director.
3. Where applicable, stormwater diversion will be allowed only if a
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
is granted by the Missouri DNR. All areas that produce an increase
in surface drainage or runoff will be required to provide for
stormwater detention or retention as necessary on the site to allow
a discharge no greater than that which existed prior to
development during a 10-year 20-minute storm event and a 25-year
20-minute storm event. Natural solutions that are pleasingly
aesthetic will be encouraged.
F. Site Hazards. Any operation shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards. All areas inside and
outside of a building shall conform to all current National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) fire and safety codes. Only minimum
quantities of materials including raw materials, reagents, products, byproducts
and wastes will be stored on site. Storage, handling and use of
hazardous and/or explosive materials will be in accordance with
Missouri DNR and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency rules and
regulations, if applicable.
G. Biological Uses On Site. Use of biological agents including laboratory
animals will be allowed upon plan approval by special use permit. No
treatment of infectious, pathogenic or etiologic waste will be allowed on
site. A property owner or lessee must arrange for proper off-site
disposal of all waste products.
H. Radioactivity. Operations shall cause no dangerous radiation at any
property perimeter or in any area where people outside the perimeter
of the property could be expected to receive such radiation as specified
by the regulations of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC). The most current Section of Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, Code of
Federal Regulations "Standards for Protection Against Radiation" shall
govern the use of radioactive materials. All sources of ionizing radiation
will be licensed by either the NRC or the Missouri DNR.
Section
470.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
470.040
AO:370
Section 470.050. Street and Roadway Standards. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
See Section 480.070 for street and roadway standards.
Section 470.060. District Lighting and Utility Regulations. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
I. Electromagnetic Radiation. Any electrical radiation shall not adversely
affect at any point any operations or any equipment other than those of
the creator of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from electrical
radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations is
permitted.
J. Site Waste Generation. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated
and disposed in such manner as to comply with the air emissions, solid
and hazardous waste and water quality standards applicable. Direct
surface discharge of waste on site will not be permitted. A pretreatment
facility must be enclosed by structure and discharge made to
the sanitary sewer system upon permit from the Metropolitan St. Louis
Sewer District.
K. Building Materials And Disposal. No building materials which will
create an exposure hazard to occupants of a facility in excess of
Occupational Safety and Health Agency (OSHA) standards will be
allowed. All waste and construction materials are to be collected and
properly disposed. No waste construction materials are to be
incorporated into the fill of a lot within the limits of the City of Fenton.
L. Violations And Accidental Spills. All environmental violations including
accidental spills are to be reported immediately upon detection to the
appropriate agency. Each property owner is responsible for the cleanup
and will copy the City on all correspondence sent or received which is
relative to the violation/spill including cleanup. Cleanup plans are
subject to review and approval by the City prior to implementation.
M. Well-Head Protection Zone. Under the MDNR, public and private
drinking water supplies are protected from potential sources of ground
water contamination by use of setback zones. The purpose of the
setback zone is to provide a buffer between the public water supply
wells and potential contamination sources or routes. A minimum of one
thousand (1,000) feet, MDNR requires one hundred (100) foot setback
from well-heads are required, until further investigation designates any
potentially hazardous impacts due to particular land uses.
N. Creeks, Canals And Drainage Facilities. All structures and accessory
buildings must have a minimum one hundred fifty (150) foot setback
from any creek, canal, channel or drainage facility.
A. This Section addresses lighting and utilities regulations for all nonresidential
districts within the City of Fenton.
Section
470.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
470.060
AO:371
B. Location Of Lighting Within District. All roadways, entranceways,
loading facilities, parking and site signage shall be lighted by electricity
from an underground conduit.
C. Lighting Of Buildings. Well-designed soft lighting of the building
exterior will be permitted, provided that the light source is not visible
from the street and that it complements the building's architecture. The
lighting should not draw inordinate attention to the building.
D. Parking Area Lighting. Parking lot, service areas and roadway lighting
will be provided by free-standing fixtures with cutoff light sources to
assure that the source is not seen from the street or adjacent parcels.
The use of cool, concealed source, cutoff design; with a range of heights
from thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet with illumination in compliance
with Section 496.140.
E. Materials Of Lighting Fixtures. The material and color of the fixtures
will be evaluated in terms of their compatibility with the architecture
and natural site characteristics.
F. Pedestrian Walkways. The lighting of pedestrian walkways may include
either cutoff or exposed sources, but the height and intensity of light
will be subdued. Outer pedestrian path systems should use warm, semiconcealed
light sources with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet
using dark colored poles. Pedestrian plazas should use a warm, semiconcealed
or visible source with a maximum height of twenty (20) feet
using dark colored poles; lumens average per square foot surface area
related to architectural design solution.
G. Lighting Of Roadways. The major entry roadways should use a cool,
concealed source, cutoff design with a maximum height of thirty-five
(35) feet using dark colored poles or concrete/stone materials with a
spacing of two hundred (200) feet. Minor roadways should use a cool,
concealed source, cutoff design with a maximum height of thirty-five
(35) feet with two hundred (200) feet spacing one (1) side or staggered,
using a eight-tenths (0.8) lumen average per square foot surface area.
Major roadways should use a cool, concealed source, cutoff design with
a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet using dark colored poles (nonwood)
or concrete/stone. Spacing should be two hundred (200) feet on
both sides with a one and two-tenths (1.2) lumen average per square
foot surface area. (See Definitions of "Roadway and Streets".)
H. Underground Utilities. All utilities within non-residential districts must
be placed underground in an aesthetic and safe manner. These utilities
would include fiber optics, electric, telephone, cable, natural gas, sewer
and water.
Section
470.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
470.070
AO:372
Section 470.070. Site Plan Requirements and Review. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 3296 § 1, 12-20-2012; Ord. No. 3552 §
1, 11-19-2015; Ord. No. 3567 § 2, 1-28-2016]
See Chapter 447, Site Plan Review.
Chapter 475
BUSINESS PARK DISTRICTS
Section 475.010. "BP-1" Business Park District Regulations. [Ord.
No. 3891, 1-24-201963]
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "BP-1" Business
Park District (hereinafter "BP-1" District). The purpose of the "BP-1"
District is to provide for a mix of office, retail, and service uses in
business park setting. Because portions of the "BP-1" District are
adjacent to residential areas, the District provides for appropriate
small-scale uses that complement and provide a buffer to the residential
area. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "BP-1" District shall be a minimum of eight (8)
contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less
than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s) and fifteen (15) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required setbacks provided in Subsections (E)(1)(a — c) above, but
shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas provided
herein.
63.Editor's Note: Former Sections 475.010 through 475.060, were repealed and replaced with
new material 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 3891. Additionally the title of this chapter was
changed from "Business Zoning Districts" to "Business Park Districts."
Section
470.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.010
AO:373
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two and three-tenths (2.3)
of an acre or one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, with a
minimum width of two hundred (200) feet at the required building
line.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional building height may be granted by Special
Use Permit.
2. Building Size. Each principal building shall have a minimum
primary floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
3. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
Section
475.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.010
AO:374
Section 475.020. "BP-2" Business Park District Regulations. [Ord.
No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "BP-2" Business
Park District (hereinafter "BP-2" District). The purpose of the "BP-2"
District is to provide a mix of office and light industrial uses with
service and convenience uses in a business park setting. These
regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional regulations
appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "BP-2" District shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less
than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s) and fifteen (15) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required setbacks provided in Subsections (E)(1)(a — c) above, but
shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas provided
herein.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two and three-tenths (2.3)
of an acre or one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, with a
minimum width of two hundred (200) feet at the required building
line.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
Section
475.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.020
AO:375
Section 475.030. "BP-3" Business Park District Regulations. [Ord.
No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional building height may be granted by Special
Use Permit.
2. Building Size. Each principal building shall have minimum primary
floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
3. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors are permitted
accent building materials.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "BP-3" Business
Park District (hereinafter "BP-3" District). The purpose of the "BP-3"
District is to provide a mix of office, light industrial, retail, and service
uses in a business park setting. Because portions of the "BP-3" District
are adjacent to residential areas, the District provides for appropriate
small-scale uses that complement and provide a buffer to the residential
Section
475.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.030
AO:376
area, regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "BP-3" District shall be a minimum of six (6)
contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback. Furthermore, any side lot line adjoining any
residentially zoned property shall have an additional side
setback of five (5) feet for each one (1) foot of building height
in excess of fifteen (15) feet; said setback being determined by
the wall facing the lot line. (Note: For comparative purposes, a
thirty (30) foot high building subject to the above provision
would be set back ninety (90) feet from any adjoining
residential lot line.)
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear setback. Furthermore, any rear lot line adjoining any
residentially zoned property shall have an additional rear
setback of five (5) feet for each one (1) foot of building height
in excess of fifteen (15) feet; said setback being determined by
the wall facing the lot line. (Note: For comparative purposes, a
thirty (30) foot high building subject to the above provision
would be set back ninety (90) feet from any adjoining
residential lot line.)
2. Buffer Area.
a. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less than
thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s) and fifteen (15) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required setbacks provided in Subsections (E)(1)(a — c) above,
but shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas
area provided herein. Expanded parking and/or drive aisles
with a reduced buffer area of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
from the front lot line and/or ten (10) feet from any side or rear
lot line may be granted by Special Use Permit.
b. Notwithstanding the above, any portion of a side or rear lot
line abutting a residentially zoned property shall have a
minimum twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer area, or more if
Section
475.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.030
AO:377
deemed necessary by the City under Site Plan Review,
extending the length of the adjacent lot. Said area shall be
planted with trees and shrubs to provide a dense screen at
maturity, throughout the year, as approved by the City under
Site Plan Review. No parking areas or accessory uses will be
allowed in the landscaped buffer areas.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre or forty-three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet, with a minimum
width of one hundred fifty (150) feet at the required building line.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional height may be granted by Special Use
Permit.
2. Building Size. The primary floor area shall be a maximum of fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet. Primary floor area greater than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet may be granted by a Special Use
Permit subject to the following:
a. Such structure must otherwise comply with the maximum lot
coverage.
b. All required setbacks, buffer areas, and parking requirements
shall be complied with.
c. The maximum primary floor area shall not exceed seventy-five
thousand (75,000) square feet.
d. A buffer area of not less than fifty (50) feet width shall be
provided along any lot line adjacent to a residentially zoned
property. Said buffer area must include a combination of
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and berms to
reasonably mitigate the view from the adjacent residentially
zoned property.
e. No loading docks or tractor-trailer dock maneuvering areas
shall be directly exposed to any adjacent residentially zoned
property. Where necessary, screen walls constructed of
materials in compliance with provisions of the "BP-3" District
may be provided.
3. Exterior Building Materials.
Section
475.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.030
AO:378
Section 475.040. "CP-1" Commercial Park District Regulations.
[Ord. No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
a. Primary Building Materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors are permitted
accent building materials.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "CP-1"
Commercial Park District (hereinafter "CP-1" District). Due to the
District's location to Interstate 44, the purpose of the "CP-1" District is
to provide for a mix of offices, retail, service, and convenience uses in a
business park setting. These regulations are supplemented and
qualified by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "CP-1" District shall be a minimum of six (6)
contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
Section
475.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.040
AO:379
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum twenty-five (25)
foot rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less
than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s) and fifteen (15) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required setbacks provided in Subsections (E)(1)(a — c) above, but
shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas provided
herein.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres or one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, with a minimum width of
one hundred fifty (150) feet at the required building line.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Height And Building Size.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional building height may be granted by Special
Use Permit.
2. Building Size. Each principal building shall have a minimum
primary floor area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet.
3. Exterior building design and materials.
a. Primary Building Materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
Section
475.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.040
AO:380
Section 475.050. "HP-1" Hospitality Park District Regulations.
[Ord. No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors are permitted
accent building materials.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "HP-1"
Hospitality Park District (hereinafter "HP-1" District). Due to the
District's location to Interstate 44, the purpose of the "HP-1" District is
to provide a variety of hospitality uses, such as hotels, restaurants,
convenience uses, and entertainment establishments, in a business
park setting. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by
additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "HP-1" District shall be a minimum of eight (8)
contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear setback.
Section
475.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.050
AO:381
2. Buffer Area. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less
than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s) and fifteen (15) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required front setback provided in Subsection (E)(1)(a) above but
shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas provided
herein.
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre or forty-three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet, with a minimum
width of one hundred fifty (150) feet at the required building line.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional building height may be granted by Special
Use Permit.
2. Building Size. Each principal structure shall have a minimum
primary floor area of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
3. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary building materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors are permitted
accent building materials.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
Section
475.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.050
AO:382
Section 475.060. "IP-1" Industrial Park District Regulations. [Ord.
No. 3891, 1-24-2019]
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Exterior finishes deemed prototypical in building design
that must be maintained for corporate or market identity
may be authorized during Site Plan Review, in accordance
with Chapter 447.
(3) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations for the "IP-1" Industrial
Park District (hereinafter "IP-1" District). Due to the District's location
to Interstate 44 and the railway system, the purpose of the "IP-1"
District is to provide a variety of light and heavy industrial, highwayrelated
businesses. These regulations are supplemented and qualified
by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Permitted Uses. See Chapter 476, Land Use Matrix.
C. Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. See Chapter 476, Land Use
Matrix.
D. District Regulations. The "IP-1" District shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) contiguous acres.
E. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks.
a. Front Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifty (50) foot
front setback.
b. Side Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
side setback.
c. Rear Setback. Each lot shall have a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear setback.
2. Buffer Area. Each lot shall have landscaped buffer areas of not less
than twenty (20) feet from the front lot line(s) and ten (10) feet
from the side and rear lot lines. Parking lots may encroach the
required setbacks provided in Subsections (E)(1)(a — c) above, but
shall not encroach the required landscaped buffer areas provided
herein.
Section
475.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.060
AO:383
3. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of lot area.
4. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres.
5. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all other regulations related to the
lot and use of the lot are met.
F. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet. Additional building height may be granted by Special
Use Permit.
2. (Reserved.)
3. Exterior Building Materials.
a. Primary Building Materials.
(1) Allowable primary building materials are brick and other
brick-like masonry, architecturally designed metal panels,
glass, or architectural pre-cast concrete.
(2) Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS) is an
allowable primary building material subject to the
maximum EIFS surface not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of any wall, excluding windows and doors. EIFS material
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet above grade.
(3) Primary building materials shall have a predominantly
warm, earthtone appearance.
b. Accent Building Materials.
(1) Vinyl or metal post wraps (post cladding) and vinyl or
metal casements for windows and doors are permitted
accent building materials.
(2) Accent building materials shall be a color that is
compatible with the primary building material.
c. Exceptions.
(1) Concrete block may only be allowed as a primary or accent
building material on a rear wall not facing a public or
private street or residential property.
(2) Alternative exterior building materials deemed to be of
high durability and quality, require low maintenance, and
compatible with the surrounding uses may be authorized
under Site Plan Review, in accordance with Chapter 447.
Section
475.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.070
AO:384
Section 475.070. "BP-4" Planned Business Park District
Regulations. [Ord. No. 3875, 11-19-201864]
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations and procedures of the
"BP-4" Planned Business Park District (hereinafter "BP-4" District). It is
the purpose of the "BP-4" District to facilitate the establishment of
combinations of development and uses in a planned environment for
which no provision is made in any single "BP" Business Park District
and to encourage a creative approach to the use of land and affiliated
physical facilities that results in a better development and design under
conditions of approved site and development plans. Furthermore, the
"BP-4" District is intended for varying intensity business and associated
retail services of high quality that can justify the amenities and high
level of performance standards governing development in a planned
business park setting. These regulations are supplemented and
qualified by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
B. Establishment Of A "BP-4" District.
1. A "BP-4" District may be established on a tract of land in a single
ownership or management control provided that:
a. An application for a change of zoning and a concept plan
(hereinafter "Concept Plan") is approved by the Board.
b. A Site Development Plan in compliance with the conditions for
rezoning and Concept Plan approved by the Board is submitted
to Commission and Board for approval and recorded with the
St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
c. The schedule of construction is complied with in accordance
with the approved rezoning ordinance and/or Site
Development Plan approval.
2. A "BP-4" District may be established by the Board in the same
manner that other Zoning Districts are established where the
Board determines that any particular tract or areas should be
developed accordingly, but because of possible conflicts with
adjoining uses, more development control is necessary to protect
the general welfare than is possible under the regulations of the
"BP-1," "BP-2" and "BP-3" Business Park Districts.
3. The minimum tract or combined property area to establish a "BP-4"
District shall be three (3) contiguous acres unless said property
adjoins a "BP-4" District. For property adjoining an existing "BP-4"
District, the minimum area is one (1) contiguous acre.
C. Permitted Uses And Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. Permitted
Uses and Uses allowed by Special Use Permit in the "BP-4" District shall
64.Editor's Note: Former Section 475.070, "BP-4" Planned Business Park District, was
repealed 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 3875.
Section
475.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.070
AO:385
be established in the conditions of the rezoning ordinance governing
the District. Specific uses may include those designated Permitted Uses
and by Uses allowed by Special Use Permit in any "BP" Business Park
District, except not more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area
of any building may be used for warehouse.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks And Buffer Areas.
a. Front Setback And Buffer Area. Each lot shall have a minimum
fifty (50) foot front setback with a landscaped buffer area of not
less than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s). Parking lots
may encroach the established front setback but shall not
encroach the required landscaped buffer area provided herein.
b. Side And Rear Setbacks. Except as otherwise required in this
Section, all required side and rear setbacks and buffer areas
shall be as approved on the recorded Concept Plan or rezoning
ordinance. Parking lots may encroach the established side and
rear setbacks but shall not encroach the established
landscaped buffer area.
c. Exceptions. The required setbacks and buffer areas along the
lot line of all lots adjacent to another zoning district shall not
be less than such requirement for the abutting property. Where
a lot abuts more than one (1) other zoning district, the most
restrictive shall apply.
2. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the lot area.
3. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre, with a
minimum lot width of two hundred (200) feet at the required
building line.
4. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may be located on a lot provided all setbacks and parking
requirements are met.
E. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be five (5)
stories, not to exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
2. Building Design And Materials. Building design and materials shall
be consistent with permitted design and materials of the "BP-3"
Business Park District.
F. Procedure For Establishment Of "BP-4" District. In order to establish a
"BP-4" District to utilize land in an established "BP-4" District, the
procedure shall be as follows:
Section
475.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.070
AO:386
1. Application. The owner or owners of record or owners under
contract of a lot or tract of land or their authorized representatives
shall petition the Board on forms prescribed for this purpose by the
Director. These forms are to be submitted to the Community
Development Department and accompanied by the following:
a. Filing fee per requirements of Section 420.030 (Procedures for
a Change in Zoning);
b. Legal description of the property;
c. Outboundary plat of the property;
d. Preliminary site plan in compliance with Section 470.070;
e. Concept Plan identifying the general location of streets,
utilities, and other proposed infrastructure and the general
location of the proposed uses of the District;
f. Description/list of proposed uses; and
g. Any additional information reasonably required by the Director
to determine compliance with the requirements herein.
2. When approving the change of zoning and Concept Plan, the
Commission shall recommend and the Board shall establish within
the governing ordinance the permitted uses and uses allowed by
Special Use Permit for the proposed "BP-4" District, required
infrastructure and rules related to the same, open space
requirements, required setbacks, landscape buffers, building
heights and materials, lot size and coverage requirements, density
requirements, and other conditions and requirements to meet the
requirements of this Section. All other provisions and procedures
for a change of zoning of Section 420.030 (Procedures for a Change
in Zoning) shall apply.
3. Site Development Plans.
a. After passage of the rezoning ordinance and approval of the
Concept Plan by the Board the developer shall proceed with
submitting a Site Development Plan. A Site Development Plan
can either be presented for the entire "BP-4" District or the
developer can proceed to construct the District in phases and
submit multiple Site Development Plans. No building permits
or authorization for improvement or development for any use
requested under provisions of this Section shall be issued prior
to approval of such Plans.
b. Site Development Plans Shall Be Submitted To Director For
Review. These plans shall contain the minimum requirements
established in the conditions of the ordinance governing the
"BP-4" District and, further, shall comply with the applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance and other City
Section
475.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.070
AO:387
ordinances. If the Director finds the Plan(s) to be in substantial
compliance with the zoning ordinance, the approved Concept
Plan, and this Section ("Applicable Authority"), the Director
shall forward to the Commission for review and
recommendation. For purposes of this Section, "substantial
compliance" shall mean a level of compliance with the
requirements of the Applicable Authority such that any
identified inconsistencies do not allow a lesser amount of
performance on behalf of the Developer nor impose a greater
burden or risk upon the City or its citizens than that of the
Applicable Authority. Specifically, the Director must determine
that:
(1) Development density and intensity have not materially
changed such that density of any use exceeds the
permitted density of that use, or the permitted height of
the buildings;
(2) Design has not materially changed, in that the roadway
patterns, particularly ingress egress points, are in the
same general location as shown on the Concept Plan,
landscaped open space is in the same general location, is
of the same or greater amount, or the proposed changes
do not have the effect of creating any non-compliance or
non-conformity with the strict application of the Zoning
Code that were not previously approved at public hearing,
or of expanding the scope of existing variances, alternative
site development, options, or other approvals pursuant to
alternative development standards such that they would
differ to a greater degree from the strict application of the
Zoning Code; and
(3) Uses have not changed to include uses not approved by the
Applicable Authority.
c. The Commission shall review the Site Development Plan for
compliance with the Applicable Authority and make a
recommendation to the Board. The Board may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the Site Development Plan in
accordance with the Applicable Authority. Within sixty (60)
days of approval by the Board, the Site Development Plan(s)
shall be recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds
by the developer at its cost and thereby authorize development
as depicted thereon. Failure to record such Plan within the
required time frame shall result in the Site Development Plan
becoming null and void.
4. Guarantee Of Improvements. Unless otherwise provided for in the
conditions of the ordinance governing a "BP-4" District, no building
permits or permits authorizing the occupancy or use of any
building, facility, commercial establishment or structure may be
Section
475.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.070
AO:388
used or occupied until required related off-site improvements are
constructed or a performance bond, escrow, or other acceptable
instrument is posted covering their estimated cost as determined
by the Director. This requirement shall not apply to foundation
permits or permits necessary for the installation of required related
off-site improvements. Required related off-site improvements shall
include, but not be limited to, streets, sidewalks, sanitary and
storm sewers, streetlights, and street trees. If a "BP-4" District is
developed in phases, the requirement shall also apply to all major
improvements necessary to the proper operation and function of
the phase in question, even though such improvements may be
located outside of the phase in question.
5. To Amend The Rezoning Ordinance Or Concept Plan. Amendment
to the Concept Plan or conditions or terms of the rezoning
ordinance shall proceed through the same procedure for approval
of the original Concept Plan and rezoning ordinance.
6. To Amend The Recorded Site Development Plans.
a. The property owner or authorized representative shall submit
an amended Site Development Plan to the Director for review.
The Director shall then evaluate the request for consistency in
purpose and content with the nature of the approved Concept
Plan, rezoning ordinance, and original Site Development Plan.
b. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is major in nature and is not in conflict
with the approved Concept Plan and meets all conditions of the
"BP-4" District ordinance, said Plan shall be reviewed by the
Commission and forwarded to the Board for approval. If
approved, said amended Plan shall be recorded with the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds by the developer at its cost
within sixty (60) days of review and report by the Commission
and approval by the Board. Failure to record within the
prescribed timeline shall result in the approval of the
amendment being null and void.
c. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is minor in nature and is not in conflict
with the original proposal as advertised and the Concept Plan
and meets all conditions of the "BP-4" District ordinance, the
Director may administratively approve such amendment. Said
amended Plan shall be retained on file by the Community
Development Department and shall be recorded with the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds by the developer at its cost
within sixty (60) days of approval by the Director. Failure to
record within the prescribed timeline shall result in the
approval of the amendment being null and void.
Section
475.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.070
AO:389
d. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is not consistent in purpose and content
of the rezoning ordinance or with the Concept Plan approved
by the Board, the Director shall so report to the applicant and
the Commission. The Commission shall then review the
amended Site Development Plan and make a recommendation
to the Board for final determination.
7. Appeals. The developer/petitioner may appeal a decision by the
Director. The petitioner shall have a fifteen-day period in which to
file a written appeal and plan with the Commission. The written
appeal, stating the reasons for the appeal, shall be submitted to the
Department. The Commission will make a final determination of the
matter. No exceptions will be granted that are in violation of the
particular ordinance governing the Site Development Plan. Such
final determination by the Commission is subject to the appeal
procedures of Chapter 160. To the fullest extent permitted by law,
such review procedures shall be exhausted before any action may
be filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees,
boards, officials, or commissions.
8. Failure To Commence Construction.
a. Unless otherwise determined by the Board in the rezoning
ordinance, the Board shall consider the "BP-4" District
development subject to revocation if substantial construction
fails to commence within one (1) year of filing of the Site
Development Plan or construction is not completed within five
(5) years from approval of the Site Development Plan. As used
in this Section, "substantial construction" shall mean final
grading for roadways necessary for first (1st) approved plat or
phase of construction and commencement of installation of
sanitary and storm sewers. Any extension herein provided for
shall be filed with the Director prior to the expiration date for
which the extension is being requested. The developer shall be
notified, in writing, at least sixty (60) days prior to any
revocation hearing.
b. The Board may grant an extension to commence construction
for not more than one (1) additional year. Any extension herein
provided for shall be filed with the Director prior to the
expiration date for which the extension is being requested.
c. In the event the Site Development Plan is not submitted or
substantial construction has not commenced within the
prescribed time limits, the Site Development Plan and Concept
Plan shall terminate and the Commission shall within forty-five
(45) days recommend initiation of a new public hearing to
revert the property to its prior classification in accord with the
proceedings specified in Section 420.040, Petitions for Change,
Filing Fee, Form and Contents. When a "BP-4" District has
Section
475.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.070
AO:390
Section 475.080. "PID" Planned Industrial Development District
Regulations. [Ord. No. 3876, 11-19-201865]
terminated by reason of provisions of this Subsection, no
building permit shall be issued on that property until a public
hearing has been held for the purpose of reinstating the "BP-4"
District or reversion of said property to its prior zoning
classification and action taken thereon by the Board.
9. Unfinished Portions Of A Site Development Plan. Any ground in an
unfinished phase of a Site Development Plan in the "BP-4" District
not completed within one (1) year from the date of Site
Development Plan approval by the Board shall be graded and
seeded with a perennial grass seed. Said undeveloped ground shall
be maintained with appropriate mowing and trimming to meet City
standards, until it becomes an active construction site.
A. Purpose. This Section contains the regulations and procedures for the
"PID" Planned Industrial Development District (hereinafter "PID"
District). It is the purpose of the "PID" District to facilitate the
establishment of combinations of development and uses that cannot be
accomplished in a Business Park District and to encourage a creative
approach to the use of land and facilities therein that can best be
achieved via parameters and alternatives through conditions of
approved site development plans. Furthermore, the "PID" District is
intended for varying intensity industrial and complementary business/
commercial services of high quality that can justify the amenities and
high level of performance standards governing development in a
planned industrial development setting. These regulations are
supplemented and qualified by additional regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Title.
B. Establishment Of A "PID" District.
1. A "PID" District may be established on a tract of land in a single
ownership or management control provided that:
a. An application for a change of zoning and a concept plan
(hereinafter "Concept Plan") is approved by the Board.
b. A Site Development Plan in compliance with the conditions for
rezoning and Concept Plan approved by the Board is submitted
to the Commission and Board for approval and recorded with
the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
c. The schedule of construction is complied with in accordance
with the approved rezoning ordinance and/or Site
Development Plan approval.
65.Editor's Note: Former Section 475.080, "PID" Planned Industrial Development District,
was repealed 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 3876.
Section
475.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.080
AO:391
2. A "PID" District may be established by the Board in the same
manner that other Zoning Districts are established where the
Board determines that any particular tract or areas should be
developed accordingly, but because of possible conflicts with
adjoining uses, more development control is necessary to protect
the general welfare than is possible under the regulations of the
"IP-1" Industrial Park District.
3. The minimum tract or combined property area to establish a "PID"
District shall be twenty (20) contiguous acres unless said property
adjoins a "PID" District. For property adjoining an existing "PID"
District, the minimum area is two (2) contiguous acres.
C. Permitted Uses And Uses Allowed By Special Use Permit. Permitted
Uses and Use allowed by Special Use Permit in the "PID" District, shall
be established in the conditions of the rezoning ordinance governing
the particular "PID" District. Specific uses include those designated
Permitted Uses and Uses allowed by Special Use Permit in any "BP"
Business Park Districts.
D. Lot Regulations.
1. Setbacks And Buffer Areas.
a. Front Setback And Buffer Area. Each lot shall have a minimum
fifty (50) foot front setback with a landscaped buffer area of not
less than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line(s). Parking lots
may encroach the established front setback but shall not
encroach the required landscaped buffer area provided herein.
b. Side And Rear Setbacks. Except as otherwise required in this
Section, all required side and rear setbacks and buffer areas
shall be as approved on the recorded Concept Plan or rezoning
ordinance. Parking lots may encroach the established side and
rear setbacks but shall not encroach the established
landscaped buffer area.
c. Exceptions. The required setbacks and buffer areas along the
lot line of all lots adjacent to another zoning district shall not
be less than such requirement for the abutting property. Where
a lot abuts more than one (1) other zoning district, the most
restrictive shall apply.
2. Intensity Of Use. Maximum lot coverage of the principal building(s)
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot area.
3. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres, except lots
established with day-care centers and restaurants may be on a lot
of not less than one and one-half (1.5) acres. Every lot shall have a
minimum lot width of two hundred (200) feet at the required
building line.
Section
475.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.080
AO:392
4. Number Of Buildings Per Lot. More than one (1) principal building
may located on a lot provided all setbacks and parking
requirements are met.
E. Building Regulations.
1. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be five (5)
stories, not to exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
2. Building Design And Materials. Building design and materials shall
be consistent with permitted design and materials of the "IP-1"
Industrial Park District.
F. Procedure For Establishment Of "PID" District. In order to establish a
"PID" District to utilize land in an established "PID" District, the
procedure shall be as follows:
1. Application. The owner or owners of record or owners under
contract of a lot or tract of land or their authorized representatives
shall petition the Board on forms prescribed for this purpose by the
Director. These forms are to be submitted to the Community
Development Department and accompanied by the following:
a. Filing fee per requirements of Section 420.030 (Procedures for
a Change in Zoning);
b. Legal description of the property;
c. Outboundary plat of the property;
d. Preliminary site plan in compliance with Section 470.070.
e. Concept Plan identifying the general location of streets,
utilities, and other proposed infrastructure and the general
location of the proposed uses of the District;
f. Description/list of proposed uses; and
g. Any additional information reasonably required by the Director
to determine compliance with the requirements herein.
2. When approving the change of zoning and Concept Plan, the
Commission shall recommend and the Board shall establish within
the governing ordinance the permitted uses and uses allowed by
Special Use Permit for the proposed "BP-4" District, required
infrastructure and rules related to the same, open space
requirements, required setbacks, landscape buffers, building
heights and materials, lot size and coverage requirements, density
requirements, and other conditions and requirements to meet the
requirements of this Section. Upon request by the petitioner, the
Board may within the ordinance that rezones the petitioner's
property "PID" District approve for good cause shown alternative
standards from the Subdivision Ordinance relative to streets,
Section
475.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.080
AO:393
sidewalks, and/or drainage, and such approved, alternative
standards shall be indicated on the plans. All other provisions and
procedures for a change of zoning of Section 420.030 (Procedures
for a Change in Zoning) shall apply.
3. Site Development Plans.
a. After passage of the rezoning ordinance and approval of the
Concept Plan by the Board the developer shall proceed with
submitting a Site Development Plan. A Site Development Plan
can either be presented for the entire "PID" District or the
developer can proceed to construct the District in phases and
submit multiple Site Development Plans. No building permits
or authorization for improvement or development for any use
requested under provisions of this Section shall be issued prior
to approval of such Plans.
b. Site Development Plans Shall Be Submitted To The Director
For Review. These plans shall contain the minimum
requirements established in the conditions of the ordinance
governing the "PID" District and, further, shall comply with
applicable provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance and other
City ordinances. If the Director finds the Plan(s) to be in
substantial compliance with the zoning ordinance, the
approved Concept Plan, and this Section ("Applicable
Authority"), the Director shall forward to the Commission for
review and recommendation. For purposes of this Section,
"substantial compliance" shall mean a level of compliance with
the requirements of the Applicable Authority such that any
identified inconsistencies do not allow a lesser amount of
performance on behalf of the Developer nor impose a greater
burden or risk upon the City or its citizens than that of the
Applicable Authority. Specifically, the Director must determine
that:
(1) Development density and intensity have not materially
changed such that density of any use exceeds the
permitted density of that use, or the permitted height of
the buildings;
(2) Design has not materially changed, in that the roadway
patterns, particularly ingress egress points, are in the
same general location as shown on the Concept Plan,
landscaped open space is in the same general location, is
of the same or greater amount, or the proposed changes
do not have the effect of creating any non-compliance or
non-conformity with the strict application of the Zoning
Code that were not previously approved at public hearing,
or of expanding the scope of existing variances, alternative
site development, options, or other approvals pursuant to
alternative development standards such that they would
Section
475.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.080
AO:394
differ to a greater degree from the strict application of the
Zoning Code; and
(3) Uses have not changed to include uses not approved by the
Applicable Authority.
c. The Commission shall review the Site Development Plan for
compliance with the Applicable Authority and make a
recommendation to the Board. The Board may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the Site Development Plan in
accordance with the Applicable Authority. Within sixty (60)
days of approval by the Board, the Site Development Plan(s)
shall be recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds
by the developer at its cost and thereby authorize development
as depicted thereon. Failure to record such Plan within the
required time frame shall result in the Site Development Plan
becoming null and void.
4. Guarantee Of Improvements. Unless otherwise provided for in the
conditions of the ordinance governing a "PID" District, no building
permits or permits authorizing the occupancy or use of any
building, facility, commercial establishment or structure may be
use or occupied until required related off-site improvements are
constructed or a performance bond, escrow, or other acceptable
instrument is posted covering their estimated cost as determined
by the Director. This requirement shall not apply to foundation
permits or permits necessary for the installation of required related
off-site improvements. Required related off-site improvements shall
include, but not be limited to, streets, sidewalks, sanitary and
storm sewers, streetlights, and street trees. If a "PID" District is
developed in phases, the requirement shall also apply to all major
improvements necessary to the proper operation and function of
the phase in question, even though such improvements may be
located outside of the phase in question.
5. To Amend The Rezoning Ordinance Or Concept Plan. Amendment
to the Concept Plan or conditions or terms of the rezoning
ordinance shall proceed through the same procedure for approval
of the original Concept Plan and rezoning ordinance.
6. To Amend The Recorded Site Development Plan.
a. The property owner or authorized representative shall submit
an amended Site Development Plan to the Director for review.
The Director shall then evaluate the request for consistency in
purpose and content with the nature of the approved Concept
Plan, rezoning ordinance, and original Site Development Plan.
b. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is major in nature and is not in conflict
with the approved Concept Plan and meets all conditions of the
"PID" District ordinance, said Plan shall be reviewed by the
Section
475.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
475.080
AO:395
Commission and forwarded to the Board for approval. If
approved, said amended Plan shall be recorded with the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds by the developer at its cost
within sixty (60) days of review and report by the Commission
and approval by the Board. Failure to record within the
prescribed timeline shall result in the approval of the
amendment being null and void.
c. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is minor in nature and is not in conflict
with the Concept Plan and meets all conditions of the "PID"
District ordinance, the Director may administratively approve
such amendment. Said amended Plan shall be retained on file
by the Community Development Department and shall be
recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds by the
developer at its cost within sixty (60) days of approval by the
Director. Failure to record within the prescribed timeline shall
result in the approval of the amendment being null and void.
d. If the Director determines that the proposed amendment to the
Site Development Plan is not consistent in purpose and content
of the rezoning ordinance or with the Concept Plan approved
by the Board, the Director shall so report to the applicant and
the Commission. The Commission shall then review the
amended Site Development Plan and make a recommendation
to the Board for final determination.
7. Appeals. The petitioner/developer may appeal a decision by the
Director. The petitioner shall have a fifteen-day period in which to
file a written appeal and plan with the Commission. The written
appeal, stating the reasons for the appeal, shall be submitted to the
Department. The Commission will make a final determination of the
matter. No exceptions will be granted that are in violation of the
particular ordinance governing the "PID" District. Such final
determination by the Commission is subject to the appeal
procedures of Chapter 160. To the fullest extent permitted by law,
such review procedures shall be exhausted before any action may
be filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees,
boards, officials, or commissions.
8. Failure To Commence Construction.
a. Unless otherwise determined by the Board in the rezoning
ordinance, the Board shall consider the "PID" District subject
to revocation if substantial construction within the "PID"
District development fails to commence within one (1) year of
filing of the Site Development Plan or construction of the first
(1st) phase or building site is not completed within five (5)
years from approval of the Site Development Plan. As used in
this Section, "substantial construction" shall mean final
grading for roadways necessary for first (1st) approved plat or
Section
475.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
475.080
AO:396
Chapter 476
LAND USE MATRIX
Section 476.010. Land Use Matrix.
Table 1, Land Use Matrix below66 indicates the Permitted Uses (X) and Uses
allowed by Special Use Permit (S) within the Zoning Districts of the City.
Section 476.020. Prohibited Uses And Exceptions. [Ord. No. 3890,
1-24-2019]
phase of construction and commencement of installation of
sanitary and storm sewers. Any extension herein provided for
shall be filed with the Director prior to the expiration date for
which the extension is being requested. The developer shall
be notified, in writing, at least sixty (60) days prior to any
revocation hearing.
b. The Board may grant an extension for any phase or building
site to commence construction for not more than one (1)
additional year. Any extension herein provided for shall be filed
with the Director prior to the expiration date for which the
extension is being requested.
c. In the event the Site Development Plan is not submitted or
substantial construction has not commenced within the
prescribed time limits, the Site Development Plan and Concept
Plan shall terminate and the Commission shall within forty-five
(45) days recommend initiation of a new public hearing to
revert the property to its prior classification in accord with the
proceedings specified in Section 420.040, Petitions for Change,
Filing Fee, Form and Contents. When a "PID" District has
terminated by reason of provisions of this Subsection, no
building permit shall be issued on that property until a public
hearing has been held for the purpose of reinstating the "PID"
District or reversion of said property to its prior zoning
classification and action taken thereon by the Board.
9. Unfinished Portions Of A Site Development Plan. Any ground in an
unfinished phase of a Site Development Plan in the "PID" District
not completed within one (1) year from the date of Site
Development Plan approval by the Board shall be graded and
seeded with a perennial grass seed. Said undeveloped ground shall
be maintained with appropriate mowing and trimming to meet City
standards, until it becomes an active construction site.
66.Editor's Note: Table 1, Land Use Matrix, can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
Section
475.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
476.020
AO:397
Chapter 480
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 480.010. Subdivision Provisions — in General. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in any Zoning
District of the City.
1. Facilities for animal slaughtering, tanning, meatpacking, or
rendering;
2. Sulphur plants, rubber reclamation plants, or cement plants;
3. Steel or any other metal mills, foundry or smelters;
4. Any use which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission
of odor, dust, smoke, or noise;
5. Any other use not specifically listed within a Zoning District on the
Land Use Matrix. Uses not listed have been determined either not
to be appropriate in the District, incompatible with certain existing
uses, or sufficiently rare or unexpected as to be incapable of being
listed at the time of adoption of this Code.
B. Exceptions. Any use constituting a use that is required to be permitted
by law, shall be authorized to the extent only required by law to be
permitted; and the use shall only be approved under a Special Use
Permit, except if by law it is required to be permitted by right.
A. General. This intent of the subdivision provisions is to provide
regulations and standards to guide the subdivision of land within
corporate limits of the City of Fenton. The purpose for the regulations is
to:
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the City;
2. Establishing accurate records of land subdivisions;
3. In general to facilitate the orderly coordinated, efficient and
economic development of the City.
B. Exceptions. These regulations shall apply to any subdivision of land as
defined herein located within the City corporate limits. Although
considered subdivisions, the following are exempt from the provisions
of this Section and may be approved by the City:
1. Combining existing lots where:
Section
476.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.010
AO:398
Section 480.020. Subdivision Procedures For Application and
Variances. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
a. The total number of lots is not increased;
b. The resultant lots conform to all applicable regulations;
c. That combining lots does not require the establishment of any
streets;
d. Cause any hardship toward future development according to
this Code.
2. Dividing land into parcels of ten (10) acres or more where no new
street or access easement is created.
C. Civil Liability Of City. Nothing contained in or omitted from these
regulations shall be construed as a basis for imposing civil liability upon
the City, its officers or employees. In addition, the City, its officers and
employees shall not be liable for any injury, damage, loss or death
arising from or related to any act performed pursuant to these
regulations, including, but not limited to, inspections, certifications,
approvals and acceptances; the omission to perform any such act; or
the adherence to or failure to adhere to any standard or requirement
set forth in these regulations.
D. No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed or
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such manner as to
prolong the life of the building, nor shall the uses of any land be
changed without first obtaining a permit issued by such officer or
official, except that no permit shall be required for ordinary repairs on
conforming use structures. Such permits shall be issued only when the
request thereof is in conformity with the subdivision regulations; after
the applicant has secured a subdivision permit from the Fenton Board
of Aldermen.
A. General.
1. Application. The Commission must take action on a plat within sixty
(60) days after submission of a complete application. No action
shall be taken on any subdivision preliminary plat by the
Commission without an informational hearing. If the Commission
does not act within the sixty (60) days after submission of a
complete application, the plat is deemed approved by the
Commission.
2. Conditions for approval. The Commission or the Board of Aldermen
may impose any reasonable conditions on approval of the
subdivision that it deems necessary as long as such conditions are
consistent with this Code. All conditions must be listed on the final
plat and meet prior to the signing of the final plat by the Chairman
of the Commission.
Section
480.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.020
AO:399
3. Variances.
a. General. The Commission may grant a variance from these
regulations when it finds that strict compliance would impose
excessive hardship and practical difficulty. Such a variance
shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
these regulations and shall be based upon evidence that:
(1) Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare;
(2) The request for the variance is based on particular
conditions of size, shape or topography of the property
which are not generally applicable to other property;
(3) Strict compliance would impose a particular hardship and
not a mere inconvenience;
(4) The variance will not violate the provisions of any other
ordinance;
(5) The request is not solely to alleviate a financial hardship;
(6) The compliance hardship must be presented clearly by the
petitioner; and the responsibility to prove the hardship
shall be that of the petitioner to the complete
understanding of the Commission.
b. Conditions. In granting a variance, the Commission may
impose any conditions it deems appropriate in compliance with
this Code.
c. Procedures. A variance may be requested by submitting a
completed application including a full explanation of the
grounds for the request. An informational hearing on the
request must be held, notice of which must be made in
accordance with Section 480.060, Subsection (D)(2).
B. Appeals. Any party who is adversely affected by a decision of the
Commission may appeal to the Board by submitting a letter to the City
within ten (10) days from the date of the decision. The letter must
clearly request such an appeal, state the relief sought by the appeal and
list the grounds on which the appeal is based. The Board may affirm,
modify or reverse the decision of the Commission.
C. Enforcement.
1. General. No lot which is to be created by a proposed subdivision
may be conveyed until such subdivision plat has been approved in
accordance with these regulations, signed by appropriate City
Officials and recorded with the St. Louis County Department of
Revenue, Recorder of Deeds.
Section
480.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.020
AO:400
Section 480.030. Inspection of Subdivisions During Construction,
Permits and Fees. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
2. Subdivision by deed. The subdivision of land by deed shall not be
permitted; such proposed subdivision must conform to the
provisions of these regulations.
3. Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any
structure to be built on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of these
regulations.
4. Enforcement officer. The Director or his designee shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the regulations.
D. Violations And Penalties. The owner or agent of the owner of any land
who transfers, sells or conveys such land by reference to, exhibition of
or other use of a plat of such proposed subdivision before such plat has
been approved in accordance with these regulations and recorded with
the St. Louis County Department of Revenue, Recorder of Deeds shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, punished as set out in
Section 100.060 of this Code. Each day that any violation of any
provision of these regulations shall continue and shall constitute a
separate offense. The inclusion of a metes and bounds description in the
instrument of transfer or sale shall not exempt the transaction from
these penalties. The City may enjoin or invalidate any transaction or
agreement involving the conveyance of any lot not approved in
conformance with these regulations.
A. Inspections. Periodical inspections by the Community Development
Department shall be made of the subdivision areas during the progress
of construction. In the case of private streets in a subdivision, the
Director or his designee shall make his inspections as aforesaid as the
official representative of the City and shall promptly report all defects
and substandard work or materials to the Commission. A registered
professional engineer shall prepare specifications on behalf of the
owner/developer for each subdivision and the improvements therein in
accordance with the requirements of the City of Fenton.
B. The explicit purpose for review and inspection fees are to reimburse the
City of Fenton for costs incurred during the review and inspection
process. Deposits exceeding costs incurred by the inspection process
may be refunded to the developer with an itemized list of those incurred
expenses for which funds have been withheld.
C. Permits.
1. No construction shall commence without first obtaining a
subdivision construction permit from the Commission and without
first giving forty-eight (48) hours' notice of the work proposed to be
done. The cost of such permit shall be one percent (1%) of the
estimated cost of such improvements, including paving, storm
Section
480.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.030
AO:401
Section 480.040. Minor Residential Subdivision Approval
Procedure. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 480.050. Criteria For Major Subdivision Approval. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
sewers and sanitary sewers and sewage disposal plants, and such
other improvements as may be provided or required; and if the
persons applying for such construction permits have paid the
subdivision permit fees as above required, the amount thereof shall
be credited on the cost of the construction permit.
2. In addition to all fees provided for herein, the owner/developer of
the subdivision shall pay for and arrange for additional inspections
as may be required by the Director and other regulations of the
City of Fenton.
A. Criteria. The criteria for a minor residential subdivision shall be any
residential subdivision containing not more than four (4) lots fronting
on an existing road and not:
1. Involving the creation of a new street or access easements;
2. The extension of municipal facilities;
3. The creation of any public improvements;
4. Adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property;
5. In conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Zoning
Ordinance or these regulations;
6. Requiring any variance.
B. The Director may waive without a variance request the requirements of
submission of all other plans except the final plat to be approved and
recorded. However, the pertinent data required by the Director shall be
submitted for their review. Should the Director choose to not waive the
requirement or plans, Section 480.050 should be followed.
A. Criteria. A major subdivision of any land, which is not classified as a
"minor" subdivision, shall meet any one (1) of the following criteria:
1. Having more than four (4) lots;
2. Involving the creation of a new street or road;
3. Involving the extension of municipal facilities;
4. Adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property; and
Section
480.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.050
AO:402
Section 480.060. Subdivision Required Plans and Plat Details. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 3104 §1, 2-25-2010; Ord. No.
3181 §1, 4-28-2011]
5. Conflicting with the Comprehensive Plan, Official Zoning Map,
Zoning Ordinance or this Code.
A. General Requirements.
1. Each plat must be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor licensed in the
State of Missouri whose name, address and telephone number shall
appear on the plat. Sheets must not be larger than twenty-four by
thirty-six (24 x 36) inches and must be numbered sequentially.
2. The Fenton Board of Aldermen shall approve all subdivisions of
land. Such proposed subdivisions shall be first submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Fenton for its
recommendations. The Director and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer shall enforce the provisions of the Zoning Code through
issuance of building and occupancy permits and field inspections to
assure conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
B. Sketch Plan.
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
property owner if different.
2. Names of owners of all property adjoining the subject tract.
3. The locator number, zoning, acreage, graphic scale (no less than
one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet), north arrow, location
map (of adequate size) and date.
4. The name, address, seal and signature of the preparer of the plat.
5. Location and length of existing and proposed lot lines and the
number of proposed lots.
6. Existing and proposed streets, roads and easements within and
adjacent to the subject property including right-of-way widths.
7. Contours at five (5) foot intervals.
8. The location of all watercourses including lakes and ponds within
two hundred (200) feet, including the 100-year floodplain and the
floodway where applicable.
9. The location of existing and proposed water lines, sanitary sewer
lines and storm drainage lines and structures.
C. Application Procedures.
Section
480.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.060
AO:403
1. Three (3) copies of the sketch plan must be submitted including the
details and supporting information listed in Section 480.060,
Subsection (B) Sketch Plan.
2. The Director shall review the sketch plan and provide written
comments to the applicant within twenty (20) working days of
submission of an acceptable application and supporting
information. If the applicant submits a revised plat in response to
the comments, the review process shall be repeated.
3. After the Director approves the sketch plan, he/she shall send the
applicant a letter verifying such approval. The letter must be issued
prior to submission of a preliminary plat.
D. Preliminary Plat Requirements.
1. Application procedures.
a. An application shall be submitted on the approved forms
provided by the City.
b. The application fee shall be in accordance with the fee
schedule in Addendum A.
c. Copies of the proposed plat in the quantities required shall be
submitted including the details and supporting information
listed in Section 480.060, Subsection (E).
d. Revised plats shall be submitted by the deadline established by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Public hearing.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold an
informational hearing on the plats. The applicant shall be
notified of the time and place of the hearing by a letter sent no
fewer than five (5) days before the scheduled date.
b. Fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be published in at least one (1) newspaper having general
circulation within the municipality. In addition, the City will be
responsible for notifying all owners of property within three
hundred (300) feet of the subject property by mail of the
application and hearing date. Said notice shall be postmarked
at least five (5) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. In
the event the petitioner seeks more than one (1) continuance of
any published or notified hearing, the petitioner shall be
responsible for reimbursement of any re-publication and/or
mailing notification costs prior to any action by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
c. In addition to the above, the Director shall cause a sign or
signs, not less than two (2) feet high by three (3) feet wide, to
Section
480.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.060
AO:404
be placed on all parcels of land on which an application for
a subdivision has been filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(1) Sign or signs shall be placed on such parcels of land at a
point nearest to the right-of-way of any street or roadway
abutting such parcel and so as to be clearly visible to the
traveled portion of such street or roadway. The Director
shall determine the number of additional signs to be
placed that may be necessary to carry out the intent of this
Code.
(2) All signs shall have letters not less than two and one-half
(2 1/2) inches in height and not less than three-eighths (3/
8) inch in width with the following: "PUBLIC HEARING."
[Ord. No. 3410 §4, 4-24-2014]
(3) The Director may provide for such additional information
to be placed on any such sign which would serve to fully
inform the public as to the nature of subdivision pending
before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(4) Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
who shall remove, mar, scratch, obliterate or in any
manner deface, hide from view or tamper with any such
sign or signs shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as set out in Section
100.060 of this Code.
d. The Director shall write a recommendation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission based upon the review of the preliminary
plans. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall report to the
Board of Aldermen its decision including any conditions of
approval or reasons for denial. The Board of Aldermen may
uphold or reverse the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The applicant shall provide copies of approved
preliminary plats as requested by the Director incorporating
any required changes so that they may be signed by the
Chairman; one (1) copy shall be returned to the petitioner.
Such plats shall state that the approval is not final and that the
plat is not to be recorded. The Chairman shall include the
expiration date on the plat.
3. Effect of approval.
a. Preliminary approval shall be effective for one (1) year during
which time the plat shall not be affected by any changes in
these regulations or the zoning ordinance. If final approval has
not been obtained during this period, preliminary approval
shall again be required, subject to any new ordinance or
physical change in the development area.
Section
480.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.060
AO:405
b. Preliminary approval does not constitute acceptance of roads
or other land or facilities to be dedicated.
c. Construction of improvements may begin in accordance with
the preliminary plat subject to the following:
(1) If the owner/developer desires to build any display homes
prior to approval of the final plat, the location and the
number of units must be shown on the preliminary plat.
(2) No site improvement other than construction of display
homes may occur prior to the final approval of the
improvement plans.
(3) Any minor changes required during the course of
construction shall be reviewed by the Director. All
substantial changes that effect lot configuration must be
submitted and approved by the Commission.
(4) All improvements shall be subject to the inspection and
final approval of the Director.
(5) The City shall be notified in writing five (5) days before any
construction begins.
(6) The Director shall be notified forty-eight (48) hours prior
to any type of blasting, provided all permits for handling of
an explosive agent is reviewed and/or approved by the City
and the State Fire Marshal.
4. Revocation of approval. The approval of a preliminary plat or
extension thereof may be revoked after a public hearing by the
Planning and Zoning Commission if there has been a major change
in conditions involving the subdivision which would adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare or if the improvements
approved are not built in accordance with plans. The applicant
shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing by registered
or certified mail sent not fewer than five (5) days before the
scheduled date.
E. Preliminary Plat. A plat at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet
submitted for preliminary approval shall include the same details
required for sketch plans in addition to the following:
1. The name of the subdivision if within an existing subdivision.
2. The proposed name of the subdivision if not within a previously
platted subdivision. The proposed name of any new subdivision
shall not duplicate or closely approximate phonetically the name of
any other subdivision within the City of Fenton.
3. The tract name if no subdivision name has been chosen.
Section
480.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.060
AO:406
4. A key map on the first (1st) sheet if the entire subdivision will not fit
on one (1) sheet and match lines to facilitate the matching of
separate sheets.
5. Municipal, County and school district boundaries within two
hundred (200) feet.
6. If the applicant is not the owner, a statement consenting to the
subdivision signed by the owner.
7. The location, size and purpose of any existing or proposed
easement, right-of-way or land reserved or dedicated to public use.
8. The names, locations and widths of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within and immediately adjacent to the tract.
9. Existing covenants or restrictions.
10. The names of owners of adjoining property.
11. Tract boundary lines and lot lines with accurate dimensions,
bearing or deflection angles, radii arcs and central angles of all
curves.
12. The number of proposed lots shown on each sheet and the dwelling
unit density and all applicable setback lines.
13. The use of any lot to be used for other than residential purposes.
14. Location and name of proposed streets. The maximum grade of all
streets shall be shown on the drawings or verified on a written
form.
15. Existing and proposed location of all storm and sanitary sewers
within and immediately adjacent to the site.
16. Proposals for connection to an adequate public water supply and
sanitary sewer systems or other means of providing water and
sewage disposal.
17. Proposals for collecting and discharging surface water drainage
including location of all detention facilities.
18. The number, size and type of trees to be planted in the subdivision.
19. All existing buildings within one hundred (100) feet of the property.
F. Improvement Plans. Construction plans at a scale of one (1) inch equals
fifty (50) feet on sheets the same size as the plat with the following
information:
1. Profiles of centerline elevations of existing and proposed roads;
approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents and central
angles of all streets;
Section
480.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.060
AO:407
2. Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross sections
of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
drainage easements, rights-of-way, fire hydrants, manholes and
catch basins; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and
proposed stormwater drains and sanitary sewers including
connections to existing or proposed systems; and the location and
size of water lines, gas lines or other underground utilities,
detention basin location, size and hydraulic calculations and site
distance calculations for all entrance and exit roads; and
3. A site grading, explosive removal and erosion control plan.
4. The above improvement plan shall be accompanied by appropriate
hydraulic cut and fill calculations, soil report including depth of
rock.
5. A soil report will be issued addressing soil conditions at the site and
corrective measures to be implemented for development and
roadway construction.
G. Final Plat.
1. Purpose. The final plat is to provide a final record of the subdivision
and related improvements including all of the information on the
approved preliminary plat such as streets, water lines and sanitary
and storm sewers and incorporation of any subsequent changes
approved by the City. Final plat approval may only be requested
after either:
a. All improvements have been completed, or
b. A performance guarantee for any uncompleted improvements
has been posted in conformance with the requirements set
forth in Section 435.010.
2. Application procedures.
a. An application shall be submitted on the forms provided by the
City by the deadline established by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
b. Any fee established in this Code must be paid.
c. Copies of the final plat conforming to the requirements of the
preliminary plat shall be submitted in the quantities previously
required. All minor changes, approved in writing by the
Director, must be reported to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the Director determines that the changes are
substantive, the revised preliminary plans must be returned to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval.
d. Final detailed plans and specifications shall be provided.
Section
480.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.060
AO:408
e. The following certifications shall be required:
(1) Statement from the City stating that all roads and other
improvements have been properly installed and
constructed in accordance to the approved plan;
(2) Statement from the St. Louis Metropolitan Sewer District
stating that sewage disposal and stormwater systems have
been properly installed; and
(3) Statement from the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning
Commission stating that an adequate performance escrow
according to this Code has been provided to ensure the
completion of all uncompleted roads and other
improvements.
H. Final Plat Requirements.
1. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat.
2. The Board of Aldermen shall have approval authority over final
plats. If approved by the Board of Aldermen, the City will issue a
letter to that effect. A notification of denial shall include an
explanation of the reasons therefore or of additional information or
changes required.
3. If no action is taken within sixty (60) days, the Board of Aldermen
shall notify the applicant in writing the reason for the extended
time to review such application.
4. Once final approval is granted, the applicant shall submit one (1)
copy of the approved plat drawn in permanent black ink on mylar to
the Community Development Department in addition to the three
(3) paper copies requested. The plats shall be signed by the
Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, no
plats shall be signed until all conditions of approval have been met.
One (1) paper copy of the signed plat shall be returned to the
applicant. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain one
(1) paper copy and associated documents on file. The mylar copy
shall be filed with the City.
5. The applicant shall be responsible for recording the final plat with
the St. Louis County D.R., R.D., within sixty (60) days after the
signing of the plat and return a mylar along with two (2) paper
copies of the recorded plat to the City. If any recorded plat is not
filed within this period, the approval shall expire.
6. The recording of the final plat will permit only the conveyance of
the approved lots. No building permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued except in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
430.
Section
480.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.060
AO:409
7. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered engineer or land
surveyor at scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet in any
increments of ten (10) feet from an accurate survey on one (1) or
more sheets whose maximum dimensions are thirty-six (36) by
forty-two (42) inches. In certain unusual instances where the
subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the Planning
Department may permit a variation in the scale or size of the final
plat. If more than one (1) sheet is required, a key map on sheet No.
1 showing the entire subdivision at reduced scale shall be provided.
8. The final plat shall be executed by the owner and lien holder.
9. The final plat shall show and be accompanied by the following
information:
a. North arrow and graphic scale.
b. The boundary lines within the outboundary lines of the
subdivision with accurate distances and bearings; also all
section, U.S. Survey and congressional township and range
lines; and the boundary lines of municipalities, sewer and
school districts and other legally established districts within
and the name of or description of any of the same adjacent to
or abutting on the subdivision.
c. The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths
and names.
d. An accurate delineation of any property offered for dedication
to public use.
e. The angle of intersection of streets.
f. The boundary lines of all adjoining lands and the right-of-way
lines of adjacent streets and alleys with their widths and
names.
g. All lot lines and an identification system for all lots and blocks.
h. Building lines, including minimum side and rear setbacks on a
typical lot and easements or rights-of-way provided for public
or private use, services or utilities, with figures showing their
dimensions and listing types of uses that are being provided.
i. All dimensions and bearings, both linear and angular, radii and
arcs, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision,
blocks, lots streets, alleys, easements, building lines and of any
other areas for public or private use. The linear dimensions are
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
j. All survey monuments, together with the descriptions.
Section
480.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.060
AO:410
k. Area in square feet for each lot or parcel on the plat or a
supplemental sheet showing same.
l. Name of subdivision and description of property subdivided,
showing its location and area.
m. Certification by a land surveyor who performs the property
survey to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by
him, and that the locations of all required survey monuments,
installed or to be installed, are correctly shown thereon. The
month and year during which the survey was made shall also
be shown.
n. Private restrictions and trusteeships where required by the
City and their periods of existence. Should such restrictions
and trusteeships be of such length as to make the lettering of
same on plat impracticable and thus necessitate the
preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such
instrument shall be made on the plat.
o. The subdivision name approved on the final plat shall
constitute the subdivision's official name. When a subdivision
name has been changed, all subsequent plats submitted for
processing shall reference the original name, which should
include names recorded on site development concept and
section plans. Any other name used for advertising or sales
purposes does not constitute an official revised name unless
approved on a plat of record approved by the Board.
p. If the developer places restrictions on any land contained in
the subdivision that is greater than those required by the
zoning ordinance or this Chapter, such restrictions references
thereto should be indicated on the plat.
q. Zoning district and zoning district boundary line when
property is located in more than one (1) district.
r. Accurately note elevation referring to mean U.S.G.S. datum for
permanent bench mark.
s. All remaining common ground is to be platted with the
recording of the final lot, unit or phase of the development.
10. Prior to forwarding the final plat to the Board, the developer shall
provide the Director with the following documents as they may be
applicable:
a. Guarantee of installation of water mains from Missouri
American Water Company.
b. Street lighting contract from AmerenUE. Submittal of contract
is optional and is to be accepted in lieu of an increased value
for escrow of actual construction costs.
Section
480.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.060
AO:411
Section 480.070. Subdivision Improvements, Reservations and
Design Standards. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 3077 §1,
10-22-2009]
c. Verification of street names and addresses from St. Louis
County Department of Revenue, Revenue Technical Services
Mapping Division.
d. Verification of location of fire hydrants and adequacy of water
supply from applicable fire district.
e. Tax certificate or copy of paid tax bill from the office of the St.
Louis County Collector of Revenue.
f. Any special study or engineering calculations required.
g. Letter from M.S.D. certifying connection fees have been paid.
h. Documentation from Corps of Engineers and/or other local,
State or Federal agencies indicating all applicable permits
have been obtained and notice submitted.
A. General. In the design of each subdivision, or portion thereof, the
subdivider shall conform to the principles and standards of land
subdivision that will encourage good development patterns as set out in
this Code.
1. Plats overlapping municipal boundaries. If a plat overlaps
municipal boundaries or extends outside the corporate limits, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall coordinate its review with
that of the other jurisdiction. If access to the subdivision will be
through another jurisdiction, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must obtain confirmation from that jurisdiction that the access road
to be used is public and is adequately improved or that a
performance bond, escrow or other surety has been provided to
assure the construction of the access road. Lot lines shall not
overlap municipal boundaries.
2. Land unsuitable for development. Land not suited for development
due to topographic or geologic features which will pose a threat to
the health, safety or welfare of present or future residents shall not
be subdivided unless adequate methods approved by the City's
Engineer are found to eliminate the threat.
3. Soil protection. Topsoil should be preserved within each
subdivision where possible.
4. Debris and waste. No timber, limbs, debris, rocks, stones, junk,
rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried. Before
a certificate of occupancy can be issued for a lot, all such materials
must be removed from it and all adjacent lots. No such materials
shall be left in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration
Section
480.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:412
of the performance guarantee or dedication of the public
improvements, whichever is sooner.
5. Fencing. Fencing is required for all hazardous conditions. Such
fencing must be approved by the Director and/or the Fenton Fire
Department. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
fencing has been installed and approved
6. Waterbodies, floodplains and watercourses.
a. If a tract being subdivided contains a lake/reservoir or portion
thereof, the owner/developer shall submit a letter signed and
sealed by a professional registered engineer that the lake/
reservoir is safe and meets all rules and regulations of the
Missouri Dam and Reservoir Safety and any other regulations
governed by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. If
such regulations do not govern dam safety guidelines as issued
by the Corps of Engineers shall be followed.
b. An association of property owners with the lake frontage must
be created in conformity with State law to be responsible for
maintenance of the lake and dam.
c. A drainage easement must be provided for any watercourse,
stream channel or other drainageway; the easement must be
wide enough to allow natural drainage, improvements to the
channel or the installation of a storm sewer.
d. Any change in an existing drainageway must be approved by
the Director.
e. In non-residential subdivisions, no more than ten percent
(10%) of lots between ten thousand (10,000) and twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and twenty-five percent (25%) of
lots greater than or equal to twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet shall be located within the 100-year floodplain area. No
part of any residential lots shall be located in the 100-year
floodplain area. All low sill and base flood elevations shall be
constructed at a minimum of two (2) feet above the 100-year
floodplain.
f. The internal drainage system for the proposed subdivision
shall not discharge water onto public or private land outside
the proposed subdivision, except via natural or publicly
dedicated drainage courses.
7. Easements.
a. A recorded easement shall be provided for each utility line and
natural drainageway which does not fall within a dedicated
right-of-way. All existing and proposed easements shall be
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:413
shown on all plats. A clause shall be included in the deed of
each affected lot reserving the easement.
b. The width of a utility easement shall be specified by the
Director but in no case shall be less than a total of ten (10) feet.
Said easement may include area on both sides of the adjoining
properties.
c. The width of an easement for a stream or drainageway shall be
specified by the Director.
d. Where possible, easements shall be centered on or adjacent to
rear or side lot lines.
e. Where an easement is located on the side, front or interior of a
lot, the Director may require an increase in the depth or width
or such lot to allow for the easement.
f. All easements must have satisfactory access to an approved
street.
g. Easements for cable TV installation shall be located at the rear
setback of the lot or on the existing utility easements. The
Director may approve other locations because of the grade or
any other problem.
h. Minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide access easement shall be
provided from the public or private road to the common
grounds. This access easement shall not be included as part of
any lot.
8. Survey monumentation.
a. A permanent bench mark shall be accessibly placed or
established, the evaluation of which shall be referred to mean
sea level and accurately noted on the record subdivision plat.
b. Prior to recording a new subdivision plat, the surveyor shall
establish semi-permanent or confirm existing monuments at
each and every exterior corner on the boundaries of the tract
of land being subdivided.
c. The surveyor shall establish at least two (2) permanent
monuments for each block granted. This requirement is waived
when the survey does not create more than four (4) lots or
parcels and new public or private streets, roads or access
easements.
d. The permanent monuments required in this Subsection shall
be set prior to the recording of the plat if they will not normally
be moved or destroyed by construction within six (6)
monuments will be moved or destroyed by construction, they
must be installed upon completion of the construction but in
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:414
any event within twelve (12) months after the plat has been
recorded. The plat shall show all monuments to be set and note
when they will be set.
e. The surveyor shall within twelve (12) months after recording
the plat monument all lot corners in the subdivision with semipermanent
monuments. The front lot corners may be
monumented by notches or cross cut in concrete paving on the
prolongation of the lot line.
f. General requirement for permanent and semi-permanent
monument. The surveyor shall select a type of monument
providing a degree of permanency consistent with that of the
adjacent terrain and physical features and as required by
theses standards. All monuments shall be solid and free from
movement. They shall be set in the ground at least to the depth
of the minimum length given unless they are encased in
concrete. With the exception of drill holes and cut crosses, the
precise position of the corner shall be marked by a pit on a cap
and the cap shall be inscribed with the registration number of
the land surveyor in responsible charge or the corporate
registration number or name of the company.
g. Permanent monuments shall be selected from the following:
(1) Concrete monuments consisting of reinforced concrete at
least four (4) inches square or in diameter and no less than
twenty-four (24) inches in length with its precise position
marked by a point on a brass or aluminum cap not less
than one and one-half (1½) inches in diameter;
(2) Commercial cast-iron or aluminum survey markers no less
than twenty-four (24) inches in length. Non-ferrous
markers shall have ceramic magnets attached to aid in
recovery;
(3) Steel, coated steel or aluminum rod markers not less than
five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter iron pipe markers not
less than three-quarter (¾) inch inside diameter and not
less than twenty-four (24) inches in length. These
monuments shall have a permanently attached cap of the
same metal or of a dissimilar metal if the metals are
insulated with a plastic insert to reduce corrosion. Nonferrous
rod markers shall have ceramic magnets attached
to aid in recovery;
(4) Brass or aluminum disk not less than two (2) inches in
diameter, countersunk and well cemented in a drill hole in
either solid rock or concrete. Ceramic magnets shall be
attached or installed with the disk to aid in recovery.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:415
h. Semi-permanent monuments shall be selected from the
following:
(1) Iron pipe markers not less than three-fourths (¾) inch
outside diameter at least eighteen (18) inches in length
and having a plastic or metal cap;
(2) Steel or aluminum rod markers not less than one-half (½)
inch in diameter and not less than eighteen (18) inches in
length and having a plastic or aluminum cap;
(3) In urban built-up areas, a cross cut in concrete, brick or
stone paving at the precise position of the corner or on a
prolongation of a boundary line; and
(4) In asphalt paving, railroad (R.R.) spikes and other metal
devices that are solid and not easily removed or destroyed.
P.K. nails and concrete nails are not to be used as semipermanent
monuments.
i. Existing survey monuments. Existing monuments shall be
evaluated for permanency by the surveyor. In no instance shall
the surveyor be required by these standards to remove existing
monuments unless the installation of a new monument is
necessary to preserve the position of the corner.
j. When it is impractical to set a required monument, a witness
monument shall be set. It should be placed five (5) feet or more
away from the point and preferably at an even foot. Witness
monuments less than five (5) feet from the point must be
clearly identified and shown on the plat. The location of the
witness monument should be along a line of the survey or a
prolongation of such line.
9. Non-residential subdivisions. In addition to conforming with the
other applicable provisions of these regulations, a non-residential
subdivision must be adapted to the specific use permitted in that
zoning district. Street layout and construction as well as utilities
must be adequate. A minimum of twenty (20) feet wide buffer yard
shall be provided between non-residential and residential
subdivisions. The property owner shall maintain the buffer yard
planting requirements and replace as necessary to maintain the
required plants. Special attention must be given to protecting
adjacent residential uses from proposed commercial/industrial
development through appropriate design.
10. Restoration of roads disturbed by utility installation. When a
roadway is disturbed by the installation of water or sewer lines or
other utilities, the subdivider must restore the roadway to City
standards.
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:416
11. Retaining walls. Retaining walls proposed for any type of
improvements within the City of Fenton that are over four (4) feet
in height from the finish (either existing or proposed) grade shall
be reviewed by the City Administrator or the City Engineer.
B. Lot Improvements.
1. Arrangement.
a. Lots must be arranged so that they will be buildable, satisfy all
requirements of the zoning ordinance and meet all health
regulations.
b. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved lines unless a variation would
result in a more appropriate street layout or lot arrangement.
c. Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots shall be avoided
except where required to separate residential development
from major highways or railroads or to overcome problems
with topography or orientation. Where permitted, such lots
shall have an extra thirty (30) feet of lot depth including a
buffer at least ten (10) feet wide heavily landscaped with
evergreen plant material at least six (6) feet height.
d. Blocks shall be deep enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots except
where major streets, railroads or topography prevent such an
arrangement.
2. Dimensions.
a. The lot size and shape shall be appropriate for the type of use
anticipated.
b. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of
the zoning ordinance.
c. Where lots are large enough for possible resubdivision, or
where a portion of a tract is not subdivided, the layout must
allow such resubdivision and permit the opening of streets
where they would be required.
d. Flag lots are prohibited, provided flag lots in existence before
November 20, 2017, are permitted but shall not be further
subdivided. [Ord. No. 3753 § 3, 11-20-2017]
3. Access to a public road. Private streets shall only be authorized by
a special use permit. Otherwise, each lot shall front on an approved
public street. However, wherever possible, no residential lot shall
have its primary frontage on or direct access to an arterial road.
C. Water.
1. General requirements.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:417
a. Where a public water main is no more than one thousand
(1,000) feet from the boundary of the subdivision, the
subdivider shall connect with such main and provide water for
domestic use and fire protection.
b. The location of all water supply improvements and fire
hydrants shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
2. Design standards.
a. The water distribution system shall be designed and
constructed in conformity with the standards and
specifications of the Missouri American Water Company and
fire protection district.
b. Water lines should be looped wherever possible.
c. The system shall provide an adequate supply of water for
domestic use and fire protection with sufficient pressure at all
times to meet minimum standards for fire protection.
d. A water connection shall be provided for each lot.
e. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Locations
of hydrants shall be approved by the Fenton Fire Protection
District.
D. Sanitary Sewer.
1. General requirements.
a. All sanitary sewer facilities discussed in this Subsection shall
be approved by and installed in accordance with the rules,
regulations and standards of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer
District, County Health Officials and the State Department of
Health and Environmental Control. The owner/developer shall
provide conceptual approval from M.S.D. with submittal of the
preliminary plat.
b. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible to the
proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall be responsible for
connecting to the sewer and providing a connection for each
lot.
c. Where public sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible to the
proposed subdivision, but plans for such a sewer have been
prepared, one (1) of the following must be done:
(1) A central sewage system may be installed with the
maintenance thereof the responsibility of the applicant or
the subdivision trustees as determined by the Board.
Lines, laterals and mains shall be installed in conformity
with the proposed public system to the subdivision
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:418
boundary where the connection to such system will be
made.
(2) Individual disposal systems may be installed provided that
lines, laterals and mains shall be installed in conformity
with the proposed public system to the subdivision
boundary where the connection to such system will be
made. In addition, lines shall be installed for each lot and
connected to the systems. All such systems shall be
capped.
d. Where no plans have been prepared for public sanitary sewers
reasonably accessible to the proposed subdivision, an
individual disposal system may be used as long as it is
approved in accordance with paragraph (1)(a) of this
Subsection but in no case on a lot of less than one (1) acre.
2. Design standards.
a. General.
(1) Sanitary sewers shall be located within an easement
designated for such a purpose. A sanitary sewer easement
shall not be located within a public street right-of-way
except as authorized by the Director.
(2) All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between
manholes except as permitted by the City's Engineer.
(3) Manholes shall be installed as required by M.S.D. and the
Director.
b. Relationship to water supply.
(1) There shall be no connection between a sanitary sewer
system and a storm sewer system.
(2) No system shall be permitted which allows the passage of
sewage or polluted water into a potable water supply.
Sewers shall be separated from water supply wells or
other water supply sources and structures.
3. Reimbursement for off-site improvement. Where the increased flow
in the sanitary sewer system generated by the subdivision would
exceed the capacity of the existing system, the developer shall post
a cash escrow to cover the cost of the improvements required to
increase the capacity. Such escrow shall be determined by the
Director and posted prior to final plat approval. Building permits
for the subdivision may be issued once the off-site improvements to
the sanitary sewer system have been completed by the owner/
developer.
E. Drainage And Storm Sewers.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:419
1. General requirements.
a. Open drainage ditches shall not be permitted except in
undisturbed common ground. Storm sewers shall be required
except for swales collection system approved by the Director.
b. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated
with the drainage pattern for the area and designed so that
runoff from one lot onto another is minimized.
c. Provision shall be made to handle any spring or surface water
that exists prior to or will result from the development of the
subdivision.
d. The subdivision trustees will be responsible for detention or
retention ponds.
2. Design standards.
a. All storm sewers shall be designed and constructed in
conformity with the standards and specification of the
Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (M.S.D.).
b. When required.
(1) The requirement of stormwater detention shall be
evaluated for all projects by City of Fenton, Missouri, for
review and approval and may be required, if deemed
necessary. Detention facilities shall be provided and
designed in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
(2) Projects which have a differential runoff of two (2) cfs or
greater shall have detention. If there are known
stormwater problems or special conditions downstream
from a project, detention will be required.
c. Design considerations.
(1) The rates (pre-developed and post-developed) of runoff are
determined by the Rational Method for the 2-, 5-, 10- and
25-year frequencies, with twenty (20) minute rainfall
intensity.
(2) Stormwater shall be detained on site or off site as
approved and released at the rate of an existing predeveloped
site for the 2-, 5-, 10- and 25-year events to
prevent possible flooding and erosion downstream. The
allowable release rate may be reduced due to downstream
conditions. Note that stormwater pipes, downstream from
the control structure, shall be sized to carry the total
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:420
tributary upstream watershed. No reduction in outfall pipe
size shall be permitted because of detention.
(3) The volume of detention may be provided through
permanent detention facilities such as dry basins or ponds,
permanent ponds or lakes, underground storage facilities
or in parking lots.
d. Detention basin volume will be based on routing each predeveloped
runoff hydrography through the detention facility
while satisfying the appropriate allowable release rate. The
routing computations shall be based on application of the
continuity principle.
e. Design of underground basins.
(1) Adequate access for basin maintenance and inspection
shall be provided. A means of visual inspection from the
ground surface of the low flow device, overflow weir and
outlet structure is necessary. Access shall also be provided
to allow for cleaning of the low flow device from the
ground surface.
(2) The basin should have sufficient volume and spillway
capacity to pass/contain the 100-year event with the low
flow outlet blocked.
(3) The engineer must submit the following for review of a
detention facility:
(a) Elevation vs. discharge tables or curves for all
frequencies.
(b) Elevation vs. storage tables or curves for all
frequencies.
(c) Inflow calculations and data for all frequencies.
(d) Hydraulic gradeline computations for pipes entering
and leaving the basin for all frequencies.
(e) If the embankment contains fill material, a
geotechnical report may be required.
(f) Site plan showing appropriate design information.
(g) Structural calculations for the outlet control
structures (if required).
(h) All ends of pipes discharging into a dry basin or pond
shall be connected with the low flow pipe or control
structure by means of a paved swale. The paved swale
shall be non-reinforced concrete, six (6) inches thick,
with a two percent (2%) slope to the center and a
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:421
minimum one-half percent (0.5%) longitudinal slope.
Paved swales shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide
or one and three-tenths (1.3) times the diameter of the
pipe entering the basin, whichever is greater, and be
keyed to structure or channel.
(i) Railroad tie walls cannot be used where water will be
in contact with the railroad tie wall.
(j) Permanent detention ponds or lakes are to be
designed to minimize fluctuating lake levels.
Maximum fluctuation from the permanent pool
elevation to the maximum ponding elevation shall be
three (3) feet.
(4) The maximum side slopes for dry basins or ponds and the
fluctuating area of permanent ponds or lakes shall be 3:1
(three (3) feet horizontal, one (1) foot vertical).
(5) Dry basins or ponds and the fluctuating areas of
permanent ponds or lakes are to be sodded and kept
mowed.
(6) Control structures and overflow structures are to be
reinforced concrete.
(7) The outflow pipe shall be sized for the developed flow rate.
(8) In basins with concrete walls or rip rap covered slopes, the
bottoms should be paved or provisions made for moving
equipment to reach the bottom (ramps, etc.).
f. Maximum depths.
(1) The maximum depth of water in a dry detention basin or
pond shall not exceed four (4) feet except by special
permission.
(2) Parking lots used for automobiles shall have a maximum
depth of eight (8) inches of water.
(3) Parking lots used for trucks or truck trailers shall have a
maximum depth of water of twelve (12) inches.
g. Limits of maximum ponding.
(1) The limits of maximum ponding elevation shall be
calculated based on a routing of the design storm
assuming the low flow outlet is blocked with water ponded
to the overflow structures sill.
(2) The limits of maximum ponding elevation in dry basins or
ponds and permanent lakes or ponds shall not be closer
than thirty (30) feet horizontally to any building and not
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:422
less than two (2) feet vertically below the lowest sill
elevation of any building.
(3) The limits of maximum ponding elevation in parking lots
shall not be closer than ten (10) feet horizontally from any
building and not less than two (2) feet vertically below the
lowest sill elevation of any building.
(4) A minimum of two (2) feet of freeboard shall be provided
from top of basins to the maximum ponding elevation.
h. Easement required. In subdivisions, the detention basin,
access roads or paths, control structures and outfall pipes are
to be located in easements dedicated to the subdivision
trustees.
i. Maintenance agreement. The owner(s) of the project shall
execute all City of Fenton, Missouri, maintenance agreement
for the detention basin or pond to ensure the detention area
will be kept in working order, prior to plan approval. City of
Fenton, Missouri, will not be responsible for maintenance of
detention basins.
j. Detention basin fencing. A four (4) foot (minimum height)
approved fence shall be provided around the perimeter of a
basin where the design depth of storage water will exceed four
(4) feet.
k. Detention basin elevation. The low elevation of the detention
basin shall be above the 25-year, 20-minute hydraulic elevation
of the receiving channel or pipe system.
CHART 1
Rainfall Report
Rainfall Type: Eastern/Central Rainfall
Rainfall Filename: Fenton.Rnd
Precipitation
2 yr/5 min = 0.45 in
2 yr/15 min = 0.90 in
2 yr/60 min = 1.58 in
100 yr/5 min = 0.83 in
100 yr/15 min = 1.75 in
100 yr/60 min = 3.25 in
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:423
Intermediate Intensities (in/hr)
5 min 15 min 30 min 60 min 6 hr 24 hr
2 yr 5.40 3.60 2.47 1.58 0.41 0.14
5 yr 6.43 4.37 3.04 1.97 0.53 0.18
10 yr 7.18 4.93 3.45 2.24 0.62 0.21
25 yr 8.29 5.74 4.05 2.64 0.71 0.24
50 yr 9.16 6.37 4.51 2.94 0.82 0.28
100 yr 10.02 7.00 4.97 3.25 0.87 0.30
BDE Values: Intensity = B/ (time_conc + D)^E
B D E
2 yr 46.93 10.00 0.80
5 yr 56.42 10.75 0.79
10 yr 66.60 11.50 0.79
25 yr 80.49 12.25 0.80
50 yr 87.63 12.25 0.79
100 yr 93.96 12.25 0.79
CHART 2
P FACTOR FOR RUNOFF
%
IMPERVIOUS DURATION OF RAIN IN MINUTES
15 20 30 60 90 120
0 0.3 0.35 0.41 0.51 0.56 0.6
5 0.32 0.37 0.43 0.53 0.58 0.62
10 0.34 0.39 0.46 0.56 0.60 0.64
15 0.36 0.41 0.48 0.58 0.62 0.66
20 0.38 0.44 0.50 0.60 0.64 0.67
25 0.4 0.46 0.52 0.62 0.66 0.69
30 0.42 0.48 0.54 0.64 0.68 0.71
35 0.44 0.50 0.57 0.66 0.70 0.73
40 0.46 0.52 0.59 0.68 0.72 0.74
45 0.48 0.54 0.61 0.71 0.74 0.76
50 0.5 0.56 0.63 0.73 0.75 0.78
55 0.52 0.58 0.65 0.75 0.77 0.80
60 0.54 0.60 0.68 0.77 0.79 0.81
65 0.56 0.63 0.70 0.79 0.81 0.83
70 0.58 0.65 0.72 0.81 0.83 0.85
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:424
CHART 2
P FACTOR FOR RUNOFF
%
IMPERVIOUS DURATION OF RAIN IN MINUTES
15 20 30 60 90 120
75 0.6 0.67 0.74 0.84 0.85 0.87
80 0.62 0.69 0.76 0.86 0.87 0.88
85 0.64 0.71 0.79 0.88 0.89 0.90
90 0.66 0.73 0.81 0.90 0.91 0.92
95 0.68 0.75 0.83 0.92 0.93 0.94
100 0.7 0.77 0.85 0.94 0.95 0.95
P (RUNOFF FACTORS) FOR VARIOUS IMPERVIOUS
CONDITIONS
Editor's Note – Chart 3 is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
CHART 4
3. Effect on downstream drainage areas.
a. Where it is determined that the runoff from a subdivision will
overload existing downstream drainage facilities, the
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:425
developer shall be responsible for the improvement of such
facilities to increase their capacity to required levels.
b. The required improvements to downstream facilities shall be
made prior to the issuance of a grading permit for the
proposed subdivision.
4. Floodplain areas. Development in the 100-year floodplain must
comply with provisions of the City of Fenton flood ordinances and
the regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
F. Grading Plan.
1. Grading/cross section sheets. All grading details pertaining to the
site development shall be shown in plan view by contours or on
cross section sheets. Specific details shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
a. Existing and proposed contours shall be plotted at two (2) foot
intervals. Contour intervals for grading plan other than the
above shall require special approval.
b. Site grading shall be compatible with the ultimate roadway
elevations.
c. Existing ground and finished grade elevations for the cross
section sheets shall be plotted at any scale between one inch
equals fifty feet (1 inch = 50 feet) horizontal and one inch
equals ten feet (1 inch = 10 feet) vertical and one inch equals
five feet (1 inch = 5 feet) horizontal and vertical.
d. The grading plan shall show the location of all siltation control
devices to prevent runoff from the site damaging adjoining
properties.
e. Siltation control shall also be shown to minimize silt deposits
downstream from the proposed development. These siltation
control devices shall include silt basins, fences, hay bales,
ditch checks, berms, etc. as approved by the City of Fenton,
Missouri, and in accordance with MDNR guidelines.
f. If a haul route is required to bring in extra material or dispose
of extra material, it shall be duly noted on the plan sheet. The
route hours of operation and number of trucks shall also be
noted. A staging wash-off area complete with water will be
required.
g. All City, County and State roads shall be kept free of dirt daily.
The City of Fenton, Missouri, reserves the right to cease the
grading operation if the contractor is in violation.
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:426
h. A complete summary of cut and fill calculations with shrinkage
will be shown on the plans. If an off-site borrow area is to be
used, the City of Fenton, Missouri, will require the developer to
submit a permit or letter of authorization for said borrow area.
G. Geotechnical Reports.
1. A geotechnical report shall be required where grading and
proposed improvements on the site are located in an area where
soil conditions are susceptible to rapid erosion, landslide,
settlement and/or creep. The report shall verify the adaptability of
grading and improvements with soil and geologic conditions. A
statement of compliance with this study, signed by the geotechnical
engineer preparing the report, shall be included on all site
development plans. The development plan and improvement plans
shall be designed to conform to the requirements and conditions of
the geotechnical report. A geotechnical engineer shall be required
to inspect construction in accordance with the grading and soils
requirements and conditions contained in the report.
2. The Engineering Geologic Map of St. Louis County, Missouri (1971)
by Edwin E. Lutzen and John D. Rockway Jr., contained in the
Missouri Geological Survey and Water Resources Engineering
Geology Series No. 4 and available through the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources shall be used to ascertain
whether a geotechnical report shall be required. At this time, a
report is required for sites located in Units IIa, IIIa, IVa, IV and Xa
and Units IIb, IIc and IId when specific site conditions or
development type necessitate a report.
3. In general, all slopes shall be graded to meet a standard 3:1 or
flatter slope for both cut and fill. If the preliminary grading plans or
site plans propose high terraces, the soils report should indicate
measures to intercept and divert surface water from flowing over
terraces and walls.
4. In all areas of questionable soil stability such as sinkholes, ponds,
marshy areas, etc., the City of Fenton, Missouri, shall be notified
prior to commencement of grading so that these locations can be
inspected.
5. Any areas identified as sinkholes will require a sinkhole report. This
report will require that the sinkhole(s) shall be inspected to
determine if it is functioning with regard to drainage and the
sinkhole shall be treated as follows:
a. All sinkhole crevices shall be located on the plan. If the
sinkhole is either in the public road right-of-way or within ten
(10) feet of the public road right-of-way, it shall be excavated to
the crevice, treated and brought to grade by the construction
of a manhole or inlet.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:427
b. Functioning sinkholes shall be utilized as a point of drainage
discharge by a standard drainage structure with a properly
sized outfall pipe provided to an adequate natural discharge
point, such as a ditch, creek, river, etc.
c. Non-functioning sinkholes and sinkholes under a proposed
building may be capped.
d. Sinkholes may be left in their natural state, however, they will
still require properly sized outfall pipe to an adequate natural
discharge point.
e. All sinkholes must be inspected by the City of Fenton, Missouri,
prior to treatment. Special siltation measures shall be installed
during the excavation of sinkholes and during the grading
operations to prevent siltation of the sinkhole crevice. In
general, the following procedure shall be followed in treating
sinkholes:
(1) Excavation. Prior to filling operations in the vicinity of a
sinkhole, the earth in the bottom of the depression will be
excavated to expose the fissure(s) in the bedrock. The
length of fissure exposed will vary, but must include all
unfilled voids of fissure widths greater than one-half (½)
inch maximum dimensions which are not filled with plastic
clay.
(2) Closing fissures. The fissure or void will be exposed until
bedrock in its natural attitude is encountered. The rock
will be cleaned of loose material and the fissures will be
hand-packed with quarry-run rock of sufficient size to
prevent entry to this rock into the fissures and all the voids
between this rock filled with smaller rock so as to prevent
the overlying material's entry into the fissures. For a large
opening, a structural (concrete) dome will be constructed
with vents to permit the flow of ground water.
(3) Placing filter. Material of various gradations as approved
will be placed on top of the hand-packed rock with careful
attention paid to the minimum thickness. The filter must
permit either upward or downward flow without loss of the
overlying material.
(4) Supervision. Periodic supervision of the cleaning of the
rock fissures must be furnished by the soils engineer.
Closing of the rock fissures will not begin until the
cleaning has been inspected and approved by the soils
engineer.
f. During the placement and compaction of earth fill over the
filter, supervision by the soils engineer shall be continuous.
Earth fill densities will be determined during the placement
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:428
and compaction of the fill in sufficient number to insure
compliance with the specification. The soils engineer is
responsible for the quality of the work and to verify that the
specifications are met.
6. For reports concerning proposed development in Units IIa, IIIa, IVa
or Xa, the consultant should prepare conditions within the report
covering the following, at a minimum:
a. Erosion of silt-rich loessial soil. What should be done to
minimize surface erosion during and after construction? Also,
what measures should be taken to address erosive velocities at
discharge points?
b. Developments on slopes greater than 20%. Soil creep is a
potential problem on slopes this steep and developments in
these areas will require engineering analysis and solutions.
7. Cut and fill. Construction of cut and fill slopes in these areas should
be detailed to assure slope stability.
a. For reports done on proposed developments in Unit IV, the
consultant should prepare a report covering the following, at a
minimum:
(1) Natural slope stability. Are the natural slopes on shale
stable enough for the density of development proposed?
(2) Swelling soils. The potential for swelling soils in Unit VI
and their effect on home and road foundations should be
discussed.
8. Additional considerations that can be covered in these reports
include effect of stream erosion on private property, foundation
design, foundation drainage, road design, excavation, etc.
9. The reports for the erosion-prone area do not necessarily require
subsurface investigation. The shale areas, however, would almost
certainly require shallow exploration. The reports shall be
prepared under the supervision of and sealed by an engineer.
10. Developments that require more detailed soils information are
those with very dense housing (greater than three to four (3 — 4)
houses per acre), extensive grading and site preparation (including
cut and fill), steep slopes, etc. Some developments can be less
critically reviewed due to minimal site disturbance and low density
housing (two (2) or less houses per acre).
11. There are other areas besides Units IIa and VI within the City of
Fenton, Missouri, where dense developments will require sound
engineering.
H. Street Design Criteria.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:429
1. General provisions.
a. Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography so as
to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient as
required herein. The street layout shall provide access to all
lots and parcels of land within the subdivision. The proposed
street layout should be appropriate for the type of future
development and properly integrated with the street system in
the area adjoining the subdivision. (Exhibit 1)
b. Proposed streets should provide access to the surrounding
properties which are landlocked or which have inadequate
access, unless the Commission has determined that such
access is not necessary or desirable for the future land use and
development of adjacent tracts.
c. Rights-of-way and paving of streets in all new subdivisions
shall be connected to an approved street. Any street that has
been approved by the City at the date of adoption of this
Chapter shall be considered an approved street.
d. Alleys should be avoided where possible in residential areas
but may be included in commercial and industrial areas where
needed for loading, unloading or access purposes and, where
platted, shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width. Dead-end
alleys shall be avoided where possible but, if unavoidable, shall
be provided with an adequate turnaround at the dead end as
determined by the Commission.
e. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to the required right-of-way widths shall dedicate
additional width along either or both sides of such streets.
Also, the street shall be improved to the required standards.
When the subdivision is located on one (1) side of an existing
street or road, a minimum of one-half (½) of the required rightof-
way and improvements shall be provided, measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way as originally established.
f. Dead-end streets.
(1) Arrangements shall be made for the continuation of streets
to adjacent properties where such continuation is deemed
necessary. If the adjacent property is undeveloped, the
road shall be extended to the boundary of the subdivision
and a cul-de-sac having a minimum right-of-way diameter
of one hundred six (106) feet and a pavement width of
twenty-nine (29) feet. A circular island with a minimum
radius of thirteen (13) feet shall be provided in the cul-desac.
A note shall be included on the plat that any excess
right-of-way used for the cul-de-sac shall revert to the
adjacent property owners when the street is continued.
(Exhibit 2)
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:430
(2) Where a road is not intended to continue onto adjoining
property, its terminus shall not be closer than one hundred
(100) feet to the boundary and shall have a cul-de-sac.
(3) The use of minor classified streets when applied to cul-desac
streets shall be limited to serving not more than
eighteen (18) total lots for cul-de-sacs.
(4) A plan for elongated cul-de-sacs shall meet the
specifications on Exhibit 3 or be reviewed by the
Commission for determination of the location and the
required right-of-way. Also, any other cul-de-sac or
turnaround configurations shall meet the specifications on
Exhibit 4 or be approved by the Commission.
g. Street intersection and alignments shall be as follows:
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. Non-perpendicular streets shall have a
perpendicular approach at intersections of at least sixty
(60) feet. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at
any one (1) point.
(2) Where collector or arterial streets intersect other collector
or arterial streets, the curb radius at the intersection shall
not be less than forty (40) feet.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:431
EXHIBIT 1. STREET TYPES
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:432
EXHIBIT 2. CUL-DE-SACS
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:433
EXHIBIT 3. ELONGATED CUL-DE-SACS
(3) Minor street intersections shall have a curb radius of not
less than thirty-two (32) feet.
(4) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet should be avoided. Proposed new
intersections with an existing street shall, whenever
appropriate, coincide with any existing "T" intersection on
the opposite side of the street.
(5) Intersections shall be designed with grades as level as
possible, consistent with proper provisions for drainage.
Approaches to intersections shall have a grade not
exceeding three percent (3%) for a distance of not less
than one hundred (100) feet measured from the centerline
of the intersecting street.
(6) Additional street paving in the form of turning lanes and/or
right-of-way may be required at intersections of collector/
arterials with other collector/arterials.
(7) Property line corners at street intersections shall be
founded with a radius of at least twenty (20) feet.
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:434
(8) Where visibility at any proposed street intersection would
be obstructed by existing earth berms or vegetation, the
developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation in
conjunction with the grading of the street right-of-way
sufficient to provide adequate sight distance. This distance
shall be located by measuring thirty (30) feet along each
property line from the intersection point and connecting
these points to create the sight triangle.
h. All streets or street widening required by these regulations
shall be dedicated to the City or be established as a private
road easement or right-of-way. In no case shall any instruments
be recorded which contain any clause causing reversion to any
persons except those having title to adjacent properties.
i. The widths may be increased, decreased or varied in certain
circumstances by the Board subsequent to review by the
Commission on recommendation of the Director.
j. Where special types of streets are proposed, the Commission
may apply special standards to be followed in the design of
such streets.
2. Design criteria. Any dedicated or private streets shall meet all City
design criteria as specified in this Subsection. All such streets in
the City or segments of streets to be constructed as part of any land
development shall be located, platted and built in such a manner
that they may be dedicated to the City in accordance with the
design criteria in this Section in (Table 1). If no criteria has been
established by the City of Fenton, St. Louis County Department of
Highways and Traffic criteria shall apply.
3. Storm drainage. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with
an adequate enclosed stormwater system which shall be connected
to an outlet approved by M.S.D.
4. Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed on each side
of the street surface. The curb and gutter shall be constructed with
Portland cement concrete in all subdivisions.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:435
EXHIBIT 4 ATYPICAL CUL-DE-SACS
TABLE 1 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Grade
Street
Classification
Minimum
Rightof-
Way
Minimum
Pavement
Width MinimumMaximum
Centerline
Horizontal
Alignment
Minimum
Sight
Distance
Commercial
Collector
60 38 1% 6%
6-8
S.U.P.*
600 300
Residential
Collector
60 38 1% 8%
> 8
S.U.P.*
300 200
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:436
TABLE 1 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Grade
Street
Classification
Minimum
Rightof-
Way
Minimum
Pavement
Width MinimumMaximum
Centerline
Horizontal
Alignment
Minimum
Sight
Distance
Minor
Commercial
Street
50 30 1% 8% 150 150
Minor
Residential
Street
50 26 1% 8%
> 8
S.U.P.*
150 150
Commercial
Alley
30 20 1% 6% 50 150
*Special Use Permit
5. Landscaping.
a. Landscaped medians and cul-de-sacs.
(1) At each entrance to a subdivision, a landscaped median
separating two (2) one-way streets may be provided as
depicted in Exhibit 5. Sufficient trees and vegetation shall
be planted in accordance with a landscaping plan
reviewed and approved by the Director.
(2) Each cul-de-sac shall have a landscaped center island at
least three hundred (300) square feet in area. If possible,
such island shall be elongated so as to appear as a median
rather than a circular planter.
b. Right-of-way tree planting. The owner/developer shall submit a
plan for such planting to include the size and type of the trees
proposed for the subdivision. This plan shall meet all the
requirements of this Code.
6. Lights.
a. Street lights shall be provided for any type of subdivision. A
street light shall be installed at each intersection of a street
and each cul-de-sac; but in no event shall there be fewer than
one (1) street light for each two hundred fifty (250) linear feet
or portion thereof of street frontage between intersections or
between a street intersection and the terminus of a dead-end
street.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:437
b. In a multi-family dwelling residential subdivision, the minimum
distance between two (2) street lights shall be not less than
two hundred (200) linear feet.
c. Street lighting shall be provided for roadways within a
subdivision using concrete poles, fiberglass or metal ornate
type units. No wood poles are allowed.
d. The height and the intensity of each street light for residential
or commercial subdivisions shall be approved by the Director.
7. Naming. Streets that are obviously in alignment with others
already existing and named shall bear the names of the existing
streets. The proposed street names shall be checked against
duplication of street names and approved by the Post Office and the
Board.
8. Signs. Street signs and traffic control signs shall be of a type and at
locations specified by the City or other appropriate governing
jurisdiction. The subdivision sign shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 485 of the Fenton Zoning Code. Subdivision trustees shall
be responsible for the replacement and/or maintenance of street
name signs different than the City of Fenton standards.
9. Addressing. Addresses shall be assigned by the St. Louis County
Department of Revenue, Mapping Division.
10. Street maintenance. The owner/developer of the subdivision shall
be responsible for maintaining the streets and other improvements
until such time they are dedicated to and accepted by the City of
Fenton.
11. Penalties. If the developer/contractor of a project approved in the
City of Fenton does not follow the before listed requirements or any
other applicable requirements of this document or is deemed to be
negligent in their development methods by the Director, the City of
Fenton reserves the right to stop work on the project until any or all
of the deficiencies have been corrected and approved by the City of
Fenton representatives.
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:438
EXHIBIT 5. MEDIANS AT SUBDIVISION ENTRANCES
12. Sidewalks.
a. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete
and shall have a width of four (4) feet and a thickness of at
least four (4) inches except at driveways where the thickness
shall be at least six (6) inches. The sidewalks shall be placed
within the street right-of-way one (1) foot from and parallel
with the edge of the right-of-way, along both sides of the street.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
480.070
AO:439
b. There shall be a grassed strip at least six (6) feet wide between
the sidewalk and the street pavement.
c. Each sidewalk shall have a ramp for handicapped access
designed in conformity with State law and the City's Building
Code at its intersection with the street.
13. Materials. Except as provided herein, all new streets constructed
after October 22, 2009 for the acceptance by the City of Fenton for
public use shall be designed to the following standards.
a. Residential. All residential streets shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete pavement at a minimum of seven (7)
inches on four (4) inches of aggregate type 5 base.
b. Commercial. All commercial streets shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete pavement at a minimum of nine (9)
inches on four (4) inches of aggregate type 5 base.
14. Other. All other standards not addressed in this Section shall be in
accordance with St. Louis County Department of Highway and
Traffic Standards. Any exceptions must be submitted to the City of
Fenton for approval. Any conflicts with the City of Fenton
regulations and St. Louis County standards for street and roadway
standards will be resolved by abiding by minimum standards as set
forth by AASHTO guidelines. In all cases, a minimum of AASHTO
guidelines must be maintained.
I. Utilities.
1. All utilities, including, but not limited to, natural gas, electrical,
telephone and television cables, shall be buried. However, such
utilities in the right-of-way may not be buried without approval of
the Director. Utilities buried in the right-of-way shall be located
toward the lot line so as not to interfere with the construction of
curbing.
2. The location of utility easements shall be shown on the final plat.
3. Underground service connections shall be provided to each lot by
the developer unless waived by the Commission.
4. Utility boxes, transformers and similar devices at ground level shall
be screened by evergreen shrubbery except for those at the rear of
lots.
J. Schools, Parks, Playgrounds And Pedestrian/Bike Paths.
1. In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable
sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other common areas for
public use so as to conform to the recommendations of the
Commission in its adopted master plan or portion thereof of the
City. Any provision for schools, parks and playgrounds should be
Section
480.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
480.070
AO:440
Chapter 485
SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 485.010. Short Title. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-201667]
This Chapter shall hereafter be known as the "Sign Code," may be cited as
such, and may be referred to herein as the "Sign Code" or "this Chapter."
Section 485.020. Purpose, Findings And Scope. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1,
11-21-2016]
indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be
determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated
to or acquired by the appropriate taxing agency.
2. The City may require a twenty (20) feet wide easement for a
pedestrian/bike path to link the residential subdivisions to the
City's public facilities. The width of the pavement shall be
determined by the Director.
K. Natural Features. Natural features, including, but not limited to, trees,
lakes and streams, shall be considered as irreplaceable assets and
incorporated into the design of the subdivision to the maximum feasible
extent.
L. Lakes And Streams.
1. The boundaries or alignment of a lake, pond or stream shall not be
changed and no grading or clearing shall be permitted within
twenty (20) feet of such a water body except approved by the City's
Engineer.
2. No grading or construction shall be permitted below a lake, dam,
pond or stream without submitting an engineering report stating
the lake, dam, pond or stream bank is safe and will not have any
impact on the proposed development.
A. This Sign Code is intended to do the following:
1. Purpose. The provisions of this Chapter shall govern the erection of
all signs and flags, together with their appurtenant and auxiliary
devices, in respect to size, color, location, and structural and fire
safety. The City has promoted and preserved its character by
systematically adopting and updating its zoning regulations. As a
result, the purpose of this Chapter is to allow a property owner the
ability to make use of its property for free expression without any
67.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 485, Sign Regulations, containing Sections 485.010 —
485.140, which derived from Ord. No. 3001 § 1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 3095 § 1, 1-28-2010;
Ord. No. 3528 §§ 1 — 2, 7-23-2015; Ord. No. 3623 § 1, 9-22-2016, was repealed 11-21-2016
by § 1 of Ord. No. 3638.
Section
480.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.020
AO:441
content based limitations but in a manner designed to avoid the
visual clutter that is harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety,
property values, business opportunities and community
appearances.
2. Findings. The Board hereby finds that:
a. Sign regulations may impact First Amendment rights and that
these rights are important constitutional rights that must be
protected.
b. Unregulated signage has direct and secondary effects that are
harmful to the safety and general welfare of the City as a whole
and to its individual citizens.
c. These direct and secondary effects result from the visual
clutter that occurs as a result of the unregulated installation
and lack of maintenance of signs.
d. These direct and secondary effects include harm to traffic and
pedestrians' safety, depreciation of property values within the
City, decreased business opportunities for individual and
business residents of the City (resulting in decreased sales,
property and other tax revenues that are necessary to provide
an adequate level of public service to City residents),
community blight and an overall less pleasing community
appearance.
e. Residents are virtually captive audiences of signs displayed by
neighbors; signs are an intrusion into residential privacy and
interfere with the enjoyment of a resident's property because
the view from the resident's property may become so marred
by the clutter of signs that the resident cannot successfully
avoid observing the sign clutter.
f. Because of these direct and secondary effects, the City has a
compelling interest in regulating signs within the City.
g. These regulations are content-neutral and place restrictions
that directly advance the City's stated interests.
h. To the extent that any provisions of these regulations are
content-based, they are intended to further compelling
governmental interests.
i. A primary and compelling interest of the City is to allow
property owners to post public interest signs to protect the
safety of others and to allow all persons to comply with legal
requirements imposed by law or by order of a court requiring
the posting of notices, without being subject to regulation.
j. The scope of these regulations is proportionate to the interests
served and narrowly tailored to achieve the desired objective.
Section
485.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.020
AO:442
Section 485.030. Computations. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
k. A direct nexus exists between the desired City's goals and the
means chosen in these regulations to achieve its desired goals.
3. Scope.
a. Classifications. Regulations in the Sign Code are classified by
use, and the definitions in Section 485.040 shall govern with
regards to the type of use.
b. Building Code Applicable. In the absence from this Chapter of
specifications governing details of sign construction, the
applicable standards listed in the Building Code shall apply.
c. Government Signs. This Chapter recognizes that government
signs are government speech intended to ensure public safety.
A. The following principles shall control the computation of sign face and
sign height:
1. Computation Of Sign Face Of Individual Signs. The area of a sign
face shall be computed by measuring the area of the smallest
circle, square, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the sign or used to
differentiate the sign from the back drop or sign structure against
which it is placed, but not including the sign structure or wall that
is clearly incidental to the display itself.
2. Computation Of Multi-Face Signs.
a. A double-faced sign with two (2) sign faces shall be considered
one (1) sign. Provided, however, to the extent a double-faced
temporary sign has two (2) sign faces that are not identical,
each sign face shall be considered a separate sign and the area
shall be computed by adding together the area of each nonidentical
sign face.
b. The sign area for a sign with more than two (2) sign faces shall
be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces on
the sign.
3. Computation Of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to
the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Sign height
of a wall sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of
the sign to the top of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to
be the lowest of: (a) existing grade prior to construction, or (b) the
newly established grade, after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating
Section
485.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.030
AO:443
Section 485.040. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall mean:
BANNER — A sign other than a flag that is made of lightweight material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to
allow motion caused by the atmosphere. This definition includes pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similarly moving devises.
BILLBOARD — A sign directing attention to a business, profession,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than upon the lot where the sign is located.
BOARD — The City Board of Aldermen.
BUSINESS USE — Use of land or buildings for office (including medical),
office park, office/warehouse, financial institution, convention center, hotel
or similar uses.
CHANGEABLE COPY PANEL — A device designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged instantaneously, either
manually or electronically.
COMMERCIAL USE — Any use wherein goods and services are purchased
or sold to either the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses
(wholesale). Commercial use includes business use and industrial use but
does not include public/semi-public use.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
DIRECTOR — For the purpose of this Chapter, Director shall mean
Community Development Director or his/her designee.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, affix or locate.
FACADE — An exterior wall(s) that is perpendicular to the horizontal view
between the grade and the roof structure.[Ord. No. 3754 § 1,
11-20-2017]
FLAG — A generally rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design
traditionally raised on a flagpole.
FLAGPOLE — A pole mounted to the ground and used for flying a flag.
FRONT — When used in relation to a building, the facade on which the main
entrance to the building is located or which faces the main street adjacent
to the building.
the sign. In cases in which normal grade cannot reasonably be
determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that
the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal
to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street
or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal
structure on the zoned lot, whichever is lower.
Section
485.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.040
AO:444
GRAFFITI — A hand-painted work of visual art that is either affixed to or
painted directly on the exterior wall of a surface without the permission of
the property owner.
GROUND FLOOR — That floor of a building which is approximately level
with the ground around the building and which contains the building's
primary ingress and egress; first floor.
HOLIDAY DISPLAYS — A display for decorative purposes during any
nationally recognized holiday period.
ILLUMINATED — A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly
from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an artificial source,
so shielded that no direct illumination from it is visible elsewhere than on
and in the immediate vicinity of the sign.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Use of land or buildings for manufacturing, assembly,
fabrication, warehousing, distribution, freight terminal, wholesale sales,
and other uses of similar intensity.
MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEX — One (1) or more buildings containing a
minimum of three (3) or more independent dwelling units per building.
ORIGINAL ART DISPLAY — A form of non-commercial speech wherein a
hand-painted work of visual art is either affixed to or painted directly on the
exterior wall of a structure with the permission of the property owner. An
original art display does not include: mechanically produced or computer
generated prints or images, including but not limited to digitally printed
vinyl; electrical or mechanical components; or changeable copy panel.
PREMISES — That portion of a lot or building occupied by one (1) or more
occupants, exclusive of common areas shared with adjacent occupants, if
any.
PROPERTY OWNER — An individual or entity who has the right to possess,
use, and convey the property, premises, building, sign or sign structure.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the tenant of a property or premises is
considered the property owner as to the property the tenant holds a right
to use exclusive of others (or the sole right to occupy). If there are multiple
tenants of a property or premises, then each tenant shall have the same
rights and duties as the property owner as to the property or premises the
tenant leases and has the sole right to occupy, and the size of the property
or premises shall be deemed to be the property that the tenant has the sole
right to occupy under the lease.
PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC USE — A school, college, place of worship,
community center, cultural facility, library, hospital or similar place that
serves the public for its educational, cultural and/or recreational benefit.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any use wherein individuals or families utilize singlefamily,
two-family and multi-family complex for private housing purposes.
Residential use does not include public/semi-public use.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration, which is
affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, or
Section
485.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.040
AO:445
other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed or intended
to direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. Signs located completely
within an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from a street or
sidewalk, shall not be considered a sign. A flag shall not be considered a
sign. This definition includes holiday displays.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign that is made up of or incorporates a
changeable copy panel.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL — A sign intended to promote the economic interests
of the sign's owner or tenant.
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED — A sign with two (2) sign faces of the same shape
designed to be seen from two (2) opposite directions, supported on the same
support, and at the same elevation.
SIGN, FACE — The entire area within a square, circle, rectangle, triangle
or combination thereof that encompasses the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including the sign structure or wall that is clearly incidental
to the display itself.
SIGN, FLASHING — Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary or constant in intensity or color at all times
when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Chapter, any moving
illuminated sign or signs that fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent
strobe or moving light or light that changes in intensity in sudden transitory
bursts, streams, zooms, twinkles, sparkles or that in any manner creates the
illusion of movement shall also be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT — A sign that is constructed, placed or maintained
by the Federal, State or local government or a sign that is required to be
constructed, placed or maintained by the Federal, State or local government
either directly or to enforce or protect a property owner's rights.
SIGN, INTEGRAL — A sign that is embedded, extruded or carved into the
material of a building facade and customarily made of bronze, brushed
stainless steel or aluminum, stone or similar material attached to the
building facade.
SIGN, INTERIOR WINDOW/DOOR — A sign located inside a building on a
window or door and exposed to view from a street or sidewalk. An interior
window/door sign may be temporary or permanent.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A sign having the appearance of a solid base of
landscape construction materials such as masonry, stucco, stonework,
textured wood, tile, anodized metal or textured concrete materials. The
base of a monument sign shall be architectural in nature, with a concealed
means of support, and utilize materials consistent with the design of the
building in which it is associated.
Section
485.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.040
AO:446
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — Commercial speech in the form of a permanent
sign that does not relate to a use of the real property on which it is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — Commercial speech in the form of a permanent
sign that relates to a use of the real property on which it is located.
SIGN, PERMANENT — Any sign affixed or attached to the ground or a
structure and which cannot be removed without special handling. Any sign
that is not a temporary sign is deemed to be a permanent sign and shall be
governed by the regulations for a permanent sign.
SIGN, POLE — Any detached permanent sign which is supported by one (1)
or more stationary poles extending more than two (2) feet above the mean
grade line of the ground at its base, provided that this shall not include a
permitted monument sign as set forth herein.
SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST — Any sign intended to convey a legal right or
restriction on a property; a sign intended to warn the public of a bona
fide danger on the property; or a sign placed by order of a court or by
a government official in the normal course of their duties. Public interest
signs shall include signs identifying a structure or an area as a historic
structure or place.
SIGN, SMALL POLE — A pole sign of not more than four (4) square feet in
area per sign face and not more than two (2) feet in height.
SIGN, SMALL WALL — A wall sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in size.
SIGN, STRUCTURE — The support, poles, upright bracing or brackets and
framework for any sign that is mounted on or affixed to a building, structure
or the ground. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be
an integral part of the building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A non-permanent sign constructed of paper, cloth,
canvas, plastic sheet, vinyl, cardboard, fiberboard, plywood or other like
materials and that by design, installation, materials and/or appearance is
intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
SIGN, VEHICLE — A sign that uses a vehicle or trailers in such a way
as to function primarily as a sign, including but not limited to vehicles
that are not operational and parked to display a sign. Vehicles and trailers
associated with the function of the business on the premises shall not be
considered a vehicle sign.
SIGN, WALL — A sign affixed directly to an exterior wall of a building and
confined within the limits of such building. An integral sign is considered a
wall sign for the purposes of this Chapter.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of man-made work composed of parts joined together
in some definite manner.
SUBDIVISION — A development of land for which there is a duly recorded
final plat approved by the City.
Section
485.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.050
AO:447
Section 485.050. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1,
11-21-2016]
A. Notwithstanding anything else in this Chapter or the City Code, the
following restrictions shall govern all signs displayed in the City:
1. Code Compliance. Signs may only be displayed in accordance with
this Chapter.
2. Maintained. All signs shall be of sound structural quality, be
maintained in good repair and condition, have a clean and neat
appearance and, as appropriate, abide by all Building, Electrical
and other Codes.
3. Permitted Signs. The following signs are permitted in every district
as established by the City's Zoning Code:
a. Government signs.
b. Traffic control devices on private or public property provided
such complies with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.68
c. Any sign necessary for public safety erected by utility
companies within their respective easements.
d. Holiday displays provided that said display does not traverse
any public right-of-way, or create any traffic problem,
congestion or safety hazard.
4. Location. No flag or sign shall be permitted or displayed:
a. In the public right-of-way, or other City property, except as
expressly provided for by this Chapter or other City ordinance.
b. So that its location might obstruct the view of or be confused
with any street markers, traffic signs or signals or other
regulatory devices or warnings or any other signs erected by
any governmental body or agency.
c. So that it is located within a sight triangle or interferes with
the view reasonably necessary for motorists to proceed safely
through streets and intersections, or to enter or exit from
public or private streets.
5. Temporary Signs. Unless otherwise provided for specific uses,
temporary signs:
68.Comment: The Federal Highway Administration has established uniform standards for
signs that regulate traffic or that are erected and maintained within road rights-of-way or
adjacent property. These uniform standards are intended to be used by owners of private
property that is open to the public to reduce confusion and limit the risk of accident.
While these regulations are content specific, they serve an extraordinarily important
public function.
Section
485.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.050
AO:448
Section 485.060. Residential Uses. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
a. Shall not exceed three (3) feet in height on any property.
b. Shall not be placed on any utility pole, street light pole, tree,
fence or similar object.
c. Shall not exceed the applicable size limits allowed for the use
type.
d. Shall be secured or mounted as to not allow any motion.
e. Shall be securely attached and flush at all points when
attached to a facade.
6. Permanent Sign Materials. All permanent signs shall be
constructed of durable, outdoor and weather-resistant materials
and shall not be primarily constructed with impermanent materials
such as paper, cloth, canvas, plastic, plastic sheet, vinyl, cardboard,
fiberboard, plywood or other like materials.
7. Wall Signs. Wall signs shall be attached firmly to the building,
parallel with and adjacent to the wall, in which the wall sign is
attached.
8. Original Art Displays. Original art displays are allowed provided
that they meet the following requirements:
a. Located in public and semi-public spaces in any zoning district.
b. Shall not extend more than six (6) inches from the plane of the
wall upon which it is painted or to which it is affixed.
c. Shall be no more than sixty-four (64) square feet in size, per lot
or premises.
9. No Permit Required. The following signs meeting the requirements
of this Chapter shall not require a sign permit:
a. Flags.
b. Holiday Displays.
c. Interior Window/Door Signs.
d. Temporary Signs.
e. Original Art Displays.
A. Residential Uses. Property owners may have the following types of
signs for residential uses:
1. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the
following standards:
Section
485.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.060
AO:449
a. Three (3) temporary signs on the property at any time with a
sign face no larger than four (4) square feet per sign.
b. One (1) temporary sign with a sign face no larger than eight
and five-tenths (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches in one (1)
window per dwelling at a time.
c. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
2. Wall Signs. Wall signs are permitted subject to the following
standards:
a. One (1) wall sign located on the ground floor of the front of the
building shall be permitted per dwelling unit not to exceed
three (3) square feet in area. Where attached dwellings exist
on a property, the total square footage of a wall sign must not
exceed three (3) square feet per dwelling unit.
b. Wall signs shall be flush mounted and shall not project from the
surface of the wall on which it is affixed by more than twelve
(12) inches at all points.
c. Walls signs shall not be illuminated.
3. Interior Window/Door Signs. Interior window/door signs are
permitted subject to the following standards:
a. One (1) interior window/door sign is permitted per dwelling
unit.
b. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign
face.
c. Interior window/door signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Monument Signs For Subdivisions. Each residential subdivision will
be permitted one (1) double-faced monument sign at each public
street entrance for such subdivision, subject to the following
standards.
a. Monument signs shall be located on subdivision common
ground or in an easement granted to the trustees of the
subdivision.
b. Monument signs shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any
property line or exceed six (6) feet in height or twenty-four (24)
square feet in area.
c. Monument signs may be illuminated in accordance with
Section 485.110.
5. Multi-Family Complexes. Each multi-family complex will be allowed
one (1) of the following signs for the clubhouse or leasing office:
Section
485.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.060
AO:450
Section 485.070. Public/Semi-Public Uses. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1,
11-21-2016]
a. A monument sign no more than twenty-four (24) square feet in
area per sign face, not exceeding six (6) feet in height, and not
located closer than five (5) feet to any property line. The
monument sign may be illuminated in accordance with Section
485.110.
b. A wall sign no more than sixteen (16) square feet in area per
sign face, oriented to the internal road system of the complex,
located on the facade of the front of the building on the ground
floor and flush mounted. The wall sign shall not be illuminated.
6. On-Premises Signs. On-premises signs are not permitted except for
one (1) non-illuminated wall sign or interior window/door sign, not
exceeding one (1) square foot in size for a home occupation.
B. Flags And Flagpoles. Flags and flagpoles are permitted subject to the
following standards:
1. A flag shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size.
2. Each property owner shall have no more than three (3) flags on
display at any given time either located on a flagpole or mounted to
the house.
3. Each property owner may have one (1) flagpole not to exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
4. Such flagpole shall be ground-mounted and may be located
anywhere on the premises, except within ten (10) feet of any
property line.
5. Flags may be illuminated in accordance with Section 485.110.
A. Public And Semi-Public Uses. Property owners located in districts
zoned "R-1" through "R-6A," "PG," "PR" or "PS" may have the following
types of signs for public and semi-public uses:
1. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the
following standards:
a. Three (3) temporary signs on the property at any time with a
sign face no larger than nine (9) square feet per sign.
b. One (1) temporary sign with a sign face no larger than eight
and five-tenths (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches in one (1)
window.
c. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
Section
485.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.070
AO:451
2. Permanent Signs. A maximum of two (2) permanent signs (wall
signs and/or monument signs) are permitted per lot, subject to the
following standards:
a. Wall Signs.
(1) A wall sign may be no larger than thirty (30) square feet in
area and five (5) feet in height.
(2) A wall sign shall not be illuminated.
b. Monument Signs.
(1) No monument sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height and
the sign face shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in
area.
(2) A monument sign may contain an electric changeable copy
panel in accordance with Section 485.110.
(3) A monument sign shall have a landscaped area extending a
minimum of three (3) feet on all sides of the monument
sign base.
(4) A monument sign may be located anywhere on the
premises except within five (5) feet of any property line.
(5) A monument sign may be illuminated in accordance with
Section 485.110.
3. Small Wall Signs. A maximum of one (1) non-illuminated small wall
sign is permitted per lot or premises.
4. Interior Window/Door Signs. A maximum of one (1) non-illuminated
interior window/door sign is permitted per lot or premises.
B. Flags And Flagpoles. Flags and flagpoles are permitted subject to the
following standards:
1. A flag shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size.
2. Each property owner shall have no more than three (3) flags on
display at any given time.
3. Each property owner may have one (1) flagpole not to exceed
twenty-five (25) feet in height.
4. Such flagpole shall be ground-mounted and may be located
anywhere on the premises, except within ten (10) feet of any
property line.
5. Flags may be illuminated in accordance with in Section 485.110.
C. Other Districts. Public and semi-public uses located in all other zoning
districts other than those set forth in Subsection (A) above, shall be
Section
485.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.070
AO:452
Section 485.080. Commercial Uses. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
governed by the sign requirements of Section 485.080 (Commercial
Uses).
A. Commercial Uses. Property owners may have the following types of
signs for commercial uses:
1. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the
following standards:
a. No more than three (3) temporary signs at any time.
b. The total sign face of temporary signs at any time shall not
exceed thirty-six (36) square feet.
c. Such may be illuminated only pursuant to an approved sign
plan and in accordance with Section 485.110.
2. Wall Signs. Wall signs are permitted subject to the following
standards: [Ord. No. 3754 § 2, 11-20-2017]
a. Wall signs are allowed per facade to a maximum of three (3)
facades having wall signs. Where a multitenant building exists
on the premises, the exterior wall of the space occupied by the
tenant shall be considered to be a separate facade.
b. Wall sign faces shall not exceed a total of fifteen percent (15%)
of the facade to which it is attached. However, when more than
one (1) facade is used for wall signs, then the wall sign faces
shall not exceed a total of five percent (5%) of the facade to
which the wall signs are attached.
c. Notwithstanding the above, wall signs permitted herein shall
not have sign faces exceeding a total of five hundred (500)
square feet per facade in the "C-1" District or a total of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet per facade in all other zoning
districts.
d. Wall signs may be illuminated in accordance with Section
485.110.
3. Small Wall Signs. One (1) non-illuminated small wall sign may be
installed by each exterior entrance.
4. Pole Signs And Monument Signs. Pole signs and monument signs
are permitted subject to the following standards:
a. One (1) monument sign or pole sign is permitted per lot
frontage.
b. Pole sign face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in area and the sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet
in height unless frontage is along an Interstate highway
Section
485.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.080
AO:453
wherein the pole sign face may not exceed one hundred and
fifty (150) square feet in area and the sign structure shall not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Pole signs may be located
anywhere on the premises except within five (5) feet of any
property line.
c. No monument sign shall exceed seven (7) feet in height and the
sign face shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in area. A
monument sign base shall have a landscaped area extending a
minimum of three (3) feet on all sides of the monument sign
base. A monument sign may be located anywhere on the
premises except within five (5) feet of any property line. The
monument sign may contain an electric changeable copy panel
in accordance with Section 485.110.
d. Pole signs and monument signs may be illuminated in
accordance with Section 485.110.
5. Small Pole Signs. Small pole signs are permitted subject to the
following standards:
a. A maximum of two (2) small pole signs may be located at the
entrance and exit of a lot.
b. Each small pole sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area per sign face.
c. Each small pole sign shall not exceed two (2) feet in height.
d. Small pole signs may be illuminated in accordance with
Section 485.110.
6. Interior Window/Door Signs. Interior window/door signs may be
displayed inside an occupant's windows or doors; provided that the
aggregate area of all such interior signs shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the window or door area upon which the window/
door sign is placed. Interior window/door signs may be illuminated
in accordance with Section 485.110.
B. Flags And Flag Poles. Flags and flagpoles are permitted subject to the
following standards:
1. A flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in size.
2. Each property owner shall have no more than three (3) flags on
display at any given time.
3. Each property owner may have three (3) flagpoles not to exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height.
4. Such flagpoles shall be ground-mounted and may be located
anywhere on the premises, except within ten (10) feet of any
property line.
Section
485.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.080
AO:454
Section 485.085. Unimproved Land. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
5. Flags may be illuminated in accordance with Section 485.110.
A. Residential Unimproved Land. A property owner may have the
following signs for unimproved land zoned residential, subject to the
following standards:
1. Lots Under Three (3) Acres In Area. The following regulations
apply:
a. Temporary signs are permitted on a lot subject to the following
standards:
(1) No more than one (1) temporary sign along a street
frontage at any time.
(2) The total sign face of temporary sign shall not exceed four
(4) square feet.
(3) May be illuminated only pursuant to an approved sign plan
and in accordance with Section 485.110.
b. No off-premises signs are permitted.
2. Lots Three (3) Acres Or More In Area. The following regulations
apply:
a. Temporary signs are permitted on a lot subject to the following
standards:
(1) No more than one (1) temporary sign along a street
frontage at any time.
(2) The total sign face of a temporary sign shall not exceed
nine (9) square feet.
(3) May be illuminated only pursuant to an approved sign plan
and in accordance with Section 485.110.
b. No off-premises signs are permitted.
B. All Other Unimproved Land. A property owner may have the following
signs for unimproved land zoned other than residential, subject to the
following standards:
1. Temporary Signs.
a. No more than one (1) temporary sign at any time for each
street frontage.
b. The total sign face of the temporary sign shall not exceed
twenty-four (24) square feet.
Section
485.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.085
AO:455
Section 485.090. Billboards. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
c. May be illuminated only pursuant to an approved sign plan and
in accordance with Section 485.110.
2. No off-premises signs are permitted.
A. Standard Billboards. Property owners may have billboards subject to
the following standards:
1. Size. Each sign face shall not exceed six hundred seventy-two (672)
square feet, with a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet and a
maximum length of forty-eight (48) feet.
2. Type. Billboards may be in a back-to-back or in a V-type
configuration on a single pole support sign structure with not more
than one (1) sign face per facing.
3. Height. The overall height of the billboard shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet. No portion of the billboard, excluding the support
pole, shall be lower than twenty (20) feet above the ground at the
base of the sign face.
4. Number. Only one (1) billboard per lot is allowed.
5. Location. Billboards are only allowed within two hundred (200) feet
of the nearest edge of the right-of-way and visible from the main
traveled way of any highway which is part of the Interstate
Highway System of the State of Missouri and in areas that are
zoned other than residential.
a. Under no conditions shall a billboard be allowed within:
(1) Fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any lot located within any
residential zoning district.
(2) Fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any other billboard on the
same side of the adjacent interstate or primary highway.
The distance between billboards shall be measured along
the nearest edge of the highway pavement between points
directly opposite the billboards. All other distance
measurement points shall be those which yield the
shortest distance between relevant points. If billboards are
angled or V-shaped, the nearest point of the billboard to
the other relevant point is to be used.
(3) A distance equal to one hundred and fifty percent (150%)
of the height of the billboard from any property line or the
nearest building.
(4) One hundred (100) feet of any on-premises sign.
Section
485.085
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.090
AO:456
Section 485.100. Sign Plan Process. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1,
11-21-2016]
(5) One thousand (1,000) feet of any park, playground, school,
library, hospital, church, historic district, landmark or an
area on the National Register of Historic Places.
b. No billboard shall be located in such manner as to obstruct or
otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic
sign, signal or device or obstruct or physically interfere with a
motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
c. No billboard shall be located adjacent to or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of an interchange, intersection at grade
or safety rest area. Such distances shall be measured from
beginning or ending of the pavement widening at the exit from
or entrance to the main traveled way.
d. No billboard shall be located on a building or non-sign
structure.
6. Lighting. Billboards may be illuminated and may be an electric
changeable copy panel in accordance with Section 485.110.
7. Other Regulations. No permit to allow a billboard to be newly
erected shall be issued without a permit issued by the Missouri
Highways and Transportation Committee.
A. Purpose. A sign plan is a creative incentive for a unified visual
statement that integrates the design of signs with the design of a
building on which they will be displayed and with the surrounding area.
B. When Allowed. The owner(s) or developer(s) of a tract of land not used
for residential use, which is the site of or is proposed as the site for a
single integrated development consisting of one (1) or more buildings
and off-street parking, may submit an application for approval of a sign
plan to the Community Development Director for Commission for
review and recommendation. The application shall be in a form
prepared by the Community Development Department.
C. Contents Of Plan. The sign plan shall contain a visual representation of
the lettering, illumination, color, size, height, placement and location of
the signs proposed for display. When possible, this may be done in
conjunction with or as a part of the site development plan review. Any
person submitting a sign plan for consideration shall pay the fee set
forth in Title IV, Addendum A, of the City Code at the time of
submission.
D. Necessity. If an applicant is submitting a sign plan that seeks signage in
size, location or number that is not permitted under the express
requirements of the Sign Code, then the applicant shall submit a
Section
485.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.100
AO:457
Section 485.110. Illumination Restrictions. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1,
11-21-2016]
narrative statement that explains the need for deviation from the
applicable sign regulations. The statement shall describe the unique
circumstances of the applicant's site that warrant a deviation from
the provisions of the Sign Code. In no instance may any deviation be
granted to allow a type of sign that is expressly prohibited by this
Chapter.
E. Standards For Approval. The Commission may recommend approval of
and the Board may approve a sign plan if the signs represented in the
sign plan conform to applicable regulations of this Chapter except for
size, location, illumination and number limitations and there is an
express legislative finding and determination that:
1. The sign plan is consistent with and fulfills the intent, spirit and
purposes of this Chapter.
2. The signs described in the Plan are compatible with the theme,
visual quality and overall character of the surrounding area.
3. The approval of the proposed sign plan will not be detrimental to
the surrounding properties.
4. The signs described in the plan are appropriately related in size,
shape, materials, lettering, color, illumination and character and
function of the building or premises on which they will be
displayed.
5. The requested deviation from the applicable sign regulations in
size, location, illumination or number of signs is warranted due to
the unique characteristics or layout of the proposed building(s) or
the unique characteristics or topography of the proposed site.
A. Illumination Standards. All illuminated signs shall be subject to the
following standards:
1. External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line and gooseneck
reflectors, are permitted, provided the light source is directed upon
the sign face and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or
rays of light from being directed into any portion of an adjacent
street and the lights are not of such intensity so as to cause glare,
impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise
interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle; provided,
however, that the light source is effectively shielded so as to
prevent beams or rays of light from shining on any adjacent street
or residential uses.
2. No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the
effectiveness of or obscures any official traffic sign, device or
signal.
Section
485.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.110
AO:458
3. If a sign or flag is externally lighted, the light source shall be
completely concealed and not visible to pedestrians, vehicles or
persons located on adjacent property.
4. All signs with internal illumination shall require an electrical
permit and meet all requirements of the City's Electrical Code and
other applicable Codes.
5. Pole signs and monument signs within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of a residential dwelling shall only be illuminated by an external
light source. All illuminated signs within one hundred and fifty
(150) feet of a residential dwelling shall be extinguished at the time
of business closing or 11:00 p.m., whichever is later, provided that
this shall not prohibit continuous illumination of flags and
monument signs for residential subdivisions and multi-family
complexes.
6. No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that simulates an
emergency light or device shall be permitted as part of any sign. No
illumination shall be allowed that converts the sign to a flashing
sign except if reasonably necessary to convey public service
information.
7. A sign may only include an electric changeable copy panel when
expressly so stated within Sections 485.060 — 485.090.
8. Notwithstanding the above lighting requirements, no illuminated
sign shall be of such brightness or intensity so as to cause glare,
impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise
interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle, obscure or
interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic control device,
prevent or interfere with the quiet use or enjoyment of any lot
which is used or zoned residential, or otherwise be maintained as a
nuisance.
B. Electric Changeable Copy Panels. Electric copy changeable panel signs
shall be subject to the general illumination standards of Subsection (A)
of this Section and the following additional regulations:
1. Duration Of Message Intervals. Messages must be displayed for a
minimum of fifteen (15) seconds for each item shown or
information displayed in the changeable copy sign.
2. Transition And Display. Message changes shall be instantaneous
without dissolving, growing, melting, traveling up or down
scrolling, fading. Messages shall have a static display and shall not
be illuminated so as to be a flashing sign or that in any manner
creates the illusion of movement.
3. Brightness. The brightness of a changeable copy sign shall
automatically adjust via photocell for use during daylight hours and
non-daylight hours. No sign may be illuminated to a degree of
Section
485.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.110
AO:459
Section 485.120. Prohibited Signs. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility.
The maximum permitted brightness for a changeable copy sign
during daylight hours is five thousand (5,000) NIT (candela per
square meter) and five hundred (500) NIT during non-daylight
hours as measured from the sign's face perpendicular to the rays
of the source at maximum brightness. The lighting and other
specifications for a proposed changeable copy sign shall be
submitted with the application proposing to incorporate a
changeable copy sign.
4. Story Advertising. Electric copy changeable signs shall not display
consecutive messages facing the same traveled way, which
constitute a substantially similar theme or story and is a
continuation of any immediately preceding message, thereby
creating a storyboarding effect when viewed by persons operating
a motor vehicle. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall prohibit
the display of identical consecutive messages.
5. Malfunction And Non-Compliance. Electric copy changeable signs
shall be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one (1)
position if a malfunction occurs. The electric copy changeable signs
shall be equipped with a means to promptly discontinue the display
if it malfunctions, and the sign owner shall immediately stop the
dynamic display when notified by the City that it is not complying
with standards of this Code.
6. Conversion. Conversions of an existing sign to an electric copy
changeable panel is authorized when the sign is permitted to be a
changeable copy panel by this Chapter and the sign complies with
current Code requirements.
A. Applicable Permits. Signs are prohibited unless constructed pursuant to
a valid building permit and electrical permit when required under the
City Code and authorized under this Chapter.
B. Prohibitions. The following signs are prohibited which:
1. Are of a size, location, movement, coloring, or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic
control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or
signal.
2. Contain or consist of banners.
3. Are flashing signs, except for holiday displays as permitted
pursuant to this Chapter.
4. Are graffiti.
Section
485.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.120
AO:460
Section 485.130. Permits. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
Section 485.140. Non-Conformity And Modification. [Ord. No. 3638
§ 1, 11-21-2016]
5. Are a vehicle sign located within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of
a public right-of-way.
A. Permits Required. Except as otherwise provided for by this Chapter or
other City ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
erect, alter, replace, relocate, convert or change any sign without first
obtaining sign approval via a sign permit, and paying any applicable
permit fee; provided that a permit is not required for ordinary
maintenance and repair of a permitted sign.
B. Application Required. Applications for a sign permit shall be made upon
forms provided by the Director.
C. Application Process. Applications for a sign permit shall be processed
through the following procedures:
1. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall
pay to the City a minimum fee set forth in Title IV, Addendum A, of
the City Code.
2. The Director shall review a sign permit within a reasonable period
of time and either approve it, reject it, or notify the applicant that
the application is incomplete with a specific list of deficiencies in
the application, or may submit the application to the Commission if
the application is complete and the applicant is seeking a variance
or sign plan from this Chapter.
3. If approved, the applicant shall apply to St. Louis County if a
building permit or an electric permit is required.
4. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed
within six (6) months after the date of approval, the permit shall
become null and void.
5. The applicant shall notify the Director within fourteen (14) days of
the sign erection. The Director shall within a reasonable period of
time thereafter file appropriate documentation of the permitted
sign.
A. Amortization. For the purpose of amortization, non-conforming signs
may be continued from the effective date of this Chapter for a period
not to exceed ten (10) years unless under a previous regulation the
signs were to be amortized and in that case the amortization period
shall be as previously required or ten (10) years, whichever is less.
B. Changes And Modifications. A non-conforming sign shall be brought
into conformity with this Chapter if it is substantially altered or
Section
485.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.140
AO:461
Section 485.150. Variances. [Ord. No. 3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
reconstructed or replaced or relocated. An alteration or reconstruction
shall be considered substantial when such alteration or reconstruction
affects fifty percent (50%) or greater of the non-conforming sign and/or
support structure or when the value of such alteration or reconstruction
is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the value of the sign and support
structure prior to the alteration or reconstruction. Any non-conforming
sign that is damaged through no fault of the owner may, upon issuance
of a permit, be reconstructed to its original condition without bringing
the sign into compliance with this Chapter; provided such change and
reconstruction shall not modify any existing amortization period.
A. The owner of a property used for a residential use aggrieved by a denial
of a sign permit application for that property by the Director may
present to the Board of Adjustment a petition, duly verified, requesting
a variance from the Section of the Sign Code upon which such denial
was based. The petition shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision of the Director and
shall be in compliance with all requirements of Section 410.030.
B. The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the requirements
of this Chapter for residential uses with regard to the size, color,
location, illumination of, and number of signs based upon unique
architectural treatments, special project conditions, or specific
hardship; provided that in no instance may any deviation be granted to
allow a type of sign that is expressly prohibited by this Chapter. In
acting upon a request for variance, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider the following criteria:
1. Purpose And Intent Of Code. Is granting of the variance in
compliance with the general purpose and intent of the Sign Code,
Zoning Regulations, and Comprehensive Plan?
2. Impacts On Adjacent Property. Will granting of the variance
adversely affect neighboring property owners or residents?
3. Safety. Will granting of the variance adversely affect safety?
4. Visual Clutter. Will granting of the variance significantly clutter the
visual landscape of the area?
5. Site Constraints. In some situations, topography, landscaping,
existing buildings or unusual building designs may substantially
block or impair the visibility of the applicant's existing or proposed
signs from multiple directions. While visibility of a sign is not to be
guaranteed from all directions, does the site provide reasonable
visibility of a business's sign?
6. Compatibility. Is the sign compatible and does the sign integrate
aesthetically with the daytime/nighttime color, lighting, and
architecture of the area as a whole?
Section
485.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.160
AO:462
Section 485.160. Enforcement And Removal Of Signs. [Ord. No.
3638 § 1, 11-21-2016]
A. Vacated Premise — Abandoned Sign. If a building or premises is
vacated, any sign or sign structure located thereon other than flags,
government signs, integrated sign, and temporary signs shall be
deemed abandoned and if the property owner fails to cover or remove
all signs or sign structures in accordance with this Subsection, such
shall constitute a nuisance and/or Code violation.
1. Interior Window/Door Signs And Wall Signs. The property owner
shall remove all interior window/door signs, which are permanent,
and all wall signs and restore the building facade, windows or
doors to their normal appearance within thirty (30) days of the
building or premises being vacated.
2. Pole Signs And Monument Signs.
a. The property owner shall arrange for an opaque surface to
cover sign faces related to a vacated building or premises
located on any type of pole sign or monument sign within thirty
(30) days of the building or premises being vacated.
b. The property owner shall remove all sign faces, lighting
fixtures and sign structures related to the vacated building or
premises and return the footing area to the natural grade
within six (6) months of the building or premises be vacated.
3. Scope. For the purposes of this Section, the property owner shall
include both the tenant of a sign or sign structure and the property
owner, if different.
B. Unsafe Signs. Any sign or sign structure deemed by the City to be a
danger to the public under any applicable ordinance or other Statute or
otherwise due to its condition shall constitute a nuisance.
C. Notice Of Nuisance. The City shall cause written notice to be served
upon the owner of an abandoned sign or sign structure or the owner of
an unsafe sign or sign structure if the owner cannot be located, to the
property management agent of the premises on which such sign or
structure is located. Such notice shall state, at a minimum:
1. The violations found.
2. That the sign or sign structure is deemed to be a public nuisance
pursuant to this Chapter.
3. What actions will remedy the public nuisance.
4. That the nuisance shall be abated within thirty (30) days from the
date of such notice or other reasonable time as determined by the
Director, but not less than ten (10) days.
Section
485.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.160
AO:463
5. That upon failure to abate the condition causing the nuisance
within the prescribed time period, the City may enforce the general
penalty provisions of the Code provided in Section 100.060 or other
remedy provided by applicable law.
D. Notice Process. Notice shall be effected by:
1. Attaching a copy of same to the nuisance.
2. Posting a copy of same at the property on which the nuisance is
situated.
3. Mailing, by certified mail or certificate of mailing, a copy of the
notice to the owner of the sign at their last known address(es) or if
the owner cannot be located, to the property management agent of
the premises on which the sign is located and to the occupant of the
property at the property address.
E. Penalty. Any property owner that fails to remedy the nuisance, shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of the Code provided in
Section 100.060.
F. Sign Removal. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code, the City may
immediately remove without notice (at the owner's expense when
appropriate) any sign or sign structure that is:
1. An immediate peril to persons or property.
2. On the public right-of-way or City property without City
authorization.
Section
485.160
FENTON CITY CODE Section
485.160
AO:464
Where a sign or sign structure has been removed by the City
pursuant to this Subsection, the City shall mail a statement of the
cost of removal of said sign or signs to the last known address
of the owner of record or person in charge of such property. If
such costs are not paid within thirty (30) days from the mailing
of such notice, the Director may certify the charges for repair or
removal to the City Clerk as a special assessment represented by
a special tax bill. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance
shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall be
a first lien against the property until paid and shall be prima
facie evidence of the recitals thereof and of its validity. No mere
clerical error or informality in such lien or in the proceedings
leading to its issuance shall be a defense thereto. The certified
costs associated with the removal, termination or abatement of
such nuisance shall include all expenses incurred by the City in the
removal of the nuisance, including, but not limited to, the actual
cost of inspecting the land or lot, the actual cost of service of
notice as provided herein, the actual cost of abatement, attorneys'
fees pursuant to Section 100.065, and the actual cost of issuing
and recording the tax bill. Such tax bill shall bear interest at the
rate of six percent (6%) per annum if not paid within thirty (30)
days after issuance.
G. Void Permit. Any sign or sign structure removed by the City pursuant to
this Section 485.160, or removed pursuant to a court order, will
automatically void the sign permit, if any, associated with such sign or
sign structure for violation of this Chapter.
H. Non-Issuance Of Permits. The Director shall not issue any further sign
permits to persons refusing to pay costs assessed under this Section
485.160 or Section 100.060, nor to agents or representatives of such
persons.
I. Violation Of Ordinance. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code, the
City may proceed, without providing notice, to issue a citation to an
owner of a sign or sign structure for any sign or sign structure believed
to be in violation of this Chapter. An owner of a sign or sign structure
found to be in violation of any provision in this Chapter shall be subject
to the general penalty provision of this Code provided in Section
100.060.
J. Equitable Relief. In addition to any other remedies or penalties
established for violations of this Chapter, the Director or City
Prosecutor may, on behalf of the City and after approval by the Board,
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such legal or equitable
relief as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this Chapter. In
such action the court may grant such legal or equitable relief, including,
but not limited to, mandatory or prohibitory injunctive relief, as the
facts may warrant. Upon the successful prosecution of any such action,
Section
485.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
485.160
AO:465
Section 485.170. Validity And Severability Clause. [Ord. No. 3638
§ 1, 11-21-2016]
Chapter 490
SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING STATION REGULATIONS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 490.010. Definition. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
As used in this Chapter, the following term shall mean:
SATELLITE DISH — Satellite dishes or any apparatus capable of receiving
communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in
planetary orbit.
Section 490.020. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
It shall be unlawful to commence or to proceed with the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of any satellite
signal receiving station without having applied for a building permit and a
building permit having been granted therefore.
Section 490.030. Building Permits. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
The provisions of Sections 430.010, 500.120 and 500.130 pertaining to
building permits shall apply to all satellite dishes.
Section 490.040. Satellite Dish Regulations. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
the City may be awarded by the court reasonable attorney fees as
allowed by law.
A. Chapter Severability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
declare any part of this Chapter to be invalid, it is the intent of the City
that such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not
specifically included in said ruling.
B. Application Severability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
declare invalid the application of any provision of this Chapter to a
particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or structure, it is the
intent of the City that such ruling shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or
structure not specifically included in said ruling.
A. General Provisions (Residential And Commercial). A building permit for
a satellite dish on residential or commercial property may be granted in
accordance with this Zoning Code, provided that:
Section
485.160
FENTON CITY CODE Section
490.040
AO:466
1. The satellite dish and its attachment to a building or the ground
meet the applicable requirements of any City codes and the
requirements of Section 500.010 of this Code as adopted by the
City of Fenton.
2. The satellite dish is located in the rear setback, provided that when
on a corner lot, it cannot be closer to the side street than the
building located on the lot.
3. The satellite dish is located not less than ten (10) feet from any
property line.
4. No advertising or signage of any type is permitted on a satellite
dish.
5. Satellite dishes shall be finished in a non-garish, non-reflective
color and surface which shall blend into the surroundings.
6. In no case shall a satellite dish be permitted to be attached to a
portable device for the purpose of relocating the entire dish on the
property in order to circumvent the intentions of this Section.
7. Every dish must be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning.
8. Dishes shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, shall be of noncombustible
and corrosion-resistant material and shall be erected
in a secure, wind-resistant manner.
9. If the dish is placed on a roof, it should be placed in such a manner
as not to detract from the aesthetic appearance of the surrounding
area and it shall be located and designed to reduce visual impact
from public streets.
10. The City may require screening and/or landscaping surrounding
the satellite dish.
B. Residential Districts (Excluding Multiple-Family Districts). A building
permit for a satellite dish in a residential district, excluding multiplefamily
districts, may be granted in accordance with this Zoning Code,
provided that:
1. The satellite dish is not located on the roof of a residential dwelling
unless such dish is less than three (3) feet in diameter and unless
the total height of the dish and stand does not exceed five (5) feet.
2. The satellite dish, when installed, except on the roof of a building,
is not, at its highest point, fifteen (15) feet above the ground.
3. Only one (1) satellite dish shall be permitted on any lot or parcel of
land.
Section
490.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
490.040
AO:467
Section 490.050. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
Chapter 491
WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section 491.010. Purpose; Applicability. [Ord. No. 3883,
12-20-201869]
C. Commercial And Multiple-Family Districts. A building permit for a
satellite dish in a commercial or multiple-family district may be granted
in accordance with this Zoning Code, provided that:
1. The satellite dish is not located on the roof of a commercial
building, unless such dish is less than eight (8) feet in diameter and
unless the total height of the dish and stand does not exceed ten
(10) feet.
2. The satellite dish, when installed, except on the roof of a building,
is not, at its highest point, twenty (20) feet above the ground.
3. Not more than two (2) satellite dishes shall be permitted on any lot
or parcel of land.
4. Any satellite dish not used for daily operations of the business shall
be removed within thirty (30) days of the date that the satellite dish
is taken out of service.
5. Satellite dishes shall not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
ninety (90) days in jail, or both.
B. Any corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation.
A. Statement Of Purpose. The general purpose of this Chapter is to
regulate the placement, construction, and modification of
telecommunications Wireless Communications Facilities to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not
unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City of Fenton.
Specifically, this Chapter is intended to:
69.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 491, Wireless Facilities, containing Sections 491.010
through 491.110, was repealed 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3883.
Section
490.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.010
AO:468
Section 491.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3883, 12-20-2018]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings and
usages indicated:
AGL (ABOVE GROUND LEVEL) — Ground level shall be determined by the
average elevation of the natural ground level within a radius of fifty (50)
feet from the center location of measurement.
ANTENNA — Any device that transmits and/or receives wireless radio
waves for voice, data, or video communications purposes, including, but not
limited to, television, AM/FM radio, texts, microwave, cellular telephone,
and similar forms of communications. The term shall exclude satellite earth
station antenna less than two (2) meters in diameter (mounted within twelve
(12) feet of the ground or building-mounted) and any receive-only home
television antenna.
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of
telecommunications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and
businesses of the City of Fenton;
2. Minimize adverse visual impacts of Wireless Communications
Facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques that provide predictability for
nearby property owners and others that future uses will not
materially alter such approved aesthetic protections without
zoning hearing procedures and input from interested parties when
not prohibited by applicable law;
3. Ensure that any new Wireless Communications Facilities are in an
area compatible with the neighborhood or surrounding community
to the extent possible; and
4. Ensure that regulation of Wireless Communications Facilities does
not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
services and does not unreasonably discriminate among
functionally equivalent providers of such service and promotes the
provision and availability of communication services within the
City.
B. Applicability; Preemption. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the
contrary, the procedures and regulation set forth in this Chapter shall
be applicable to all Wireless Communications Facilities existing or
installed, built or modified after the effective date of this Chapter to the
fullest extent permitted by law. No provision of this Chapter shall apply
to any circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under
superseding Federal or State law and furthermore, if any Section,
Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is now
or in the future superseded or preempted by State or Federal law or
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such
provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by
law.
Section
491.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.020
AO:469
CABINET — A structure for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one (1) or more Antenna where direct access to
equipment is provided from the exterior and that has horizontal dimensions
that do not exceed four (4) feet by six (6) feet and vertical Height that does
not exceed six (6) feet.
DIRECTOR — The Community Improvement Director or his/her designee or
official acting in such capacity.
DISGUISED SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any free-standing, man-made
structure designed for the support of Antenna, the presence of which is
camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately placed and designed
architectural or natural feature. Depending on the location and type of
disguise used, such concealment may require placement underground of
the utilities leading to the structure. Such structures may include but are
not limited to clock towers, campaniles, observation towers, light standards,
flag poles, and artificial trees. For purposes of this definition, a structure
"camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately-placed and designed
architectural or natural feature" shall mean:
EXISTING STRUCTURE — Any structure capable of supporting Wireless
Communications Facilities (other than a Support Structure) in full
conformance with the design and other requirements of this Chapter and
is: (1) existing prior to the date of all applicable permit applications seeking
City authorization for installation of such Facilities thereon, and (2) not built
or installed in anticipation of such specific installation or erected as a means
to evade approvals applicable to a non-existing structure.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
"FAST-TRACK" SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A "Fast-Track" Small
Wireless Facility, or "Fast-Track," shall mean a Small Wireless Facility that
meets the following requirements for an Antenna and associated
equipment:
It is consistent with and contributes to and does not detract from the
character and property values and use of the area and neighborhood in
which it is located;
1.
It does not contain distorted proportions, size, or other features not
typically found on the type of structure or feature to which it is
designed to replicate;
2.
It cannot be identified as a Support Structure by persons with
reasonable sensibilities and knowledge;
3.
Its equipment, accessory buildings, or other aspects or attachments
relating to the Disguised Support Structure are wholly concealed using
a manner consistent with and typically associated with the architectural
or natural structure or feature being replicated; and
4.
It is of a Height, design, and type that would ordinarily occur at the
location and neighborhood selected.
5.
Section
491.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.020
AO:470
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average grade of the
base of the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the
main structure and all attachments thereto.
INCIDENTAL USE — Any use authorized herein that exists in addition to
the principal use of the property.
SHELTER — A building for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one (1) or more Antenna and where access to
equipment is gained from the interior of the building. Human occupancy for
office or other uses or the storage of other materials and equipment not in
direct support of the connected Antenna is prohibited.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — An Antenna and associated equipment that
meets the following:
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A Tower or Disguised Support Structure.
TOWER — A structure designed for the support of one (1) or more Antenna
and including guyed towers, self-supporting (lattice) towers, or monopoles,
but not Disguised Support Structures, Utility Poles, or buildings. The term
shall also not include any Support Structure that includes attachments of
sixty-five (65) feet or less in Height owned and operated solely for use by an
amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC.
No more than seven cubic feet (7 ft3) in volume (comprised of no
more than twenty-seven square feet (27 ft2) of exterior surface area,
excluding the surface width equal to the width of the Existing Structure
or Utility Pole to which it is mounted, on an imaginary enclosure
around the perimeter thereof, excluding cable or cable conduit of four
(4) inches or less). Volume shall be the measure of the exterior
displacement of the Antenna and associated equipment;
1.
Located with the consent of the owner on an Existing Structure or
Utility Pole, or concealed within or on a replacement Utility Pole if
the appearance is not materially altered and the Existing Structure or
Utility Pole is no more than five (5) feet taller;
2.
Not exceeding six (6) feet above the top of an Existing Structure or
Utility Pole for a total Height not exceeding forty-five (45) feet (nor
taller than more than six (6) feet above the average of similar poles
within three hundred (300) feet).
3.
1. An Antenna of no more than six cubic feet (6 ft3) in volume; and
All other associated equipment, to the extent permitted by applicable
law to be calculated, of cumulatively no more than twenty-eight cubic
feet (28 ft3) in volume; provided that no single piece of equipment on
the Utility Pole shall exceed nine cubic feet (9 ft3) in volume, and no
single piece of ground mounted equipment shall exceed fifteen cubic
feet (15 ft3) in volume.
2.
Section
491.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.020
AO:471
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is or may be used for
wireline communications, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control,
signage, or a similar function, which may also support a Small Wireless
Facility or "Fast-Track."
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any Antenna, Small Wireless
Facility, "Fast-Track," Cabinet, Shelter, and Support Structure, and
associated equipment.
Section 491.030. Application Procedures; Timing. [Ord. No. 3883,
12-20-2018]
Section 491.040. General Requirements; Administration. [Ord. No.
3883, 12-20-2018]
A. Applications. Applications for permitted, administrative, or special uses
pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the supplementary
procedures in this Chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the City
as a complete application on forms provided by the City. A "complete
application" shall be an application submitted on the forms provided by
the City, fully executed by the applicant, identifying the specific
approval sought, and containing all attachments, fees as may be
established to reimburse the City for its inspection and review costs,
and information as required thereon or by the City, consistent with this
Chapter. Applications shall be accompanied by a building permit
application and other applicable forms.
B. Proof Of Owner Consent. Applications for permitted, administrative, or
special uses pursuant to this Chapter shall be required to provide proof
of owner consent, which shall minimally include:
1. Written consent to pursue the application by all fee simple owners
of the underlying real estate (or where located in street right-ofway,
the right-of-way owner thereof), including when the proposed
location is also in a utility easement; and
2. Written consent to pursue the application of the owner of the
structure on which such Facility is to be placed, if different than
applicant.
C. Timing. Applications shall be decided upon within a reasonable time,
subject further to State or Federal specific additional time
requirements as may apply to the particular application.
A. Applicability. The requirements set forth in this Chapter shall be
applicable to all Wireless Communications Facilities within the City
installed, built, or modified after the effective date of this Chapter to the
full extent permitted by law. Such zoning review and approvals required
in this Chapter shall be in addition to any other generally applicable
permitting requirement, including applicable building, excavation, or
other right-of-way permits.
Section
491.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.040
AO:472
1. Principal Or Incidental Use. Towers may be either a principal or
Incidental Use in all non-residential zoning districts, subject to any
applicable requirement relating to yard or setback. An Incidental
Use subject to a leasehold interest of a person other than the lot
owner may be approved for a Tower only if the leasehold area
separately meets all requirements for a separate subdivided lot,
including dedicated access, parking, setbacks, and lot size,
applicable to a primary use in the district in which the use is
proposed as if it was a separate subdivided lot. No other district
shall allow Towers unless required by law. All other wireless
facilities other than Towers, may be a principal or Incidental Use in
all districts subject to the requirements herein.
2. Building Codes, Safety Standards, And Zoning Compliance.
Wireless Communications Facilities shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with all standards contained in
applicable State and local building codes. A certified engineer's
structural report shall be required for all applications to construct
a new or modify, or any way alter, a Support Structure, a Utility
Pole, or Antenna, including Small Wireless Facility and "Fast-
Track," unless waived upon application to the Director stating why
such report is unnecessary to the specific application and a
determination in the discretion of the Director approving such
statement. In addition to any other approvals required by this
Chapter, no Wireless Communications Facility or portion thereof
shall be erected, replaced, or expanded prior to receipt of a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance, unless otherwise required by
law, and the issuance of a Building Permit. For sites within City
right-of-way:
a. The most restrictive adjacent underlying zoning district
classification shall apply unless otherwise specifically zoned
and designated on the Official Zoning Map,
b. Wireless Communications Facilities shall be installed and
maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or
public safety on the right-of-way or obstruct the legal use of
such right-of-way by authorities or authorized right-of-way
users, and
c. Such use shall be required to obtain applicable permits and
comply with the City's ROW management rules and regulations
set forth in Chapter 510.
3. Regulatory Compliance. All Wireless Communications Facilities
shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA,
FCC, and any other local, State, or Federal agency with the
authority to regulate Wireless Communications Facilities, and
including all required licenses, permits, and taxes applicable to
such structure and/or modification. Should such standards or
regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring such devices
Section
491.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.040
AO:473
and structures into compliance with the revised standards or
regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling
agency. No approval for any placement, construction, or
modification of any Wireless Communications Facilities permitted
by this Chapter shall be granted for any applicant having an
uncured violation of this Chapter, any zoning regulation regarding
the lot on which the structure is proposed, or any other
governmental regulatory, licensing, or tax requirement applicable
to such Wireless Communications Facilities within the City unless
preempted by applicable law. Modifications under 47 U.S.C.
§ 1455(a) shall be approved without regard to zoning regulations
regarding the lot on which the modification is proposed.
4. Security. All Wireless Communications Facilities shall be protected
from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. A
description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part
of any application to install, build, alter, or modify Wireless
Communications Facilities. Additional measures may be required
as a condition of the issuance of a Building Permit as deemed
necessary by the Director or by the Board of Aldermen in the case
of a Special Use Permit.
5. Lighting. Antenna, Small Wireless Facilities, "Fast-Track," and
Support Structures shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA
or other State or Federal agency with authority to regulate, in
which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be
made a part of the application to install, build, alter, or modify the
Antenna, Small Wireless Facilities, "Fast-Track," or Support
Structure. Lighting may also be approved as a consistent
component of a Disguised Support Structure. Equipment Cabinets
and Shelters may have lighting only as approved by the Director or
Board of Aldermen in the case of a Special Use Permit.
6. Signs. Except for a Disguised Support Structure in the form of an
otherwise lawfully permitted sign, the placement of advertising on
Wireless Communications Facilities is prohibited other than
identification signage of not greater than one (1) square foot on
ground equipment or required safety signage.
7. Design.
a. Color. Subject to the requirements of the FAA or any applicable
State or Federal agency, Wireless Communications Facilities
and attachments shall be painted a neutral color consistent
with the natural or built environment of the site or an
alternative painting scheme approved by the Director, or the
Board of Aldermen in the case of Special Use Permits,
consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. Unpainted
galvanized steel Support Structures are not permitted.
Section
491.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.040
AO:474
b. Ground Equipment. When authorized, equipment Shelters or
Cabinets shall have an exterior finish reasonably compatible
with the natural or built environment of the site and shall also
comply with any design guidelines as may be applicable to the
particular zoning district in which the facility is located unless
not feasible. All equipment shall be either placed underground,
contained in a single Shelter or Cabinet, or wholly concealed
within a building or approved walled compound.
c. Antenna Design. Antennas attached to a Disguised Support
Structure shall be contained within the Disguised Support
Structure or within or mounted flush on the surface of the
Disguised Support Structure so as not to defeat the disguised
design. Antennas attached to a Tower shall be contained within
the Tower or mounted flush on the surface of the Tower to
which they are mounted. All Antennas attached to an existing
building, Utility Pole, or structure shall be of a color matching
the surface to which they are mounted. Antennas on the
rooftop or attached to a building shall be screened or
constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which
they are attached. All Antennas shall be designed to be
disguised and maximally concealed on or within the Support
Structure or other structure. Exposed Antennas on crow's nest
or other visible platforms or extensions are prohibited.
d. Height. Support Structures and Antenna shall be no taller than
necessary and shall not exceed the height limitation of any
airport overlay zone as may be adopted by the City or other
regulatory agency. Support Structures may exceed underlying
zoning district height restrictions for buildings and structures
only where shown to be necessary, provided that no reasonable
and feasible alternative exists. To the extent permitted by
applicable law, district height restrictions shall be considered
by the City in determining the appropriateness of the design
and location of the application under the applicable standards
for approval. No Support Structure shall be approved at a
Height exceeding one hundred twenty (120) feet AGL unless
the applicant clearly demonstrates that such Height is
required for the proper function of the applicant's system.
e. Monopole Design. All Towers shall be of a monopole design.
Lattice, guyed Towers, or other non-monopole Tower designs
shall not be permitted.
f. Compound Walls/Landscaping. All Towers shall be surrounded
by a minimum of a six-foot high decorative wall constructed of
brick, stone, or comparable masonry materials and a landscape
strip of not less than ten (10) feet in width and planted with
materials, which will provide a visual barrier to a minimum
Height of six (6) feet. The landscape strip shall be exterior to
any security wall. In lieu of the required wall and landscape
Section
491.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.040
AO:475
strip, an alternative means of screening may be approved by
the Director, or by the Board of Aldermen in the case of a
Special Use Permit, upon demonstration by the applicant that
an equivalent degree of visual screening will be achieved.
Landscaping or other improvements may be required for
Disguised Support Structures if needed to implement an
approved disguise.
g. Setbacks. All Support Structures, including any portions of any
wireless Communications Facilities thereon and associated
structures, fences, and walls (except for parking associated
with the Wireless Communications Facility) shall be separated
from any public right-of-way, sidewalk or street, alley, parking
area, playground, or other building, and from the property line
of any adjacent property at least a horizontal distance equal to
the Height of the Support Structure, including any portions of
any Wireless Communications Facilities thereon. In addition, a
Tower must be located more than seventy-five (75) feet from
any residential dwelling unit and at least one hundred (100)
feet from any trail, park, or outdoor recreation area, and no
Tower that is readily visible from off-site shall be installed
closer than one-half (1/2) mile from another readily visible
Tower unless it is situated on a multiple-user site, or blends
with the surrounding existing natural and man-made
environment in such a manner as to be effectively
unnoticeable.
h. Storage. Vehicle or outdoor storage on any Wireless
Communications Facilities site is prohibited, unless otherwise
permitted by the zoning district.
i. Parking. On-site parking for periodic maintenance and service
shall be provided at all Support Structure locations consistent
with the underlying zoning district and the type of Support
Structure approval granted.
j. Decorative Poles. In districts where there are Utility Poles
which were specifically designed for their aesthetic nature and
compatibility with the built environment of that district, as
determined by the City, such Utility Poles shall be deemed to be
decorative Utility Poles. Such decorative Utility Poles, when
authorized to be replaced by an applicant for Wireless
Communications Facilities pursuant to applicable law and in
compliance with this Chapter and Code, shall only be replaced
with a substantially similar decorative Utility Pole which
matches the aesthetics and decorative elements of the original
decorative Utility Pole being replaced. Such replacement
expenses shall be bore wholly by the applicant seeking to place
Wireless Communications Facilities on such decorative Utility
Pole.
Section
491.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.040
AO:476
Section 491.050. Permitted Use. [Ord. No. 3883, 12-20-2018]
8. Public Property. Wireless Communications Facilities located on
property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City shall be
subject to the requirements of this Chapter. A license or lease with
the City authorizing the location of such Wireless Communications
Facilities shall be required for each site.
9. As-Built Plans. Within sixty (60) days of completion of the initial
construction and any additional construction, two (2) complete sets
of plans drawn to scale and certified as accurately depicting the
location of all Wireless Communications Facilities constructed shall
be furnished to the City.
10. Historic Preservation; Thirty-Day Hearing Period. To the extent
permitted by law, approval shall not be issued for any Wireless
Communications Facility that the Director or Board of Aldermen
determines would create a significant negative visual impact or
otherwise have a significant negative impact on the historical
character and quality of any property within a Historic
Preservation District or such District as a whole. For collocation of
any certified historic structure as defined in Section 253.545
RSMo., in addition to all other applicable time requirements, there
shall be a thirty-day time period before approval of an application
during which one (1) or more public hearings on collocation to a
certified historic structure are held. The City may require
reasonable, technically feasible and technological neutral design
and concealment measures as a condition of approval of a Wireless
Communications Facility within a historic district.
B. Administration. The Director shall have the authority to establish forms
and procedures consistent with this Chapter and applicable Federal,
State, and local law to ensure compliance and to facilitate prompt
review and administration of applications.
A. Permitted Use. The placement of Wireless Communications Facilities
fully conforming with the General Requirements in this Chapter are
permitted in all zoning districts only as follows:
1. Collocations On Existing Support Structures. The attachment of
additional or replacement Antenna, including Small Wireless
Facilities and "Fast-Track," and associated equipment to any
existing Support Structure or Utility Pole or as otherwise
authorized by State or Federal law where local zoning is
preempted, provided that building permit requirements, national
safety codes, and other applicable codes including recognized
accepted industry standards for structural, safety, capacity,
reliability, and engineering are satisfied, including specifically the
requirement to submit a certified structural engineering report as
provided in Section 491.040.
Section
491.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.050
AO:477
2. Antenna On High-Voltage Towers. The mounting of Antenna on or
within any existing high-voltage electric transmission Tower, but
not exceeding the Height of such Tower by more than ten (10) feet,
provided that all requirements of this Chapter and the underlying
zoning ordinance are met, except minimum setbacks provided in
this Chapter shall not apply.
3. Antenna On Existing Buildings/Structures. In all districts, except
not on single-family residential or two-family dwellings, the
mounting of Antenna on any existing and conforming building or
structure (other than a Support Structure or Utility Pole) provided
that the presence of the Antenna and equipment is concealed by
architectural elements or fully camouflaged or concealed by
painting a color identical to the surface to which they are attached,
and further provided that all requirements of this Chapter and the
underlying zoning ordinance are met.
4. Collocation Of Small Wireless Facilities On Utility Poles. In
accordance with Section 67.5112, RSMo., a Wireless Provider may
collocate Small Wireless Facilities and install, maintain, modify,
operate, and replace Utility Poles, at Heights below the Height
limitations outlined in this Subdivision, which shall be a permitted
use in all districts except within single-family residential and
historic districts provided the proposed installation does not:
a. Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic and
control equipment or City-owned communications equipment;
b. Materially interfere with compliance with the American
Disabilities Act, or similar Federal or State standards
regarding pedestrian access or movement;
c. Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety
on the rights-of-way;
d. Materially obstruct the legal use of the rights-of-way by the
City, utility, or other third-party;
e. Fail to comply with the spacing requirements within Section
510.050(D)(1);
f. Fail to comply with applicable national safety codes, including
recognized engineering standards for Utility Poles or Support
Structures;
g. Fail to comply with the decorative pole replacement
requirements herein;
h. Fail to comply with undergrounding requirements within
Section 510.050(D)(1); or
i. Interfere or impair the operation of existing utility facilities, or
City or third-party attachments.
Section
491.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.050
AO:478
Section 491.060. Administrative Approval. [Ord. No. 3883,
12-20-2018]
New, replacement, or modification of Utility Poles under the
following circumstances shall not be considered a permitted
use under this section:
(1) Proposals to construct or modify a Utility Pole which
exceeds the greater of:
i. Fifty (50) feet AGL; or
ii. More than ten (10) feet above the tallest existing
Utility Pole as of January 1, 2019, within five hundred
(500) feet of the proposed Utility Pole in the City; and
(2) Proposals to collocate on an existing Utility Pole in place
on August 28, 2018, which exceeds the Height of the
existing Utility Pole by more than ten (10) feet.
B. Application Procedure. Application for a Permitted Use under this
Section shall require submission of an application with proof of owner
consent as required by Section 491.030 and an application fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per Small Wireless Facility and an
application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the installation,
modification, or replacement of a Utility Pole and collocation of a Small
Wireless Facility thereon, as required to partly cover the City's actual
costs, and not to exceed such amounts as may be limited by law. If the
applicant is not a Wireless Services Provider, as defined by Section
67.5111, RSMo., then the applicant must submit evidence of
agreements or plans, or otherwise provide attestations to the same,
which conclusively demonstrate to the City that the proposed site(s)
will become operational and used by such Wireless Services Provider
within one (1) year of the permit's issuance date. For any application for
a Small Wireless Facility, the applicant shall provide an attestation that
the proposed Small Wireless Facility complies with the volumetric
limitations as required to meet the definition of a Small Wireless
Facility in accordance with this Chapter and pursuant to applicable law.
Applicant shall also submit a certified structural analysis as required in
the General Requirements of this Chapter. Applications requesting any
information that is prohibited by Federal or State law under the
applicable circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the subject
application. The Director shall issue a decision on the application for a
permitted use within the time-frame permitted by applicable law. A
decision to deny an application shall be made, in writing, and state the
specific reasons for the denial.
A. Administrative Approval. The placement of Wireless Communications
Facilities fully conforming with the General Requirements in this
Chapter are permitted in all zoning districts by Administrative Permit
approved by the Director only as follows:
Section
491.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.060
AO:479
1. Disguised Support Structures. The construction of a Disguised
Support Structure, provided that all related equipment shall be
placed underground or concealed within the structure. Equipment
may be placed in an appropriately concealed Cabinet if the
Disguised Support Structure is incidental to an industrial,
commercial, or other non-residential use and fits with the natural
built environment or the Disguised Support Structure. Any
Disguised Support Structure shall have as a condition of approval,
unless expressly exempted in the approval, an obligation and
corresponding covenant recorded on the property that runs with
the land to the benefit of the City on behalf of the public,
prohibiting modifications to the Disguised Support Structure that
defeats the disguise, unless such proposed modification is
approved by a duly authorized zoning or special use approval
approved. If the applicant does not wish to have such a covenant,
the application shall not qualify for Administrative Permit approval,
unless another mechanism is proposed and approved to ensure that
the disguise is not subsequently defeated. A Disguised Support
Structure proposed to be located within a public or private right-ofway
may be exempted from the General Requirements of this
Chapter relating to parking/access and setbacks, unless
determined by the Director as applicable to the specific location for
safety reasons or other applicable reasons.
2. "Fast-Track" Small Wireless Facilities. An application for a "Fast-
Track" Small Wireless Facility may be approved administratively by
the Director, subject to meeting the following requirements:
a. General Requirements. The following requirements shall
generally apply to all "Fast-Track" Small Wireless Facilities
located within the City:
(1) The "Fast-Track" shall substantially match any current
aesthetic or ornamental elements of the Existing Structure
or Utility Pole, or otherwise be designed to maximally
blend in to the built environment, with attention to the
current uses within the district at the proposed site;
(2) Any portion above the Existing Structure or Utility Pole
shall be concealed and of the same dimensions and
appearance so as to appear to be a natural extension of the
Existing Structure or Utility Pole in lieu of an enclosure or
concealment;
(3) The "Fast-Track" equipment shall not emit noise audible
from the building line of any residentially zoned or used
property; and
(4) Location, placement, and orientation of the "Fast-Track"
shall, to the extent feasible, minimize the obstruction to, or
Section
491.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.060
AO:480
visibility from, the closest adjacent properties unless
otherwise required by the City for safety reasons.
b. Additional Requirements When Sited Near Pedestrian And
Vehicle Ways. When a "Fast-Track" is proposed to be located on
an Existing Structure or Utility Pole on or adjacent to public or
private streets, sidewalks, or other pedestrian or vehicle ways:
(1) The Height of all portions of the "Fast-Track" shall be
located at least eight (8) feet above ground level;
(2) No ground equipment shall be permitted; and
(3) No portions of the "Fast-Track" shall extend horizontally
from the surface of the Utility Pole or Existing Structure
more than sixteen (16) inches.
c. Waiver For Good Cause Shown. Additionally, the Director may
for good cause shown increase any one (1) or more of the
maximum volumetric specifications from the definition of a
"Fast-Track" by up to fifty percent (50%) if the applicant
demonstrates that it:
(1) Does not in any location nationally use equipment capable
of meeting the specifications and the purpose of the
equipment; and
(2) Cannot feasibly meet the requirements as defined and
described.
The Board of Aldermen may further waive one (1) or more of the
requirements found in the definition of "Fast-Track," or from: a.
General Requirements, or b. Additional Requirements When Sited
Near Pedestrian or Vehicle Ways of this Subdivision, upon good
cause shown by the applicant, and provided a showing that the
waiver is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this Chapter. The burden of proof for any waiver shall be wholly
on the applicant and must be shown by clear and convincing
evidence.
B. Application Procedures. Applications for Administrative Permits shall
be made on the appropriate forms to the Director consistent with the
requirements of this Chapter. Applications requesting any information
that is prohibited by Federal or State law under the applicable
circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the subject application.
1. General Application Requirements. Applicant shall submit along
with its completed application form:
a. An application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per "Fast-
Track" and an application fee of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for an application for a Disguised Support
Structure and collocation of a Small Wireless Facility thereon
Section
491.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.060
AO:481
as required to partly cover the City's actual costs, and not to
exceed such amounts as may be limited by law; any amount
not used by the City shall be refunded to the applicant upon
written request after a final decision;
b. A detailed site plan, based on a closed boundary survey of the
host parcel, shall be submitted indicating the exact location of
the facility, all dimensions and orientations of the facility and
associated equipment, in addition to all existing and proposed
improvements including buildings, drives, walkway, parking
areas, and other structures, public right-of-way, the zoning
categories of the subject and adjoining properties, the location
of and distance to off-site residential structures, required
setbacks, required buffer and landscape areas, hydrologic
features, and the coordinates and Height AGL of the Utility
Pole, or Existing Structure, if applicable;
c. Specifications, dimensions, photos, or drawings of the
completed installation;
d. Proof of owner consent as required by Section 491.030;
e. Certified structural analysis as required in the General
Requirements of this Chapter;
f. If the applicant is not a Wireless Services Provider, as defined
by Section 67.5111, RSMo., then the applicant must submit
evidence of agreements or plans, or otherwise provide
attestations to the same, which conclusively demonstrate to
the City that the proposed site(s) will become operational and
used by a Wireless Services Provider within one (1) year of the
permit's issuance date; and
g. All other information necessary to show compliance with the
applicable requirements of this Chapter.
2. "Fast-Track" — Specific Application Requirements. In addition to
the above General application requirements, applications for a
"Fast-Track" shall include the following:
a. An attestation that the proposed "Fast-Track" meets the
volumetric and other requirements to meet the definition of
"Fast-Track" provided in this Chapter; and
b. Information demonstrating that the applicant's proposed plans
are in compliance with Section 67.5113.3(9), RSMo., to the
satisfaction of the City.
3. Review. The application shall be reviewed by the Director to
determine compliance with the above standards, including
specifically, design, location, safety, and appearance requirements
and transmit the application for review and comment by other
Section
491.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.060
AO:482
Section 491.070. Special Use Permit Required. [Ord. No. 3883,
12-20-2018]
departments and public agencies as may be affected by the
proposed facility.
4. Additional Information May Be Required. In reviewing an
application, the Director may require the applicant to provide
additional information, including technical studies, to the extent
permitted by applicable law. An application shall not be deemed
complete until satisfaction of all application requirements and
submission of all requested information as provided herein.
5. Decisions; Denials Required In Writing. The Director shall issue a
decision on the permit within the time-frame permitted by
applicable law. The Director may deny the application or approve
the application as submitted or with such modifications or
conditions as are, in his/her judgment, reasonably necessary to
protect the safety or general welfare of the citizens and property
values consistent with and to affect the purposes of this Chapter
and subject to applicable law. The Director may consider the
purposes of this Chapter and the factors established herein for
granting a Special Use Permit as well as any other considerations
consistent with the Chapter. A decision to deny an application shall
be made, in writing, and state the specific reasons for the denial.
A. Special Use Permit Required. All proposals to construct or modify a
Wireless Communications Facilities not permitted by Section 491.050
(Permitted Use) or Section 491.060 (Administrative Approval) or not
fully complying with the General Requirements of this Chapter, except
for modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) which must be approved,
shall be permitted only upon the approval of a Special Use Permit
authorized consistent with Section 420.020 following a duly advertised
public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to the
following additional requirements, procedures, and limitations:
1. Applications. Applications for Special Use Permits shall be filed on
such forms required by the Director and processed subject to the
requirements of and in the manner established by applicable law,
herein, and for Special Use Permits in the Zoning Code and, in
addition to such other requirements, shall be accompanied by a
deposit of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), to the
extent permitted by applicable law to the specific Wireless
Communications Facility. Any amount not used by the City shall be
refunded to the applicant upon written request after a final
decision. Except as otherwise provided by law, no application for a
Special Use Permit under this Section shall be deemed complete
until the applicant has paid all fees and deposits required under
this Chapter, submitted certified engineering plans, and provided
proof of owner consent as required by Section 491.030.
Applications requesting any information that is prohibited by
Section
491.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
491.070
AO:483
Federal or State law under the applicable circumstance shall be
deemed inapplicable to the subject application.
2. Decision And Findings Required. A decision shall be
contemporaneously accompanied by substantial evidence
supporting the decision, which shall be made a part of the written
record of the meeting at which a final decision on the application is
rendered. Evidence shall be under oath and may be submitted with
the application or thereafter or presented during the public
hearing by the applicant or others.
3. Additional Minimum Requirements. No Special Use Permit shall be
issued unless the applicant has clearly demonstrated by substantial
evidence that placement of Wireless Communications Facilities
pursuant to Section 491.050 (Permitted Use) or Section 491.060
(Administrative Approval) of this Chapter is not technologically or
economically feasible. The City may consider current or emerging
industry standards and practices, among other information, in
determining feasibility.
4. Findings Required. In addition to the determinations or limitations
specified herein and by the applicable provisions of Section
420.020 of this Zoning Code for the consideration of Special Use
Permits, no Special Use Permit shall be approved by the Board of
Aldermen unless findings in the affirmative are made that the
following conditions exist:
a. That the design of the Wireless Communications Facilities,
including ground layout, maximally reduces visual degradation
and otherwise complies with provisions and intent of this
Chapter;
b. That the design is visually compatible with the area, will not
distract from the view of the surrounding area, is maximally
concealed or blended in with the environment, and will not
adversely affect property values;
c. That such use shall not be inconsistent or adversely affect the
regular permitted uses in the district in which the same is
located; and
d. That the proposal fully complies with applicable law including
the General Requirements herein; provided that an exception
to the General Requirements, other than building or safety
code compliance, may be approved upon evidence that
compliance is not feasible or is shown to be unreasonable
under the specific circumstances shown.
Section
491.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
491.080
AO:484
Section 491.080. Commercial Operation Of Unlawful Wireless
Communications Facilities. [Ord. No. 3883, 12-20-2018]
Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to
operate or construct Wireless Communications Facilities, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect or operate for any private commercial
purpose any Wireless Communications Facilities in violation of any
provision of this Chapter, regardless of whether such Wireless
Communications Facilities are located on land owned by a governmental
entity.
Section 491.090. Removal Of Support Structure. [Ord. No. 3883,
12-20-2018]
Any Wireless Communications Facility or portion thereof that is no longer in
use for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's
expense. In the case of multiple operators sharing use of a single Support
Structure, this provision requiring removal of the Support Structure shall
not become effective until all users cease operations.
Section 491.100. Penalty. [Ord. No. 3883, 12-20-2018]
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, any person violating any
provision in this Chapter shall be subject to penalties set forth in Section
100.060.
Section 491.110. Appeals. [Ord. No. 3883, 12-20-2018]
The procedures of the Board of Adjustment, shall govern appeals by any
aggrieved person of a final action under this Chapter of any City Officer,
employee, board, commission, or the Board of Aldermen that are claimed
by an aggrieved person to be unlawful or an unconstitutional taking of
property without compensation. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the
review procedures of the Board of Adjustment shall be exhausted before any
action may be filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees,
boards, officials or commissions. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
unlawfully limit any remedy that is required to be available as a matter of
law.
Chapter 495
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
Section 495.010. Applicability. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the construction or
reconstruction of all driveways and/or curb cuts in the respective zoning
districts.
Section
491.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
495.020
AO:485
Section 495.020. All Single-Family Residential Districts. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 495.030. Commercial, Multi-Family Residential Districts.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. Interior Lots.
1. On all lots up to two hundred (200) feet wide at the right-of-way,
one (1) driveway not more than thirty (30) feet or thirty-five
percent (35%) of lot width, whichever is less, from the right-of-way
to the front building line shall be permitted. For radii, the width
may be increased by not more than ten (10) feet at the edge of the
pavement.
2. On all lots in excess of two hundred (200) feet wide at the right-ofway,
the following shall apply:
a. One (1) driveway not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width
from the right-of-way to the front setback line. For radii, the
width may be increased by not more than ten (10) feet at the
edge of pavement.
b. Two (2) driveways with an aggregate width from the right-ofway
to the front setback line, not to exceed forty-four (44) feet,
shall be allowed, provided that a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet is required between driveways at the right-of-way. A
maximum of ten (10) feet may be added for radii of each
driveway at the edge of the pavement.
c. A wider driveway may be permitted behind the front setback
line to serve three-car garages and turnarounds.
d. A circular driveway may be permitted if the pavement width is
less than eighteen (18) feet.
B. Corner Lots.
1. Corner lots may be considered as two (2) interior lots if the width at
the right-of-way is greater than two hundred (200) feet on each
street in order to allow one (1) driveway on each frontage, provided
however, that not more than two (2) driveways shall be allowed per
lot.
2. On any corner lot, no driveway shall be permitted to be closer than
thirty (30) feet to the point of intersection of the right-of-way
tangents.
A. Single Entrance And Exit Driveways.
1. The minimum width of entrance and exit driveways shall be
fourteen (14) feet at the right-of-way.
Section
495.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
495.030
AO:486
Section 495.040. Industrial Districts (Including Truck Ports). [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
2. The maximum width of entrance driveways shall be eighteen (18)
feet at the right-of-way.
3. The maximum width of exit driveways shall be twenty-four (24) feet
at the right-of-way.
4. There shall be a minimum distance of eighty (80) feet between
driveways measured at the right-of-way.
5. The minimum distance from the point of intersection of the
tangents of the right-of-way shall be eighty (80) feet on corner lots.
6. All driveways shall be constructed with a minimum radius of twenty
(20) feet. The maximum radius shall be forty (40) feet unless it is
determined by the Department of Public Works that a larger radius
is required to provide adequate turning movements.
B. Combined Entrance/Exit Driveways.
1. The minimum width of combination entrance/exit driveways shall
be twenty-four (24) feet at the right-of-way.
2. The maximum width of combination entrance/exit driveways shall
be thirty-six (36) feet at the right-of-way, except that the maximum
width may be increased to forty-two (42) feet in order to allow one
(1) island not to exceed six (6) feet in width between the entrance
and exit.
3. The minimum distance from the point of intersection of the
tangents of the right-of-way shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. The minimum radius for all driveways shall be twenty (20) feet. The
maximum radius shall be forty (40) feet unless determined by the
Department of Public Works that a larger radius is required to
provide adequate turning movements.
5. The minimum distance between driveways on the same lot shall be
one hundred twenty (120) feet at the right-of-way.
A. The minimum width of driveways shall be twenty-four (24) feet
measured at the right-of-way.
B. The maximum width of driveways shall be thirty-six (36) feet measured
at the right-of-way.
C. The minimum distance from the point of intersection of the right-of-way
tangents shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
D. The minimum distance between two (2) driveways on the same lot shall
be two hundred (200) feet measured at the right-of-way.
Section
495.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
495.040
AO:487
Section 495.050. General Regulations For All Driveways. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Chapter 496
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Editor's Note — Ordinance no. 3001 §1, adopted December 23, 2008,
repealed title IV in its entirety. See editor's note at beginning of title IV.
E. The minimum radii for all driveways shall be twenty (20) feet.
Note: The width, number of driveways or radii may be increased or
decreased as determined by the Department of Public Works to provide
for high traffic volumes or movement of large trucks.
A. All driveways must be paved with concrete or asphaltic materials.
B. Any portion of all driveways in right-of-way shall be paved with
concrete.
1. Residential driveways shall be a minimum of six (6) inches of
concrete within the right-of-way on four (4) inches of compacted
aggregate base.
2. Commercial and industrial driveways (including multi-family) shall
be a minimum of eight (8) inches of concrete within the right-ofway
on four (4) inches of compacted aggregate base.
C. Residential driveways constructed of concrete shall be a minimum of
four (4) inches on four (4) inches of compacted aggregate base on
private property.
D. Residential driveways constructed of asphaltic materials shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches of Type "C" asphalt on six (6) inches of
compacted aggregate base on private property.
E. Commercial and industrial driveways (including multi-family)
constructed of concrete shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in depth
within the right-of-way on four (4) inches of compacted aggregate base
and a minimum of six (6) inches in depth on private property on four (4)
inches of compacted aggregate base.
F. Commercial and industrial driveways (including multi-family)
constructed of asphaltic materials shall be a minimum of four (4) inches
in depth on six (6) inches of compacted aggregate base on private
property.
Exception: Driveways in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential Districts
shall be exempt from the surface requirements on private property.
Section
495.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.010
AO:488
Section 496.010. Scope of Provisions. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
The regulations contained in this Chapter shall govern the size, number,
location and design of all off-street parking and loading facilities in the City
as required for each land use, activity, building or structure permitted by
this Title.
Section 496.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
FLOOR AREA — The term "floor area" as referenced in this Chapter as
a measurement for determining the required number of parking and/or
loading spaces shall mean the floor area as measured from the inside face of
exterior building walls or center of building wall dividing tenants in a multitenant
building; excluding bathrooms and corridors for public and common
usage, utility closets, stairwells and elevators.
PARKING LOT — Any building, structure or parcel of land regularly used,
in whole or in part, for the storing or off-street parking, including aisles, of
more than three (3) motor-driven vehicles, except this shall not be deemed
to apply or be applicable to the following buildings, structures or parcels of
land:
PARKING SPACE — An area surfaced with asphaltic concrete, Portland
cement concrete or other approved material, properly graded for drainage,
A parking area used for dead storage of new or used motor-driven
vehicles held by a licensed franchise dealer, agent or manufacturer for
sale, lease or rent;
1.
A parking area used for the temporary storage of construction
equipment including truck and hauling trailers used in support of
approved and permitted site development. Such equipment and trailers
shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line and shall
be removed within fourteen (14) days after completion of construction.
In the event that substantial work or construction has not commenced
or ceases during development following the issuance of a building
permit, the construction equipment and trailers shall be removed
within thirty (30) days;
2.
A parking area attached to a motor-driven vehicle repair shop where
motor-driven vehicles are stored awaiting repair; and
3.
A parking area used for the storage of truck trailers, hauling trailers or
other wheeled rental equipment that is not self-propelled. Such parking
area must be paved with asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete
or other approved material, but not necessarily striped according to
the parking table. The striping must be approved by the Community
Development Department.
4.
Section
496.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.020
AO:489
enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building or an unenclosed
area.
Section 496.030. Minimum Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 496.040. Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. The number of parking spaces and the loading facilities in all zoning
districts shall comply with the minimum requirements listed by the
following use category:
1. Business, commercial and industrial uses.
2. Fitness/recreational, entertainment, educational and institutional
uses.
3. Residential uses.
A. The regulations of this Section shall govern the dimensions of the offstreet
parking spaces in all zoning districts.
The requirements for off-street parking shall meet the minimum
dimensions in the following table:
A B C D E F G
45° 9.0 19.7 14.0 12.7 53.4 47.1
*65°
±5°
9.0 21.0 18.0 10.5 60.0 55.5
90° 9.0 19.0 24.0 9.0 62.0
A Parking angle (degrees)
B Stall width (feet)
C 19 feet minimum stall to curb (feet)
D * * Aisle width (feet)
E Curb length per car (feet)
F Curb to curb (feet)
G Center-to-center width of double row with aisle between (feet)
* Dimensions in columns C, E, F and G will adjust, depending
on the angle used.
* * Additional width may be required where the aisle serves as
the principal means of access to on-site buildings or
structures
Section
496.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.040
AO:490
Section 496.050. Procedure. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
B. In the event that the desired parking angle is not specified by the above
table, the Community Development Department may specify other
equivalent dimensions associated with the desired parking angle by
interpolating from dimensions listed in the table.
C. A stall dimension of eight and one-half (8½) feet by eighteen (18) feet
may be permitted for off-street parking stalls provided in excess of the
minimum requirements as set forth in this Section when designated for
compact car use.
D. On-site parallel parking stalls shall be nine (9) feet by twenty-two (22)
feet adjacent to a twenty-two (22) foot two-way lane or a fifteen (15)
foot one-way lane.
E. Curbed islands are required at the ends of aisles where necessary for
traffic control or drainage.
F. No off-street parking space required under this Chapter shall be used
for any other purpose.
G. The City of Fenton may approve the use of continuous curbs as wheel
stops and thus measure the size of parking spaces to be two (2) feet less
in length than otherwise required. In such instances, the parking layout
should allow for the vehicle to overhang the curb by two (2) feet and
such overhang area must be clear of all obstructions, signs, trees and
may not be included as part of a minimum required landscape buffer
between the parking space and the street or other property line
setback.
A. Parking Requirements. When a use is expanded, accessory off-street
parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations set forth in this Code for the area or capacity of such
expansion in combination with the previously existing uses, structure or
activity.
B. Every application for a new, enlarged or remodeled building, structure
or use shall include a parking site and landscape plan, drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned, showing any off-street parking or loading
facilities and related site improvements and landscaping. These plans
will be included within the site plan review process which is conducted
by the City.
C. A building permit is required for grading and stormwater runoff for
construction of a new, enlarged or remodeled parking lot in excess of
five (5) parking spaces or a loading facility. The application shall be
accompanied by a parking site and landscape plan to be reviewed and
approved, if appropriate, by the Community Development Department.
Any deviation from the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this
Chapter.
Section
496.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.060
AO:491
Section 496.060. Modified Parking Demand. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
Section 496.070. Construction. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Except as otherwise noted in this Chapter, in all zoning districts, all parking
and loading areas, including driveways, shall be paved with asphaltic
concrete, Portland cement concrete or other permanent, impervious surface
material approved by the Community Development Department.
Section 496.080. Driveway Regulations. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
See Chapter 495 for driveway regulations.
Section 496.090. Ingress and Egress. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
All entrances and exits to parking and loading areas from a public right-ofway
shall be subject to specific approval by the City of Fenton in accordance
with any additional requirements contained in appropriate ordinances to
ensure the smooth and safe circulation of vehicles to and from the public
street system. In no event shall parking or loading spaces be provided in
a manner requiring the backing out of vehicles into public right-of-ways,
except for detached and attached single-family dwellings.
Section 496.100. Location, Design and Maintenance of Parking
Spaces and Loading Facilities. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. When any building or structure undergoes a change of use or any
increase in gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter, off-street parking or loading
facilities shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking or
loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of
these standards to the proposed change in use of gross floor area or
other unit of measure. An occupancy permit shall not be issued until
provision is made for the increased amount of required off-street
parking.
B. If the building is being constructed as a shell for a future office/
warehouse, the City shall calculate the number of parking spaces based
on a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) office and the remainder a
warehouse.
C. When a building or structure undergoes a decrease in gross floor area
due to interior space re-allotment or design, a decrease in seating
capacity, a permanent decrease in number of employees or other unit of
measurement, the available off-street parking and loading facilities may
be reduced accordingly. Remaining parking or loading facilities must at
least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading requirements of
the entire building, activity or structure as modified.
Section
496.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.100
AO:492
A. No parking space required or otherwise provided in an enclosed
structure shall project beyond any required yard, setback or building
line, except as otherwise provided for in the specific regulations of that
zoning district.
B. Driveways leading to a parking lot shall not be used for parking.
C. All required off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided on
the same parcel of land as the use to be served and must meet ADA
(American with Disabilities Act) access requirements, except as follows.
1. Alternate parking location provisions specified in the regulations of
that particular district.
2. Shared parking for two (2) or more uses may be provided wherein
said parking is less than three hundred (300) feet from the property
to be served; that the number of off-site shared parking spaces does
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the minimum required parking
for the use served. The total required available parking for all uses
participating in an approved shared parking area shall not be less
than the sum of the parking required for each use individually. All
requests for shared parking approval shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department and accompanied by a report
with data and information setting forth justification for such
request, including signed agreements from all participants.
D. Internal drives, pedestrian walks, open spaces and parking/loading
areas shall be designed as integral parts of an overall design to achieve
an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement for pedestrian and
traffic circulation.
E. Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be
provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from
building entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent buildings.
F. The materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs and benches shall be of good appearance, easily
maintained and indicative of their function.
G. When the determination of the number of required off-street parking
spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of
one-half (½) space or less should be disregarded and any fraction over
one-half (½) space shall count as one (1) space.
H. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the
number of employees on the maximum shift.
I. All areas for off-street parking and loading in all zoning districts, except
residential, shall be so arranged that vehicles are not required to back
into any street or roadway to gain access thereto.
J. The Director shall determine which of the categories of parking
regulation any unlisted use belongs or determine and recommend to
Section
496.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.100
AO:493
Section 496.110. Parking Surface, Drainage and Maintenance.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Section 496.120. Repair, Service or Sales Use of Parking Facilities.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, lessee or attendant or any
parking lot to permit motor vehicle repair work, service, vending, selling,
offering for sale or display of merchandise.
Section 496.130. Reduction of Required Parking Spaces. [Ord. No.
3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
The minimum parking requirements may be reduced in all zoning districts,
except for detached and attached single-family dwellings, not to exceed ten
percent (10%) on approval of a special use permit filed and reviewed in
compliance with the provisions set forth in Section 420.020 of this Title.
With each such special use permit application the petitioner shall provide
a parking study showing justification for a reduction in parking spaces and
that such reduction will not adversely impact future use of the subject or
adjacent properties.
the Board of Aldermen of Fenton appropriate standards to be added to
this Section by amendment of this Chapter whenever the above prove
inapplicable.
A. Surfacing. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, all open offstreet
parking and loading areas should be improved with a compacted
select gravel base and paved with a material suitably designed for the
intended use to a standard approved by the City. This would include a
minimum of four (4) inches asphalt with not less than seven (7) inches
crushed rock base or not less than six (6) inches concrete with four (4)
inches crushed rock base.
B. Within the "OT" Olde Towne Zoning District, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, subsequent to a report from the Community Development
Department, may consider and approve an alternate paving surface
when such surface is an integral design element of the property and
deemed consistent with sound planning and construction standards.
C. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided with adequate
stormwater drainage facilities to prevent damage or inconvenience to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys.
D. The surface of such area shall be kept clear of trash and debris and the
parking spaces shall be clearly striped and marked. Parking lots shall
be maintained free of surface defects.
Section
496.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.140
AO:494
Section 496.140. Lighting. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off-street parking or loading
spaces to be used at night. If provided, such lighting shall be maintained,
arranged and installed to deflect, shade and focus lights away from adjacent
properties. The height, type, spacing and degree of light standard may be
further regulated by the Community Development Department in relation
to specific site conditions or type of development. Parking lot lighting,
when provided, shall not exceed a maximum of five (5.0) foot-candles at a
distance of fifteen (15) feet from the base of a light standard, shall provide a
minimum illumination of any parking area surface of not less than one-half
(0.5) foot-candle and shall not be greater than one (1.0) foot-candle at any
property line adjoining a non-residential district. Illumination beyond the
property line of any adjoining residential district shall not exceed one-tenth
(0.1) foot-candle.
Section 496.150. Markings. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least four
(4) inches wide and extending the length of the space or by curbs or
other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers located on the
surface within a parking lot shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient
and safe traffic operation of the lot.
Section 496.160. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements —
Business, Commercial and Industrial Uses. [Ord. No. 3001 §1,
12-23-2008]
The following business, commercial and industrial uses shall provide offstreet
parking and loading facilities as follows:
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Auto Parts Store 4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 1
Auto Sales or Lease 3 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area of
sales and show room/office
area; 3 spaces for every
service bay
Table 1
Banking Facilities
With Drive-Through
Service
4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
within the building in addition
to 4 queuing spaces for each
service window/auto teller
unit
None
Banking Facilities 4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet floor area
None
Section
496.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.160
AO:495
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Barbershops and
Beauty Parlors
2.5 spaces for every chair None
Beverage Shops 5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 2
Bookstores and Card
Shops
4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 2
Car Wash (except selfservice)
Reservoir (line-up) parking
equal to 5 times the capacity
of the car wash
None
Car Wash (selfservice)
Line-up area for each wash
stall of sufficient size to
accommodate 4 cars
None
Child Care Centers,
Day Nurseries
1 space per 5 children plus 1
space per employee. There
shall be a 15-foot wide paved
unobstructed pickup space
with adequate stacking area in
addition to standard driveway
and parking requirements.
None
Commercial or
services not listed in
this Chapter
4.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 2
Equipment Sales,
Service Repair
including Plumbing,
Air-Conditioning and
Heating
4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area of
office and sales area, rental
and 2 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of warehouse area
or 1 space for each employee
on the maximum shift,
whichever is greater, plus 1
space for every vehicle
customarily used in operation
of the use or stored on site
Table 1
Filling Station
(service station)
1 space for each gas pump, 3
spaces for each service bay, 5
spaces for every 1,000 square
feet floor area of a
convenience store, 1 space for
every vehicle customarily used
in operation of the use
None
Food Markets (5,000
sq. ft. floor area and
over)
5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 1
Section
496.160
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.160
AO:496
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Food Markets under
5,000 sq. ft. floor area
(convenience store)
5.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 1
Hotels, Motels and
Lodging
1 space for every guest room
or sleeping unit, 2 spaces for
every 3 employees on the
maximum shift, plus 1 space
for every vehicle customarily
used in operation of the use or
stored on the premises
Table 2
Laundry and pickup 3.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 2
Laundromat 1 space for every 2 wash
machines
None
Medical and Dental
Offices and Clinics
4 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area or 4
spaces for every doctor and 1
space for every additional
employee, whichever is
greater
Table 2
Mortuaries 1 space for every 5 seats, 10
space minimum
None
Corporate, General
and Professional
Offices and Office
Buildings or Research
Facilities
3.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
Table 2
Office/Warehouse,
Manufacturing,
Assembly,
Distribution,
Processing,
Wholesaling or
Fabrication
1. Less than 1,000
sq.ft.
5 spaces None
2. 1,000 sq. ft. to
5,000 sq. ft.
3.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of office area and
1 space for every 1,000 square
feet of warehouse area
Table 2
Section
496.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.160
AO:497
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
3. 5,000 sq. ft. to
10,000 sq. ft.
3.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of office area and
1 space for every 1,000 square
feet of warehouse area
Table 1
4. 10,000 sq. ft. or
larger
3.5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of office area and
1 space for every 1,000 square
feet of warehouse area
Table 1
5. In addition to the
requirements of
Subsections (2) to (4)
hereof, 1 space for
each employee in the
maximum shift within
the warehouse,
manufacturing,
assembly, distribution
processing or
fabrication area will
be substituted for 1
space per 1,000
square feet where
such standard
requires a greater
number of spaces.
Table 1
Restaurants, Bars,
Cocktail Lounges
1 space for every 3 seats, plus
2 spaces for every 3
employees on the maximum
shift
None
A restaurant facility which
provides an outdoor seating
area in which the number of
seats exceeds 20% of the
number of indoor seats shall
provide parking spaces for the
outdoor seating area at a ratio
of 1 parking space per 4
outdoor seats provided.
"Outdoor seating" is defined
as a seating area which is
neither mechanically heated
or cooled.
Section
496.160
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.160
AO:498
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Restaurants, Fast-
Food
1 space for every 2 seats, plus
2 spaces for every 3
employees on the maximum
shift, in addition to 1 space for
every 3 seats of outdoor
seating area. (See Chapter
450 for drive-through
regulations.)
None
Vehicle Service
Centers and Repair
Facilities
1 space for every employee on
the maximum shift, 3 spaces
for every service bay, 1 space
for every vehicle customarily
used in operation of the use
and 3 spaces for every 1,000
feet of retail sales area
None
Veterinary Clinics
and/or Animal
Hospitals
4 spaces for every doctor, plus
1 space for every additional
employee
None
Section 496.170. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements For
Fitness/Recreational, Entertainment, Educational and Institutional
Uses. [Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Fitness/recreational, entertainment, educational and institutional uses shall
provide off-street parking and loading facilities as follows:
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Athletic Fields 20 spaces for every diamond of
athletic field or 1 space for
every 4 seats, whichever is
greater (One seat is equal to 2
feet of bench length.)
None
Auditoriums,
theaters, places for
private or public
assembly, including
private clubs or
similar facilities,
except as noted
herein
1 space for every 4 seats or 1
space for every 50 square feet
floor area when there is no
fixed seating
Table 2
Section
496.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.170
AO:499
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Bowling Alleys 5 spaces for every alley.
Additional spaces shall be
provided for restaurants or
places of assembly within the
development.
None
Churches 1 spaces for every 4 seats (1
seat equals 2 feet of bench
length), plus 1 space for every
vehicle customarily used in
operation of the use or stored
on the premises
None
Exercise or Fitness
Facilities
5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area
None
Fire Stations 1 space for every employee on
the maximum shift
None
Golf Courses 10 spaces per each hole None
Golf Driving Ranges 2 spaces for every tee None
Gymnasium without
bleachers or fixed
seating, except as
noted herein
1 space for every 100 square
feet of floor area
None
Handball,
Racquetball Courts
3 spaces for every court None
Hospitals 1 space for every 2 beds, plus 1
space for every staff doctor and
employee on the maximum
shift
Table 2
Ice, Roller Rinks 1 space for every 100 square
feet of skating area or playing
surface
None
Indoor Soccer 50 spaces for every playing
field, plus 1 space for every 3
seats of spectator seating (1
seat equals 2 feet of bench
length), plus 2 spaces for every
3 employees on the maximum
shift, but in no case less than
100 spaces
None
Section
496.170
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.170
AO:500
Use
Minimum Parking
Requirement
Minimum
Loading
Requirement
Libraries, Museums,
Galleries
5 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area, 1
space for every 6 seats in an
accessory auditorium and 2
spaces for every 3 employees
on the maximum shift and 1
space for all vehicles used in
the operation of such
establishment
None
Nursing Homes 1 space for every 5 beds, 1
space for every self-care unit
and 1 space for every 2
employees on the maximum
shift
Table 2
Schools, public and
private, all grades
and vocational
1 space for every classroom
and office and 1 space for
every 4 students over 16 years
of age
None
Schools, special 1 space for every classroom
and office
None
Uses not specified in
this Chapter
Where no minimum
requirement is specified this
Chapter or where any of the
parking requirements may be
construed as applicable to the
same use, lot or building, the
final determination of required
parking shall be made by the
Community Development
Department.
Section 496.180. Off-Street Parking Requirements — Residential.
[Ord. No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
Residential uses shall provide off-street parking as follows:
Multiple-Family 2 spaces for each dwelling unit. The parking area
shall be screened from surrounding residential
districts by a maximum 5-foot fence or by
landscaping. Either of these materials must be
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Single-Family
Dwellings or Two-
Family Dwellings
2 accessible parking spaces for each dwelling unit
shall be provided behind the building line.
Section
496.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.190
AO:501
Section 496.190. Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements. [Ord.
No. 3001 §1, 12-23-2008]
A. Every structure or building containing a floor area of two thousand
(2,000) square feet or more shall provide off-street loading space when
required in conjunction with uses specified elsewhere in this Chapter.
Each loading space shall connect with an alley, driveway or street and
shall be so laid out that trucks shall be able to maneuver into abutting
loading docks or designated loading areas at the side or rear of the
building served, except as following. For commercial units of less than
five thousand (5,000) square feet, the Planning and Zoning Commission
may approve a loading zone to accommodate ten (10) foot by twentyfive
(25) foot loading zone spaces in front of the building.
The loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
tables:
TABLE 1
Floor Area (sq. ft.)
Number of Min. 10 foot X 40
foot Loading Spaces
5,000 — 24,000 1
24,001 — 60,000 2
60,001 — 96,000 3
96,001 — 144,000 4
144,001 — 192,000 5
192,001 — 240,000 6
240,001 — 294,000 7
294,001 — 348,000 8
For each additional 54,000 1 additional loading space
TABLE 2
Floor Area (sq. ft.)
Number of Min.
10 foot X 25 foot
Loading Spaces
Number of Min.
10 foot X 40
foot
Loading Spaces
2,000 — 10,000 1
10,001 — 25,000 2
25,001 — 100,000 2 1
For each additional
100,000
1 additional
loading space
B. The off-street loading area shall meet the following requirements:
Section
496.190
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.190
AO:502
Section 496.200. Handicapped Parking Regulations. [Ord. No. 3001
§1, 12-23-2008]
1. Adequate space shall be provided within the site to accommodate
the loading and unloading of trucks, tractors and trailers serving
commercial, industrial or any large-scale residential or institutional
use. A designated loading space shall be provided for the location
of trash collection or compaction units, in addition to the loading
space requirements provided herein.
2. The required off-street loading spaces shall have adequate means
of access to a street, alley or highway in a manner that will least
interfere with traffic movement as approved by the City.
3. The City may require landscaping, fencing or other materials to
screen the loading areas.
4. The loading spaces must be paved with a minimum of nine (9)
inches Portland cement concrete or any other material approved by
the City.
5. Each ten (10) foot by forty (40) foot loading space required by Table
1 or 2 must have seventy-five (75) feet of maneuvering space and
shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet.
6. The loading space that is utilized for the location of trash collection
shall be screened with a privacy fence or any other material
approved by the City.
A. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
following table:
1. Total Number of Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Handicapped Spaces
Required
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 or more 5 plus 1% of the total number of
spaces
2. One (1) of every eight (8) handicapped parking spaces shall be van
accessible. Parking areas of less than eight (8) handicapped
parking spaces shall have a minimal of one (1) van accessible.
B. The handicapped parking spaces shall meet the following
requirements:
Section
496.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.200
AO:503
1. Parking spaces designated for physically handicapped persons
shall be at least ten (10) feet wide with a five (5) foot access aisle
immediately adjacent thereto. Two (2) handicapped parking spaces
may share a common access aisle.
2. Van accessible handicapped parking spaces shall be at least ten
(10) feet wide with an eight (8) foot access aisle immediately
adjacent thereto; two (2) handicapped parking spaces may share a
common access aisle.
3. Parking spaces designated for physically handicapped persons
shall be located on the shortest possible accessible circulation
route to an accessible entrance of the building. In separate parking
structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking
spaces for physically handicapped persons shall be located on the
shortest possible pedestrian route to an accessible pedestrian
entrance of the parking facility.
4. Each parking space designated for physically handicapped persons
shall be provided with a freestanding sign bearing the international
symbol of accessibility in white on a blue background. In addition,
such freestanding sign must read "$50 to $300 Fine" pursuant H.B.
389 enacted by the State of Missouri. Non-conforming signs in use
prior to August 28, 1997, may be used during the useful life of the
sign so long as it is maintained in an appropriate manner as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Director.
5. Height requirements. Handicapped parking spaces shall be
identified by a sign centered within the space. The bottom of the
sign shall not be less than four (4) feet or more than five (5) feet
above grade. The sign(s) will utilize the international symbol of
access and include the violation fine notice specified in this
Section.
6. Color requirements.
a. In residential areas, all handicapped parking spaces shall be
marked and maintained with the international symbol of access
on the pavement. The minimum size for the symbol shall be
fifty-five (55) inches by forty-four (44) inches. The color of the
symbol and the space lines shall be blue.
b. In commercial areas, all handicapped spaces shall be marked
and maintained with blue space lines on the parking area
pavement. Ground painted symbols are not required, however,
if provided, shall be of the same blue color as the space
marking.
c. Requirements of this Section shall apply to all new parking lots
and parking areas and when any parking lot existing as of date
of this Section is restriped or redesigned for the existing
handicapped parking spaces.
Section
496.200
FENTON CITY CODE Section
496.200
AO:504
Chapter 500
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Cross Reference — As to requirements for zoning approval prior to issuance
of any building permits, see §§430.010 et seq.
Section
496.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
496.200
AO:505

ARTICLE I
County Code Adoptions70
Section 500.010. County Code Adoptions. [R.O. 2006 §505.010; Ord.
No. 2560 §1, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2609 §1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No.
2803 §1, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 2878 §1, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 3067 §1,
9-24-2009; Ord. No. 3156 §1, 9-30-2010; Ord. No. 3579 § 2,
4-28-2016]
A. The St. Louis County Building, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing,
Explosives, Residential, Existing Building, and Property Maintenance,
only for the limited purposes of enforcement by the St. Louis County
Problem Property Unit, Codes as amended by the County of Saint Louis
through date of last amendatory ordinances, three (3) copies of which
are on file in the office of the City Clerk:
1. Building (County Ordinance 24,444 — Adopted by County 7/21/10)
2. Mechanical (County Ordinance 24,438 — Adopted by County 7/14/
10)
3. Electrical (County Ordinance 24,439 — Adopted by County 7/14/
10)
4. Plumbing (County Ordinance 24,441 — Adopted by County 7/14/10)
5. Explosives (County Ordinance 18693 — Adopted by County 11/12/
97)
6. Residential (County Ordinance 24,427 — Adopted by County 7/13/
10)
7. Existing Building (County Ordinance 24,444 — Adopted by County
7/21/10)
8. Land Disturbance Code (County Ordinance 24,084 — Adopted by
County 8/12/09)
9. Property Maintenance Code, only for the limited purposes of
enforcement by the St. Louis County Problem Property Unit
(County Ordinance 24,440 — Adopted by County 07/14/10)
Are hereby adopted as the:
1. Building,
2. Mechanical,
3. Electrical,
4. Plumbing,
70.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 3291 §1, adopted 11-20-2012, and Ord. No. 3579, adopted
4-28-2016, authorized amendment of the scope of services of an existing contractual
agreement with the St. Louis County government, first entered into on 5-19-2003, for the
provision of code enforcement services.
Section
500.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.010
AO:507
Section 500.020. Penalty.
5. Explosives,
6. Residential,
7. Existing Building,
8. Land Disturbance, and
9. Property Maintenance, only for the limited purposes of
enforcement by the St. Louis County Problem Property Unit.
Codes of the City of Fenton, Saint Louis County, Missouri, as if
fully set out herein.
A. Whenever in any code adopted in this Chapter, or in any rule,
regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the
City under authority duly vested in him/her by said codes, any act is
prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation or the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or
ordinance violation, upon conviction of a violation of any such provision
of any code adopted in this Chapter, the violator shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by
imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that imprisonments may
be in the City prison or workhouse instead of the County Jail.
B. Every day any violation of any code adopted in this Chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by any code adopted in this Chapter, by
an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted
thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing,
securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do said act. Whenever
any act is prohibited by any code adopted in this Chapter, an attempt to
do the act is likewise prohibited.
Section
500.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:508
ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance
Section 500.030. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [R.O.
2006 §500.250; Ord. No. 2229 §1, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 2487 §1,
7-15-2002]
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Fenton, Missouri, being marked and designated as
"The International Property Maintenance Code", 2000 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council in November, 1999, is hereby adopted
as the Non-Residential Property Maintenance Code of the City of Fenton,
Missouri, for the control of building and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Section 500.050 of this Article. This Code shall be applied to the following
properties: commercial, industrial and multi-family dwellings.
Section 500.040. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [R.O. 2006
§500.255; Ord. No. 2487 §1, 7-15-2002]
All ordinances of the City of Fenton in conflict with the "Property
Maintenance Code" adopted herein are hereby repealed.
Section 500.050. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2006
§500.260; Ord. No. 2229 §2, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 2487 §1,
7-15-2002]
A. The Code adopted by this Article is hereby amended by substituting the
following Sections or portions of Sections for those Sections or portions
of Sections with corresponding numbers of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2000 Edition, or where there is no corresponding
Section in the code, the following Sections shall be enacted as additions
to the code.
1. Section 101.1. Insert: "The City of Fenton".
2. Section 101.1. Change by inserting the following sentence at the
end of the Section:
In all cases where the term Code Official is used in this code, it
shall be changed to read Building Official.
3. Section 101.2. Change this Section to read as follows:
This code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in
all existing nonresidential structures and on all existing nonresidential
premises by establishing minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for
light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the
Section
500.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:509
elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for
safe and sanitary maintenance; fixing the responsibility of owners,
operators and occupants; regulating the occupancy of existing
structures and premises; and providing for administration,
enforcement and penalties.
4. Section 102.3. Change by deleting the reference to the
International Building Code and insert "BOCA National Building
Code, 1999 Edition".
5. Section 103. Delete Title "Department of Inspection". Add new Title
"Division of Building Inspection within the Department of
Community Development".
6. Section 103.1. Change to read as follows: "The administration and
enforcement of this Code shall be the duty of the Building Official of
the City of Fenton. In all cases where the term "Department of
Property Maintenance Inspection" is used in this code, it shall be
changed to read "Division of Building Inspection".
7. Section 106.1. Change to read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail to
maintain, provide, fail to provide, use or occupy, let to another
for use or occupy or permit another person to use or occupy any
structure, premises or equipment regulated by this code, or cause
the same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation
of any provisions of this code, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the
Building Official, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted
under the provisions of this code.
8. Section 106.4. Change by inserting the following sentence at the
end of the Section:
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of a
provision of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), ninety (90) days in jail, or both.
9. Add 107.6 as follows: If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee
fails to comply with the order within thirty (30) days, the Building
Commissioner shall cause such building or structure to be
repaired, vacated or demolished and the property cleaned up as the
facts may warrant; and the Building Commissioner shall certify the
cost of the work borne by the City of Fenton for such repair,
vacation or demolition or cleaned up to the City Clerk as a special
assessment represented by a special tax bill against the real
property affected; said tax bill shall be a lien upon such property
and shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner(s)
unless the building or structure is demolished, secured or repaired
by a contractor pursuant to an order issued by the City of Fenton
Section
500.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:510
and such contractor files a mechanic's lien against the property
where violation(s) occur. The contractor may enforce this lien as
provided in Sections 429.010 to 429.360, RSMo. Except as
provided in Section 107.7 of this Section, at the request of the
taxpayer this special tax bill may be paid in installments over a
period of not more than ten (10) years; said assessment shall bear
interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum until paid.
10. Add 107.7 as follows: As to damage or loss to a building or other
structure by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty
loss, if an order is issued by the Code Official as provided in Section
107.6 and a special tax bill or assessment is issued against the
property, it shall be deemed a personal debt against the property. If
there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered
claim, payment made for damage or loss to a building or other
structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other
casualty loss, the following procedure is establisher for the
payment of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the insurance
proceeds, as set forth in Subdivisions (a) and (b) of the Section.
This Subsection shall apply only to a covered claim payment that is
in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the face value of the policy
covering a building or other structure:
a. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim, payment up
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and
shall pay such monies to the City of Fenton to deposit into an
interest-bearing account. Any named mortgagee on the
insurance policy shall maintain priority over any obligation
under this Chapter.
b. The City of Fenton shall release the proceeds and any interest
that has accrued on such proceeds received under Subdivision
(a) of this Subsection to the insured or as the terms of the
policy and endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30)
days after the receipt of such insurance monies, unless the City
of Fenton has instituted legal proceedings of 107.6 of this
Section. If the City of Fenton has proceeded under the
provisions of 107.6 of this Section, all monies in excess of that
necessary to comply with the provisions of 107.6 of this Section
for removal, securing, repair and clean up of the building or
structure and the lot on which it is located, less salvage value,
shall be paid to the insured.
11. Add 107.8 as follows: If there are no proceeds of any insurance
policy as set forth in 107.7 of this Section, at the request of the
taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of
not more than ten (10) years. The tax bill from the date of its
issuance shall be a lien on the property and a personal debt against
the owner(s) until paid.
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:511
12. Add 107.9 as follows: Section 107.7 of this Section shall apply to
fire, explosion or other casualty loss claims arising on all buildings
and structures.
13. Add 107.10 as follows: Section 107.7 of this Section does not make
the City of Fenton a party to any insurance contract and the insurer
is not liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds
otherwise payable under its insurance policy.
14. Add 107.11 as follows: The Building Commissioner may certify in
lieu of payment of all or part of the covered claim under Section
107.7 that it has obtained satisfactory proof that the insured has
removed or will remove the debris and repair, rebuild or otherwise
make the premises safe and secure. In this event, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a certificate within thirty (30) days after
the receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to the insured
without the deduction pursuant to Section 107 of this Section. It
shall be the obligation of the insured or other person(s) making a
claim to provide the insurance company with the written certificate
provided from this Section.
15. Section 110.0 through 110.4. Delete in their entirety.
16. Section 111.1. Change by deleting the words "within twenty (20)
days" and inserting the words "within ten (10) days".
17. Section 111.2 through 111.8. Delete in their entirety.
18. Insert a new Section 111.2. which reads as follows:
Section 111.2. Board of Appeal. For the purposes of this Code, the
Board of Appeals shall be the Building Code Board of Appeals as
described in the City of Fenton Building Code.
19. Insert a new Section 112.0. OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
20. Insert a new Section 112.1. Occupancy Permit Required. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner or agent thereof to occupy or use or
to permit the occupancy or use of any premises for any purpose,
including the movement of furniture, equipment or other personal
property into said premises, until a permit to occupy has been
issued by the Building Official. The permit so issued shall state that
the occupancy complies with all the provisions of this code as far as
can be determined by a visual inspection of the premises.
21. Insert a new Section 112.3. Application Other Than Single-Family
Occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make
any false statement on an application for an occupancy permit for a
non-residential unit as to the name of the person, firm, company or
institution which will occupy the premises, the type of use, the type
or quantity of materials that will be stored on the premises or the
floor area of the portion of the premises that will be occupied.
Section
500.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:512
22. Insert a new Section 112.4. Action on an Application. The Building
Official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for
permits within a reasonable time after filing. No action shall be
taken to issue a permit until there is an inspection of the premises
and a property maintenance inspection report less than one
hundred twenty (120) days old on file with the City.
23. Insert a new Section 112.4.1 Issuance of Permit. If all fees are paid
and the Building Official is satisfied that the premises and its
occupancy are in compliance with this code and all laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Official shall issue the
occupancy permit as soon as practicable. No permit shall be issued
under the provisions of this code for premises which have been
newly constructed, newly altered, or on which a change in use is
proposed unless a certificate of use and occupancy has first been
issued under the provisions of the Building Code.
24. Insert a new Section 112.4.2 Temporary Conditional Occupancy
Permit. Occupancy may be permitted on a temporary conditional
basis when in the judgment of the Building Official practical
difficulties interfere with completing all repairs required to bring
the premises into full compliance with this code prior to permitting
occupancy, there are no conditions on the premises which threaten
the health or safety of an occupant or the general public and the
Building Official is satisfied that the premises will be brought into
compliance with the requirements of this code within a ninety (90)
day period. No temporary conditional permit shall be issued when
there is a condition on the premises which can threaten the health
or safety of an occupant and until an escrow has been established
with an approved financial institution which guarantees that the
premises will be brought into full compliance within ninety (90)
days. For exterior items only, a letter agreeing to bring the exterior
of the premises into full compliance within ninety (90) days may be
accepted in lieu of such escrow. Temporary conditional occupancy
permits may be extended for one (1) additional ninety (90) day
period when, in the opinion of the Building Official, practical
difficulties prevent complete compliance within the first (1st)
ninety (90) day period. The escrow amount shall be established by
the Building Official in an amount up to the amount necessary to
complete the work by a licensed contractor at prevailing prices, but
in no case less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). No
temporary conditional permit shall be issued under the provisions
of this code for premises which have been newly constructed,
newly altered or on which a change of use is proposed unless a
certificate of use and occupancy has first been issued under the
provisions of the Building Code.
25. Insert a new Section 112.4.3 Rejection of Application. If the
application does not comply with the requirements of all pertinent
laws, the Building Official shall reject such application.
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:513
26. Insert a new Section 112.5 Suspension of Permit. Any permit issued
shall become invalid if the occupancy is not commenced within six
(6) months after issuance of the permit or if the occupancy is
terminated.
27. Insert a new Section 112.6 Revocation of Permit. The Building
Official may revoke a permit in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a permit was
based, or in the event a structure or part thereof is condemned
pursuant to this code.
28. Modify Section 302.2 Grading and Drainage by adding the
following sentence: Stagnant water shall be defined as any water
accumulation in an improperly drained pool, pond, ground
depression, collector, container which is not dispersed within five
(5) days.
29. Insert a new Section 302.2.1 Watercourse. A natural or established
watercourse shall not be disturbed in any manner which reduces
the capacity of the watercourse or diverts the water, unless as a
part of an approved development or grading permit or
authorization of the Metropolitan Sewer District.
30. Insert a new Section 302.2.2 Sedimentation. All premises and
exterior property shall be graded and maintained to prevent
sediment on adjacent property, public property or in a watercourse.
31. Insert a new Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained in accordance with Section 215.020 of
the Fenton Municipal Code.
32. Insert a new Section 302.8 Motor Vehicles. Delete in its entirety.
33. Insert a new Section 303.7.1 Roof Clearances. Roofs shall be clear
of tree limbs and branches or other overhanging vegetation.
34. Insert a new Section 303.14 Insect Screens. Insert dates from April
fifteenth (15th) to November fifteenth (15th).
35. Insert a new Section 401.3 Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means
for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, skylights,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the City of
Fenton Building Code shall be permitted.
36. Insert a new Section 507.1.1 Stormwater. Stormwater or sump
pump water shall not be directed through a pipe, culvert or drain
which discharges within ten (10) feet of an abutting property line.
Exceptions:
a. Roof or foundation drains which discharge within two (2) feet
of the building foundation; or
Section
500.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:514
Section 500.060. Savings Clause. [R.O. 2006 §500.270; Ord. No.
2229 §3, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 2487 §1, 7-15-2002]
Nothing in this Article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
Section 500.040 of this Article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
b. Discharge into an open natural creek or swale on the same
property; or
c. Discharge which is parallel to abutting property line and at
least five (5) feet from said line.
37. Insert a new Section 508.2 Stormwater Systems. All stormwater
systems on the premises or exterior of the property shall be
maintained in working condition free from damage or restriction of
flow. All entries to stormwater drainage systems shall be
maintained clear and free of any restrictions to water flow.
38. Insert a new Section 508.3 Stormwater Discharge. Stormwater
shall not be directed to a sanitary sewer system.
39. Sections 602.2 through 602.3. Delete in their entirety.
40. Section 602.4. Insert October first (1st) and May fifteenth (15th).
41. Insert a new Section 604.3.1 Prohibited Installations. Hazards shall
include, but not be limited to:
a. Flush or semi-flush mounted floor receptacle outlets, unless
provided with an approved listed cover.
b. Extension cords for other than short-term, temporary use.
c. Lamp cord used as permanent wiring.
d. Conductor supported pendant switches or conductor
supported pendant lighting fixtures.
e. Loose or hanging wires.
f. Frayed or bare wires.
g. Grounded-type receptacles which are improperly or
inadequately grounded.
42. Section 605.2. Change by adding the following sentence to the end
of the Section:
All receptacles within six (6) feet of any water source shall be
ground fault circuit interrupter protected.
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.070
AO:515
Section 500.070. Penalty. [R.O. 2006 §500.275; Ord. No. 2487 §1,
7-15-2002]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or the Property
Maintenance Code adopted in this Article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Section 500.080. Date of Effect. [R.O. 2006 §500.280; Ord. No. 2229
§4, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 2487 §1, 7-15-2002]
The Fenton City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Article and cause
the same to be published as required by law; and this Article shall take full
force and effect upon the date of final passage and approval.
Section
500.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.080
AO:516
ARTICLE III
Fire Prevention
Section 500.090. Additional Residential Fire Prevention. [Ord. No.
3493 §2, 2-26-201571]
Section 500.100. (Reserved)72
A. Floor assemblies for new single-family and two-family dwellings not
otherwise required in the International Residential Code, 2009 Edition,
to be fire resistance rated, shall be provided with a one-half-inch
gypsum wallboard member with a rough tape, five-eighths-inch wood
structural panel member or equivalent on the underside of the floor
framing member with seams protected. There shall be no unprotected
opening or penetrations in the membrane.
B. Exceptions.
1. Floor assemblies located directly over a space protected by an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13D or other
approved equivalent sprinkler system.
2. Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended
for storage or fuel-fired appliances.
3. Portions of the floor assemblies can be unprotected when
complying with fire blocking in accordance with Section R302.11.1
of the International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, and shall be
installed along the perimeter of the unprotected portion to
separate the unprotected portion from the remainder of the floor
assembly.
4. Wood floor assemblies using solid sawn lumber or dimensional
lumber equal to or greater than two-inch-by-ten-inch nominal
dimension.
5. Floor assemblies with a listed and/or approved fire rating
equivalent to the floor assembly described in Section 500.090(B),
Exception (4), of this Title.
C. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
be imprisoned in the City or County Jail for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
71.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 3493 also changed the title of Art. III from "Fire
Prevention Code" to "Fire Prevention." Section 2 of same repealed former Section
500.090, Adoption of the International Fire Code, which derived from Ord. No. 3290 §1,
11-20-2012; Ord. No. 3303 §§1 — 2, 12-20-2012 and replaced same with the material found
herein.
Section
500.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.100
AO:517
72.Editor’s Note: Former Section 500.100, Penalty, was repealed 2-26-2015 by §3 of Ord. No.
3493.
Section
500.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.100
AO:518
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 500.110. Earthquake and Seismic Design Requirements.
All construction in the City shall comply with the requirements of Sections
319.200 through 319.207, RSMo., and any amendments thereto, relating to
earthquakes and seismic construction requirements.
Section 500.120. Expiration of Building Permits. [R.O. 2006
§430.050; Ord. No. 1919 §1, 11-20-1995]
Any building permit, under which no construction work has been
commenced within six (6) months after the issuance of said permit or under
which the proposed construction has not been completed within one (1)
year within the date of issuance, shall expire by limitation. Extensions
may be requested in writing and will be reviewed and approved by the
Director of Community Development. This extension will be granted for only
six (6) months. Thereafter approval for additional time shall be reviewed
and approved by the Board of Aldermen upon the recommendation of the
Community Development Department.
Section 500.130. Applications To Be Accompanied By A Plat. [R.O.
2006 §430.060; Ord. No. 1919 §1, 11-20-1995]
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon or used, the size, shape and location of the building to be
erected and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this Code. A record of applications and plats shall be kept in
the office of the Community Development Department.
Section 500.140. Miscellaneous Building Regulations. [Ord. No.
3521 §3, 6-25-2015]
A. Tower Structures. Unless otherwise provided by law or variance, the
following additional requirements shall apply to the construction,
alteration or maintenance of towers:
1. For purposes of this Section, the term "tower" shall mean a
permanent structure, having a total height in excess of fifty (50)
feet measured from the ground and having one (1) or more legs
designed for the support of one (1) or more sign, antenna, light,
wind turbine, solar array or other object but excluding buildings
serving other purposes and meeting the building requirements for
all purposes. A tower shall not include existing electric utility poles
installed by a provider holding a certificate of convenience from the
Missouri PSC and installed consistent with industry practice and in
conformance with all otherwise applicable Federal, State, and local
requirements.
Section
500.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.140
AO:519
2. Safety fall zone required. All new towers and extensions or
attachments thereto shall be separated by a safety fall zone from
any public rights-of-way, sidewalk or street, alley, parking area,
playground, or building (except for parking and buildings
dedicated solely for access to or maintenance of the tower), and
from any property line, a distance equal to the height of the tower.
Towers shall be reasonably designed to reduce the potential
damage to persons or property from falling ice or equipment from
the tower or from wind damage or structural failure.
3. In addition to other applicable requirements, the tower and any
appurtenances shall be safely maintained and fenced or otherwise
secured to prevent unauthorized access or climbing of the tower.
Barbed, electrified or razor wire is prohibited. Tower legs shall be
of monopole design without use of lattice or guy wire support and
be engineered and designed with sufficient depth, counter-weight
and other mechanisms to address wind-loading and other failure
risks under all reasonably anticipated conditions and
circumstances.
4. All requirements in Sections 491.040, 491.100, 491.160, 491.180,
491.210, and 491.260 of the Municipal Code of the City of Fenton,
Missouri, shall apply to the construction, modification, and
maintenance of each tower and are reincorporated herein as
building code requirements to the extent permitted by law.
5. Any tower not operated for a period of six (6) months or more, shall
be deemed abandoned and the Community Development Director
shall cause notice of such determination to be sent and request for
removal within a reasonable time not to exceed ninety (90) days. If
a tower is abandoned, it shall be removed at the owner's expense.
Failure to comply with this provision shall constitute a public
nuisance and building code violation that may be remedied by the
City at the tower or property owner's expense. Any applicant for a
new tower shall place a bond or other security with the City prior to
any final approval to ensure abandoned towers can be removed.
The bond or security shall be in the form and amount approved by
the Community Development Director. The amount of the bond
shall be determined by the Community Development Director to
satisfy the requirements hereof with regard to the specific tower to
which it would apply based on the estimated total cost of removal of
that tower.
B. Appeals. The procedures of Chapter 160, Administrative Procedure for
Review of Certain Actions, shall govern appeals by any aggrieved
person of a final action of any City Officer, employee, board,
commission, or the Board of Aldermen that are claimed by an aggrieved
person to be unlawful or an unconstitutional taking of property without
compensation.
Section
500.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.150
AO:520
Section 500.150. Miscellaneous Property Regulations. [Ord. No.
3848, 8-23-2018]
A. Temporary Storage Containers.
1. Definition. For the purposes of this Section, the term "storage
container" shall mean a fully enclosed and securable single unit
used for the temporary storage of equipment, goods, materials,
fixtures, etc., which is similar in function and design to a
containerized shipping unit, typically constructed of metal, without
running gear or other permanently attached equipment allowing
movement from place to place.
Purpose. This Article is intended to permit businesses and
residents within the City to, temporarily, expand their storage
needs on-site.
2. General Regulations.
a. Permit Required. No person shall set, drop, construct, erect, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed, any storage container
within the City without first having secured a permit from the
Community Development Department. The permit application
must be submitted on a form provided by the City with the
permit fee and property owner consent.
b. Occupancy/Storage Use.
(1) Applicants shall be required to disclose the general nature
and condition of all materials to be stored within any
storage container.
(2) No hazardous, flammable, explosive, corrosive, or
biologically infectious or contagious materials shall be
stored within any storage container.
(3) No live animals or plants shall be stored within any storage
container.
(4) No trash, garbage, or refuse shall be stored within or
allowed to accumulate around any storage container.
(5) No storage container shall be used to house any business
activity other than storage.
(6) No individual may work from, live in or otherwise occupy a
storage container.
(7) Nothing may be stacked or stored on top of any storage
container, including another storage container.
c. Container Condition. All storage containers shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
Section
500.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.150
AO:521
(1) All storage containers shall be maintained in a safe, neat,
and orderly manner, shall be structurally sound, free of
corrosion, rust, rot, holes, leaks, or other deterioration,
and shall be kept free of graffiti. No temporary signage
shall be permitted on the storage container.
(2) All storage containers shall be securable and kept secure
at all times.
d. Placement. All storage containers shall be placed and
maintained at the approved location in accordance with the
following criteria:
(1) Unless otherwise provided herein, all storage containers
must be located on the same premises of the business or
residence in which it is related.
(2) All storage containers must be properly held in place or
otherwise secured to prevent shifting, rolling, or other
movement.
(3) All storage containers must be placed on a reasonably flat
surface, upon paving materials sufficient to bear the
weight of the storage container and anticipated contents.
(4) Storage containers shall not be located in a manner that
encroaches, interferes, and/or obstructs vehicular access
from designated fire lanes or drive aisles, and/or impedes
the flow of pedestrian traffic on sidewalks or crosswalks,
or be located where the required number of parking
spaces for the principal use of the premises is diminished.
e. Removal. All storage containers shall be removed upon the
expiration of the permit issued pursuant to this Section or upon
the receipt of a notice to remove. A notice to remove may be
issued by the Director for failure to meet or adhere to the
minimum provisions of this Section.
3. Regulations For Storage Containers Associated With A Non-
Residential Use.
a. Permit Fee. For storage containers associated with a nonresidential
use, the fee for a storage container permit or
renewal permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per storage
container and shall be assessed on containers originally
permitted and for any storage containers subsequently added
to the original permit, regardless of the time the added storage
containers will be in place.
b. Permit Duration. Storage container permits shall be valid for a
maximum period of ninety (90) days from the date of issuance.
A renewal, for one (1) additional period of up to ninety (90)
Section
500.150
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.150
AO:522
days, may be obtained via application and payment of an
additional fee. Only one (1) permit and one (1) renewal shall
be issued per business within a one-year period, which shall
commence on the effective date of the issuance of the storage
container permit. Additional containers, up to the maximum
allowed per business, may be added to an existing permit. The
time for the additional containers shall expire on the expiration
date of the permit issued for the original container(s). Such
additional containers may be renewed in accordance with the
renewal provisions. Exception: Permitted storage containers
that are associated with a valid building permit may be located
on the premises while the approved construction is underway.
Once the associated building permit has been closed, the
storage container must be immediately removed from the
premises.
c. Containers Per Business. One (1) storage container per ten
thousand (10,000.00) square feet of gross floor area of the
business requesting the permit will be permitted. Fractions of
one-half (0.50) or more will be rounded to the next higher unit.
d. Location Limits. Storage containers must comply with the
following locational criteria:
(1) Storage containers may only be located on the premises in
which they are related and are prohibited in the public
rights-of-way.
(2) Storage containers shall be located behind the front
elevation line of the principal building and confined to the
side or rear yard of the property.
(3) No storage container shall be located within five (5) feet of
any side or rear lot line.
(4) Storage containers shall not be located closer than ten
(10) feet from any building.
e. Size Limits. No storage containers shall exceed forty-five (45)
feet in length by ten (10) feet in width by twelve (12) feet in
height.
4. Regulations For Storage Containers Associated With A Residential
Use.
a. Permit Fee. For storage containers associated with a
residential use, the fee for a storage container permit shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00). The renewal fee shall be the same.
b. Permit Duration. Storage container permits shall be valid for a
maximum period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
A renewal, for one (1) additional thirty-day period, may be
Section
500.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.150
AO:523
obtained via application and payment of an additional fee.
Only one (1) permit and one (1) renewal shall be issued per
residence within a one-year period. This period shall
commence on the effective date of the issuance of the storage
container permit. Exception: Storage containers that are
associated with a valid building permit are permitted to be
located on the premises while the approved construction is
underway. Once the associated building permit has been
closed, the storage container must be immediately removed
from the premises.
c. Containers Per Residence. Not more than one (1) storage
container shall be allowed per residence on the premises. In
extraordinary circumstances, upon written application to the
Board of Aldermen, additional storage containers may be
approved by the Board if, based on the facts submitted by the
applicant, the Board determines that additional containers are
appropriate for the proposed use, lot size, location, and other
relevant factors.
d. Location Limits. Storage containers may only be located on the
residential premises in which they are related and shall not be
placed in the public rights-of-way, unless sufficient information
has been provided to the Public Works Director, in writing, that
the storage container cannot be reasonably placed on the
premises and that the storage container can be placed in the
public rights-of-way in a safe manner that will not interfere or
obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. If the location of the
storage container in the right-of-way is approved by the Public
Works Director, a License for Incidental Use in compliance
with Section 510.030(D)(3) of the Municipal Code must be
obtained.
e. Size Limits. No storage containers shall exceed sixteen (16)
feet in length by eight (8) feet in width by eight (8) feet in
height.
Section
500.150
FENTON CITY CODE Section
500.150
AO:524
Chapter 505
EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE
Section
500.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.150
AO:525

ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section 505.010. General; Definitions. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1,
7-28-201673]
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall for
the purpose of this Chapter have the meanings indicated in this Section.
B. Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
C. Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this
Chapter and are defined in the adopted Building, Electrical, Plumbing
or Mechanical Codes of the City, they shall have the same meanings
ascribed to them as in those Codes.
D. Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined, through the methods
authorized by this Section, they shall have their ordinarily-accepted
meanings such as the context shall imply.
E. Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling," "building," "structure,"
"premises," "rooming unit," etc., are used in this Code, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words, "or any part
thereof."
F. Applied Meaning Of Words And Terms.
ADMINISTRATOR — The City Administrator of the City of Fenton.[Ord.
No. 3847, 8-23-2018]
APPEALS BOARD — The Board of Adjustment of the City sitting as the
Building Code Appeals Board.
APPROVED — Approved by Code Official or by another regulating
authority, if applicable.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BUILDING — Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and
designed or used to shelter persons, chattels or property.
BUILDING CODE — All of the technical codes officially adopted by the
City in Title V ("Building And Construction") of the Municipal Code
or other such codes officially designated by the Board of Aldermen
for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal,
demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of structures.
CITY — The City of Fenton.
73.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 505, Existing Exterior Structures Code, containing Sections
505.010 through 505.120, which derived from R.O. 2006 §§ 251.010 — 251.020, 251.040 —
251.130; Ord. No. 1410 § 1, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 2463 § 3, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 3019 § 1,
4-23-2009; Ord. No. 3302 § 1, 12-20-2012, was repealed 7-28-2016 by § 1 of Ord. No. 3620.
Section
505.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.010
AO:527
CODE OFFICIAL — The Director or any duly authorized representative
of the Director.[Ord. No. 3847, 8-23-2018]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer which is
designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of
property or which is used primarily for the transportation of passengers
for hire, including, but not limited to, tow trucks, dump trucks, flat-bed
trucks, stake-bed trucks, step vans, refuse or garbage trucks, buses,
semi-trailers, truck-tractors, or any motor vehicle or trailer having a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment primarily used for
commercial construction purposes, including, but not limited to,
tractors, backhoes, blades, buckets, bulldozers, compactors, crane
scrapers, excavators and front-end loaders.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE — All structures deemed unsafe, unsanitary
or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of this City because of any or all of the following characteristics:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base;
1.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting
member or members or fifty percent (50%) of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside wall or
covering;
2.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors
or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
3.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so
as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general
health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the City;
4.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation,
or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein;
5.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare
of human beings;
6.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of communications;
7.
Section
505.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.010
AO:528
DIRECTOR — The Community Development Director of the City.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof used exclusively for
human habitations, except hotels, motels or house trailers.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
more than two (2) dwelling units and not classified as a one- or twofamily
dwelling.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one (1) dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two (2) dwelling
units.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison
spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence, contiguous to a structure or premises
of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET — To permit possession or occupancy
of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure by a person
who shall be legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or
pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the
sale of land.
MAINTENANCE — Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline
in the condition of grounds and structures, such that the condition
does not fall below the standards established by this Code and other
applicable Statutes, Codes and ordinances.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure members of the public or property; and/or
8.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of this City.
9.
Section
505.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.010
AO:529
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles or commercial
vehicle or off-road vehicle as defined herein. For purposes of this
Chapter a recreational vehicle, as defined herein, is included in all
regulations relating to motor vehicles.
OCCUPANT — Any person living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or
having possession of a space within a building.
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — Any camper, travel trailer, boat trailer or other
trailer; or any boat, golf cart, dune buggy, snowmobile, all-terrain
vehicle (ATV), utility vehicle (UTV), or any similar motor vehicle not
primarily used or designed for ordinary day-to-day transportation on
public streets.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person or persons in whom is vested an interest in
the premises as shown by the land records located in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for St. Louis County, Missouri. For purposes
of this Chapter 505, the term "owner" shall also include any person(s)
efor operator known to the City and who is recognized in equity as
the owner of the property, because the real and beneficial use and title
belong to that person or operator, although the bare legal title as shown
by the conveyancing records in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of St.
Louis County, Missouri, remains in another. For purposes of enforcing
the provisions of this Chapter 505, the City may, at its option, proceed
against the legal or equitable interest in said premises, or against both
said interests.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation, fraternal or religious organization or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the structures
thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law; or
1.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures; or
2.
3. Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage facilities; or
4. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
Section
505.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.010
AO:530
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) — A motor vehicle equipped with living
quarters and amenities found in a home. Touring buses are considered
recreational vehicles for purposes of this Chapter.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar materials.
SEMI-TRAILER — Any vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used
in conjunction with a self-propelled towing vehicle (such as a "tractor,"
"truck tractor" or "truck-tractor" as defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.)
where a considerable part of trailer's own weight rests upon and is
carried by the towing vehicle.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes,
railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways,
tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is
fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the
ground.
TRAILER — Any vehicle without power designed for carrying property
or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a selfpropelled
vehicle. The term "trailer" shall not include the following:
Cotton trailers as defined in Section 301.010(8), RSMo.; Manufactured
homes as defined in Section 700.010, RSMo.; and semi-trailers as
defined herein.
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard,
or are manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or
property; or
5.
Any premises which the required precautions against trespassers
have not been provided; or
6.
Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish
or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds, or;
7.
Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by
fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or
failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or;
8.
Any premises found to be harboring, causing or permitting a
nuisance as set forth in Chapter 215 of the Municipal Code.
9.
Section
505.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.010
AO:531
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this Code, they shall mean that
such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful
manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line.
Section
505.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.010
AO:532
ARTICLE II
Administration
Section 505.020. General. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
Section 505.030. Applicability. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Structures Code
of the City hereinafter referred to as the Existing Structures Code or
"this Code."
B. Scope. This Code is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
City's residents in and around all existing structures, whether
residential and non-residential, and on all existing premises, by
establishing:
1. Minimum maintenance standards for all structures and premises
for use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all
structures and premises now in existence;
2. Regulations for rehabilitation and reuse of existing structures and
allowing differences between the application of the Code
requirements to new construction and the application of the Code
requirements to alterations and repairs;
3. The responsibilities of owners; operators and occupants of all
structures; and
4. Procedures for administration, enforcement and penalties.
C. Intent. This Code shall be construed liberally and justly to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
use and maintenance of structures and premises.
D. Severability. If a Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of this Code.
A. General. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 505.020.
Where, in a specific case, different Sections of this Code specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
B. Maintenance. Except as otherwise noted herein, the owner or the
owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
structures and premises.
C. Application Of Other Regulations. Any repairs or alterations to a
structure which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this Code shall be done in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of the City's Building Code. Nothing in this Code shall
cancel, modify or set aside the City's Zoning Code.
Section
505.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.030
AO:533
Section 505.040. Enforcement Authority, Duties And Powers Of The
Code Official. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
D. Existing Remedies. The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the City or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any structures which are
dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
E. Workmanship. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are required for compliance with this Code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as
to secure the results intended by this Code.
F. Alterations Or Repairs. Exterior alterations or repairs to any structure
shall be performed in conformance with all applicable, current
regulations and Building Codes for a new structure; provided that such
exterior alterations and/or repairs shall not cause the remainder of the
existing structure to be required to be brought into compliance with all
the requirements of the Code for new construction. No exterior
alterations or repairs may be undertaken in a way that causes an
existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affects the
performance of the structure. Exterior alterations or repairs to an
existing structure which are structural, or adversely affect any
structural member or any part of the structure having a required fireresistance
rating, shall be made with materials as required for a new
structure.
G. Other Ordinances. This Code establishes minimum exterior
requirements for all structures and premises and does not replace or
modify requirements otherwise established by ordinance which are
additional or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of structures.
H. Other Regulations. The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided herein.
A. General. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Official to
enforce the provisions of this Code as herein provided.
B. Inspections. For the safety, health and welfare of the public, the Code
Official in compliance with all applicable laws may enter upon any
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections
and performing duties under this Code.
1. Non-Conforming Conditions. If additional non-conforming
conditions are encountered during the course of any approved
alteration or repair which were not considered or known initially,
the Code Official shall have the authority to require compliance
with this Code of such additional conditions. The determination of
what is necessary to bring such conditions into compliance shall
Section
505.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.040
AO:534
Section 505.050. Materials. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
take into consideration the use of alternatives and equivalent
approaches as provided for in this Code. The Code Official shall
have the authority to approve construction changes in the field
when conditions are encountered which make the originally
approved work impractical, provided such changes in approved
work can be readily determined to be in compliance with this
Code and are requested by the owner or the owner's agent prior
to such construction changes. Such changes shall be specifically
documented by the owner or the owner's agent describing the
change in work and the reasons and justification for the change and
shall be filed with the permit for the project.
2. Right Of Entry. If any owner, occupant, operator or other person in
charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this Code refuses
entry and free access to any exterior part of the premises where
inspection authorized by this Code is sought, the Code Official for
good cause shall be permitted to seek from the Municipal Court or
other court of competent jurisdiction, an administrative search
warrant to allow entry onto the premises for inspection of any
exterior feature or area not freely observable from the public rightof-
way or other adjacent property.
C. Credentials. The Code Official shall display proper official credentials
for the purpose of inspecting the exterior of any and all structures and
premises in the performance of duties under this Code.
D. Relief From Personal Liability. Any Code Official, officer or employee of
the City who acts in good faith, without malice and within the scope of
duties or enforcement of this Code is relieved of all personal liability for
any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or
alleged failure to act. Further, the Code Official shall not be held liable
for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted by the
City in the enforcement of this Code. In any of these actions, the official
or employee shall be defended or represented by the City's attorney at
law until the final termination of the proceedings. Nothing herein is
intended as, nor shall be deemed, a waiver of the City's sovereign
immunity which sovereign immunity is expressly reserved.
E. Notices And Orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices
and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to ensure compliance
with this Code's requirements for the safety, health and general welfare
of the public.
A. Approved Materials. All approved materials shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with such approval.
B. Used Materials. Building materials shall not be reused unless they have
been reconditioned and approved for use.
Section
505.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.050
AO:535
Section 505.060. Notices And Orders. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1,
7-28-2016]
C. Alternative Materials. The provisions of this Code are not intended to
prevent the use of any material or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall
be approved when the Code Official finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Code,
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire-resistance, durability and safety.
D. Research And Investigations. The Code Official shall require that
sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use
of any material or assembly, and if it is determined that the evidence
submitted is satisfactory proof of performance for the use intended, the
Code Official shall approve its use subject to the requirements of this
Code. The costs of all tests, reports and investigations required under
these provisions shall be paid by the applicant.
A. Notice To Owner Or To Person Or Persons Responsible. Whenever the
Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or
has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice
shall be given to the owner, operator or other person or persons
responsible therefore in the manner prescribed below.
B. Form Of Notice. Except where otherwise provided, any notice required
under this Chapter 505 shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
3. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
If the owner of the property does not also occupy the property, any
notice of violation(s) directed to the property owner shall
enumerate the specific violation or violations then existing on the
property at the time of the notice;
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit,
structure or premises into compliance with the provisions of this
Code; and,
5. Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or
withdrawal of the notice by petition to the Appeals Board.
C. Method Of Service. Service shall be deemed proper if the notice is:
1. Delivered personally;
Section
505.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.060
AO:536
Section 505.070. Violations. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
2. Sent by certified or First-Class Mail addressed to the owner at the
last known address (notices directed to a non-occupant property
owner may be sent by First Class Mail to the last known address of
such owner); or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the
structure or premises affected by such notice.
D. Transfer Of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit, structure or premises who has received a notice of
violation or upon whom such notice has been served to sell, transfer,
mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to another until such owner has
first furnished the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy
of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code
Official and furnished the Code Official a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
E. If the person (or persons) served with notice fails to comply with the
correction order within a reasonable time as established by the Code
Official taking into account the extent of work anticipated to be
necessary to bring the structure or premises into compliance but not
less than ten (10) days of receiving notice, the Code Official shall take
such action as authorized in Section 505.070.
A. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or
premises regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done contrary to
or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or
fail to timely comply with a lawful notice or correction order of the Code
Official, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the
provisions of this Code.
B. Penalty. In case any notice of violation is not promptly complied with,
the Code Official shall request the City Prosecutor to institute an
appropriate action for violation of this Code. Any person who shall
violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as set out in Section 100.060 of the Municipal Code. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in
accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Corrective Action. In addition, or as an alternative to the action
authorized in Subsection (B) above, the Code Official may ask the City
Section
505.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.070
AO:537
Section 505.080. Means Of Appeals. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
Attorney or Prosecutor to proceed at law or in equity against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of
such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or,
4. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a plan
or specification under which an approval, plan, permit or certificate
was issued.
A. Modifications. When there are demonstrated practical difficulties
involved in carrying out structural provisions, upon application of the
owner or the owner's representative, the Appeals Board shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided that the
spirit and intent of the law shall be observed and public welfare and
safety assured.
B. Appeal Of Code Official Action. Any person aggrieved by any notice for
corrective action which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this Code, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the right to request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board; provided
that such person shall file in the Community Development office a
written petition requesting such hearing containing a statement of
grounds therefore within twenty (20) days after the day the notice was
served.
C. Appeals Board. The Appeals Board shall hear all appeals relative to the
enforcement of this Code.
1. Vote. The Appeals Board is empowered to hear and decide appeals
relative to the enforcement of this Code and by a concurring vote of
the majority of its members shall reverse or affirm wholly or partly,
or modify, the decision appealed from and shall make such order or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made. Failure to secure
such concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the
decision of the Code Official.
2. Financial Interest. A member of the Appeals Board shall not
participate in any hearings or vote on any appeal in which that
member or his/her family member, has a direct or indirect financial
interest, or is engaged as a contractor, or is engaged in the
Section
505.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.080
AO:538
preparation of plans and specifications, or in which that member
has any personal interest.
Section
505.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.080
AO:539

ARTICLE III
General Regulations Of Exterior Property
Section 505.090. General. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
Section 505.100. Exterior Property Areas. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1,
7-28-2016]
A. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum conditions for
maintenance of exterior property, premises and structures. Premises
shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed insofar as they are
applicable.
B. The owner of the premises shall maintain such structures and premises
in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use premises which
do not comply with the following requirements of this Chapter.
C. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided
herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the
public health, safety or property value or adjacent properties.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Grading And Drainage. All exterior property areas and premises shall
be graded and maintained so as to prevent the erosion of soil and
prevent accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon. Stagnant water shall be determined as any
accumulation in an improperly drained pool, pond, ground depression,
collector, container that has not dispersed within five (5) days of the last
recorded local rainfall. Exception: approved retention areas and
reservoirs.
C. Watercourse. A natural or established watercourse shall not be
disturbed in any manner which reduces the capacity of the watercourse
or diverts the water, unless as a part of an approved development or
grading permit or authorization of the Metropolitan Sewer District.
D. Sedimentation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
graded and maintained to prevent sediment on adjacent property,
public property or in a watercourse.
E. Weeds. All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in
accordance with Section 215.020 of the Municipal Code and shall be
free of excessive growth of trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation in
contact with a structure's siding, doors, windows, roof, or chimney that
may cause damage to the structure's components.
Section
505.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.100
AO:541
F. Insect And Rodent Control. An owner of a structure or premises shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or other
pests in all exterior property areas of the premises, except that the
occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior
property areas of the premises of a one-family dwelling. Whenever
infestation exists on a premises other than a one-family dwelling,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
G. Public Areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, free of all snow, ice, mud, overhanging trees and shrubs which
obstruct walkways and other debris and shall be maintained free of
hazardous conditions. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by
virtue of its state of repair shall constitute a danger of public health and
safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced.
Steps shall comply with the requirements for exterior stairs.
H. Exhaust Vents. A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes,
ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot
air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to
discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private
property or that of another tenant.
I. Accessory Structures. All accessory structures, including, but not
limited to, detached garages, fences, walls, and mailboxes shall be
maintained structurally sound and in compliance with this Code.
J. Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.
K. Motor Vehicles.
1. Regulations.
a. Except as provided in other regulations, no inoperative,
unregistered or currently unlicensed motor vehicle shall be
parked on any property in the City, and no motor vehicle shall
at any time be in a state of disassembly, disrepair or shall it be
in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
b. A motor vehicle shall not at any time undergo major overhaul,
including bodywork, on any property within the City unless
such work is performed inside a building or similarly enclosed
area designed and approved for such purposes.
c. No parking of any motor vehicle is permitted on any property
unless said motor vehicle is on a paved parking surface.
2. Exceptions.
a. Driveways constructed of material other than concrete or
asphalt which is a legal non-conforming use and driveways
constructed of material other than concrete or asphalt in the
Section
505.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.100
AO:542
"R-1" Single-Family Residential District shall be permissible
parking spaces for motor vehicles which are operable,
currently licensed and are not in a state of major disassembly
or disrepair.
b. Motor vehicles within a fully enclosed building, closed to public
view and view of adjacent properties; or motor vehicles stored
or displayed as part of a licensed vehicle dealership business
which is in compliance with the Fenton Zoning Code; or motor
vehicles on the premises of a State licensed vehicle inspection
station or motor vehicle service station licensed in the City,
waiting for services or repairs; provided that such motor
vehicle(s) are not on the premises for more than five (5)
consecutive days.
L. Commercial Vehicles.
1. Regulations. Notwithstanding anything in Subsection (K) above, no
person shall park, keep, store or leave any commercial vehicle on
any residential property unless said vehicle is located within an
enclosed garage or located on residential property containing more
than one (1) acre and kept behind the front elevation of the primary
building.
2. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to any emergency vehicles,
ambulances, public utility service vehicles, moving vans or any
commercial vehicle in the process of making a legitimate pickup,
delivery or call to a residence.
M. Off-Road Vehicles.
1. Regulations. Any off-road vehicle parked, kept, stored or left on any
property used for residential purposes shall be located within an
enclosed garage or shall be located on a paved parking surface
constructed of concrete or asphalt. Said off-road vehicles shall not
at any time be in a state of disassembly or disrepair.
2. Exceptions. Parking surfaces other than asphalt or concrete shall
be permissible in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential Zoning
District.
N. Construction Equipment.
1. Regulations. No person shall park, keep, store or leave any
construction equipment on any property used for residential
purposes in the City.
2. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to any construction
equipment:
a. Located on residential property containing more than one (1)
acre and kept in a manner that such equipment is not visible to
any adjoining street or residential property; or
Section
505.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.100
AO:543
Section 505.110. Exterior Structure. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
b. Being utilized for construction, remodel or repair on any
residential property.
O. Defacement Of Property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure on any private
or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
P. Exterior Storage Of Household Items. The accumulation, placement,
use or storage of any type of household items and household furniture
not designed or intended for outdoor use, including, but not limited to,
furniture, mattresses, appliances, cabinets, etc., for more than seven
(7) days, is prohibited.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants
from the adverse effects of the environment.
B. Protective Treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited
to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or
treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipping paint shall be eliminated and
surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those
between the structure envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors,
and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight.
Siding shall be maintained free from excessive mold growth. All metal
surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust
and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized
and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be
removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
C. Street Numbers. Each building to which a street number has been
assigned shall have the number so assigned displayed in a position
easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way.
D. Structural Members. All supporting structural members of all
structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and
maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed
upon them.
E. Exterior Surfaces (Foundations, Walls And Roof). Every foundation,
exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in
a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in
such condition as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
Section
505.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.110
AO:544
1. Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to
carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not
to be detrimental to public safety and welfare.
2. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks,
loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which
might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls
or to the occupied spaces. All exterior surface materials, including
wood, composition, or metal siding, shall be maintained
weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated when required
to prevent deterioration.
3. Roofs And Drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and
not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof
water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance
to owners or occupants of adjacent premises, or that creates a
public nuisance.
4. Decorative Features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition.
5. Overhang Extensions. All overhang extensions, including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes, exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and
be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition.
When required, all exposed surfaces be protected from the
elements and against decay and rust by the periodic application of
a weather-coating material such as paint or other protective
treatment.
6. Stairway, Decks, Porches And Balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper
anchorage and capable of supporting imposed loads. Every
stairway and porch shall be maintained free of hazardous
conditions such as snow, ice, mud and other debris.
7. Chimneys And Towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe,
sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood
shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
F. Window And Door Frames. Every window, door and frame shall be
constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction so as to be weathertight.
Section
505.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.110
AO:545
1. Weathertight. Every window and exterior door shall be fitted
reasonably in its frame and be weathertight. Weather stripping
shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or
structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
2. Glazing. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with
approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and
holes.
3. Open Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by
window hardware.
4. Insect Screens. During the period from April first to December first
every door and window or other outside opening used for
ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable
rooms, food preparation area, food service areas, or any areas
where products used in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tight fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16)
mesh per inch and every swinging screen door shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition. Exception. Screen doors
shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other types of
openings which make screening impractical, provided other
approved means such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are
employed.
5. Door Hardware. Every exterior door and its hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Door locks on all doors entering
dwelling units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly
securing the door.
6. Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water into the structure.
7. Guards For Basement Windows. The openable area of every
basement window shall be supplied with rodent shields, or storm
windows or other material affording protection against the entry of
rodents.
8. Boarded-Up Windows And Doors. Windows or doors may be
boarded up only on a short-term basis for the purpose of scheduling
and allowing for repairs.
G. Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from infestation. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.
Section
505.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.120
AO:546
Section 505.120. Sanitary Drainage System. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1,
7-28-2016]
Section 505.130. Storm Drainage. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1, 7-28-2016]
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
A. General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other
open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
B. Stormwater. Stormwater or sump pump water shall not be directed
through a pipe, culvert or drain which discharges within ten (10) feet of
an abutting property line.
Exceptions:
1. Roof or foundation drains which discharge within two (2) feet of the
structure foundation; or
2. Discharge into an open natural creek or swale on the same
property; or
3. Discharge which is parallel to abutting property line and at least
five (5) feet from said line.
C. Stormwater Systems. All stormwater systems on the premises or
exterior property area shall be maintained in working condition free
from damage or restriction of flow. All entries to stormwater drainage
systems shall be maintained clear and free of any restrictions to water
flow.
D. Stormwater Discharge. Stormwater shall not be directed to a sanitary
sewer system.
Section
505.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.130
AO:547

ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Structures
Section 505.140. Dangerous Structures. [Ord. No. 3620 § 1,
7-28-2016; Ord. No. 3847, 8-23-2018]
A. Authority And Purpose. Pursuant to Section 67.400, et seq., of the
Revised Missouri Statutes, the City is authorized to enact orders or
ordinances to provide for vacation and the mandatory demolition of
structures or mandatory repair and maintenance of structures within
the corporate limits of the City which are detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the residents and declared to be a public nuisance.
This Article IV of Chapter 505 has been adopted pursuant to that
authority of Section 67.400, RSMo., as amended, and in full compliance
with all requirements of Section 67.410, RSMo., as amended.
B. Dangerous Structures As A Nuisance. All dangerous structures, as
defined in Section 505.010, are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and the owner of such structures shall be responsible for their repair,
removal or demolition.
The following standards shall be followed by the owners of dangerous
structures in repair, removal or demolition:
1. If the dangerous structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
ordered repaired.
2. If the dangerous structure is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of future
occupants, it shall not be occupied until repaired.
3. In any case where a dangerous structure is vacant and more than
fifty percent (50%) damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its
original value, it shall be demolished; and in all cases where a
dangerous structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer
exist in violation of the terms of this Article IV, it shall be
demolished.
C. Duties Of Code Official. The Code Official shall:
1. Inspect any structure about which complaints are filed by any
person to the effect that a structure is or may be existing in
violation of this Article IV.
2. Inspect any structure reported by the Fire or Police Department as
probably existing in violation of the terms of this Article IV.
3. Report as necessary receipt of such complaints and the results of
the investigation and inspection.
4. Provide notice pursuant to Subsection (D) of this Section.
Section
505.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.140
AO:549
5. Set out, in the notice provided for in Subsection (C)(4) hereof, a
description of the structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the
particulars which make the structure a dangerous structure, and
an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to
comply with the terms of this Article IV within such length of time,
not exceeding thirty (30) days, as is reasonable.
6. Report to the Administrator any non-compliance with the notice
provided for in Subsections (C)(4) and (C)(5) hereof.
7. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Administrator and/or
Board of Appeals and testify as to the condition of dangerous
structures.
8. Place a notice on all dangerous structures as set forth in
Subsection (D) of this Section.
D. Notice. The City of Fenton, Missouri, hereby establishes the following
procedures for notices of dangerous structures and other unsafe
structures or equipment.
1. Notice Of Dangerous Structure. If a structure is found to be a
dangerous structure, the Code Official shall prepare and issue a
notice, which at a minimum, shall specify that:
a. The structure is to be removed, repaired or demolished, and
vacated if such be the case, in accordance with the terms of the
notice and this Article IV.
b. The structure may not be occupied until it shall be repaired in
accordance with this Article IV.
c. The persons having an interest in said structure shall be given
such reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, as may be
necessary to commence or have commenced the work or act
required by the notice provided for herein.
d. The notice shall be addressed to the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in
the structure as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of St. Louis County.
e. Notice may be served either by personal service or by certified
mail, return receipt requested; but if service cannot be had by
either of these modes of service, then service may be had by
publication.
2. Identification Of Defects. The notice shall list defects in the
structure that constitute a dangerous structure and declare that
structure a public nuisance.
a. The notice shall also order the structure vacated by the 15th
day following service of the notice. However, if the Code
Section
505.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.140
AO:550
Official determines that a condition of imminent danger exists,
the notice shall also order that the structure be vacated and
that the structure be boarded up or otherwise secured within
twelve (12) hours of service of the notice.
b. In addition, the notice shall order that substantial work on
repairs must begin or (if repairs would be unreasonable) that
demolition must be completed by no later than the 30th day (or
other such time frame) following service of the notice.
3. Form Of Notice. The notice shall be in substantially the following
form:
CITY OF FENTON, MISSOURI
NOTICE OF UNSAFE STRUCTURE AND DECLARATION OF
PUBLIC
NUISANCE AND ORDER
Unsafe structure: [insert address or other adequate description of
structure]
Serve: [insert names of owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent
and all other persons having an interest in the structure according
to the land records of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds]
Notice of Unsafe structure, Declaration of public nuisance, and
Order: [complete Paragraphs 1, 2 and either 3a or 3b depending
on whether repair or demolition is sought]
[1] THE STRUCTURE IDENTIFIED ABOVE IS UNSAFE AND
IS HEREBY DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE BECAUSE
OF THE FOLLOWING DEFECTS:
[List specific defects]
[2] NO PERSON MAY OCCUPY THIS STRUCTURE, OR ANY
PART THEREOF, AFTER THE 15TH DAY [or other
reasonable period] FOLLOWING SERVICE OF THIS
NOTICE.
After such date, no person shall occupy, enter, refuse to leave,
or remain in this structure or any part thereof, except persons
directly employed in securing, repairing or removing such
structure.
[If it is determined that repairs but not demolition of the
dangerous structure is in order, then the notice shall state:]
[3a] THIS STRUCTURE MUST BE REPAIRED TO CURE THE
DEFECTS LISTED IN PARAGRAPH 1 ABOVE. WORK
MUST BEGIN WITHIN [insert number of days, not
exceeding thirty (30)] DAYS FOLLOWING SERVICE OF
THIS NOTICE AND PROCEED CONTINUOUSLY
WITHOUT UNNECESSARY DELAY TO COMPLETION.
Section
505.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.140
AO:551
Nothing herein shall prohibit an owner from complying with a
repair order by demolition and removal of this structure.
[If it is determined that demolition of the dangerous structure is in
order, then the notice shall also state:]
[3b] THIS STRUCTURE MUST BE DEMOLISHED AND
REMOVED FROM THE PREMISES BY WITHIN [insert
number of days, not exceeding sixty (60)] DAYS
FOLLOWING SERVICE OF THIS NOTICE.
This demolition order is mandatory. However, it may be converted
into a repair order, provided that plans and bids satisfactory to
the Code Official are presented to the Code Official within [insert
number of days, not exceeding twenty (20) days] of the service of
this notice.
4. Posting Of Notice. In addition to service of the notice as set forth
above, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a prominent place on
the premises. The posted notice shall state that it is, and it is
hereby declared to be, unlawful to remove the notice until such
time as the City shall cause the notice to be removed.
E. Review Of Code Official's Classification Of Dangerous Structure –
Appeal By Aggrieved Person. Any person aggrieved by a finding by the
Code Official that a structure is a dangerous structure within the
meaning of Section 505.010(F) shall have ten (10) days in which to
appeal, in writing, to the Administrator, who shall schedule a hearing,
upon written notice or waiver thereof, which said notice and hearing
shall be conducted in accordance with this Article IV.
F. Failure To Repair, Demolish Or Complete; Hearing.
1. Hearing On Failure To Repair/Demolish As Ordered. If the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an
interest in said structure fail to undertake repair or demolition
within the time specified by the Code Official, or upon failure to
proceed continuously with the work without unnecessary delay, as
provided to be done in the required notice, the Code Official shall
notify the Administrator, and the Administrator shall call and have
a full and adequate hearing upon the matter, giving the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an
interest in said structure at least ten (10) days' written notice of the
hearing served either by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested; but if service cannot be had by either of
these modes of service, then service may be had by publication.
The notice shall also provide that any party may be represented by
counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard.
2. Determination And Order. If the evidence at the hearing supports a
finding that the structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health,
safety, or welfare of the residents of the City, the Administrator
shall render a final decision in the form of an order making specific
Section
505.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.140
AO:552
findings of fact, based upon competent and substantial evidence,
which shows the structure to be a dangerous structure thereby
constituting a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the City, and ordering the structure to
be vacated, demolished and removed, or repaired within a specified
time. If the evidence does not support a finding that the structure
is a dangerous structure or otherwise a nuisance or detrimental to
the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the City, no order
shall be issued.
3. Review Of Order Of Administrator. Any request for review of a final
action by the Administrator shall be in accordance with Chapter
160 (Administrative Procedure for Review of Certain Actions) of the
Fenton Municipal Code.
G. Costs Of Abatement; Special Tax Bill Or Assessment. If the
Administrator, or other designated officer or Board, issues an order
whereby the structure is demolished, secured, or repaired, or the
property is cleaned up, the cost of performance shall be certified to the
City Clerk or officer in charge of finance, who shall cause a special tax
bill or assessment therefor against the property to be prepared and
collected by the Collector or other official collecting taxes, unless the
structure is demolished, secured or repaired by a contractor pursuant
to an order issued by the City and such contractor files a mechanic's
lien against the property where the dangerous structure is located. The
contractor may enforce this lien as provided in Sections 429.010 to
429.360, RSMo., as amended. At the written request of the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance of the tax bill or
assessment, the tax bill, including the costs of tax collection, accrued
interest and attorneys' fees, if any, may be paid in installments over a
period of not more than ten (10) years. The tax bill from the date of its
issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner
and shall also be a lien on the property until paid.
H. Insurance. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a
covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a structure caused
by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss, the
ordinance may establish a procedure for the payment of up to twentyfive
percent (25%) of the insurance proceeds, as set forth in this
Section. The order or ordinance shall apply only to a covered claim
payment which is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the face value of the
policy covering the structure.
1. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and shall
pay such moneys to the City to deposit into an interest-bearing
account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall
maintain priority over any obligation under the order or ordinance.
2. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has
accrued on such proceeds received under Subsection (1) of this
Section
505.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.140
AO:553
Subsection to the insured or as the terms of the policy and
endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after receipt
of such insurance moneys, unless the City has instituted legal
proceedings under the provisions of this Article IV. If the City has
proceeded under the provisions of Subsection (G) of this Article IV,
all moneys in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions
of Subsection (G) of this Article IV for the removal, securing, repair
and cleanup of the structure, and the lot on which it is located, less
salvage value, shall be paid to the insured.
3. If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in this
Section, at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in
installments over a period of not more than ten (10) years. The tax
bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until
paid.
4. This Section shall apply to fire, explosion, or other casualty loss
claims arising on all structures.
5. This Section does not make the City a party to any insurance
contract, and the insurer is not liable to any party for any amount in
excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance
policy.
I. Emergencies.
1. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, it reasonably appears that
a dangerous structure, as defined herein, poses an immediate or
potential danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the
Code Official may take emergency measures to vacate the structure
and to abate, secure, repair or demolish the dangerous condition.
The Code Official shall order the necessary work to be done,
including the boarding-up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe and shall cause such other action to be taken as
may be necessary to meet such emergency.
2. In the event of such an emergency, the Code Official shall notify
interested persons, as promptly as possible, as required in
Subsection (D) hereof; provided, however, to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public, the Code Official shall have the
authority to act in accordance with Subsection (1) of this
Subsection regardless of whether such notice has issued or
whether review proceedings as established in Subsection (E) have
been instituted.
3. The Code Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to any
vacated, dangerous structure a notice to read substantially as
follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe And Its Occupancy Has Been
Prohibited. Do Not Enter." It shall be unlawful for any person to
enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the
structure, making the required repairs, abating the dangerous
condition or demolishing the structure.
Section
505.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.140
AO:554
4. For the purposes of this Section, the Code Official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform all required work as
expeditiously as possible. The costs incurred in the performance of
such emergency work shall be collected as provided in Subsection
(G) hereof.
5. In all cases where a structure does not meet the standards for
dangerous structures as set forth herein but nonetheless
constitutes a nuisance to the general public because it is vacant
and open to unauthorized entry, the Code Official may notify the
owner to secure the structure within forty-eight (48) hours. In the
event the owner fails to secure the structure in that time, the Code
Official may take whatever measures are necessary to secure the
structure. The cost of such measures shall be recovered in the
same manner as that provided in Subsection (G) hereof.
6. Closing Streets. When necessary for public safety, the Code Official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and
places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from
being utilized.
J. Unlawful To Enter Structure Ordered Vacated Or To Remove Notice. It
shall be unlawful for any person to enter any structure which has been
placarded with a notice setting forth the order of the Code Official or
Administrator requiring the structure to be vacated. The Police
Department may remove any unauthorized person from any such
structure and may take all steps necessary to prevent any unauthorized
person from entering such structure.
K. Violations And Penalties. Pursuant to Section 67.410.4, RSMo., as
amended, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Article IV, or fail to obey or abide by an order made pursuant thereto,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), unless the
owner of the property is not also a resident of the property, then such
fine may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day any
such violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Section
505.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.140
AO:555
Chapter 510
EXCAVATIONS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
505.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
505.140
AO:556
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Applicability
Section 510.010. Applicability; Preemption. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2,
2-23-201774]
Section 510.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this Chapter, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
ABANDONMENT — Any equipment, materials, apparatuses, devices, or
facilities that are: 1) declared abandoned by the owner of such equipment
or facilities, 2) no longer in active use and the owner of such equipment or
facilities fails to respond within thirty (30) days to a written notice sent by
the City, or 3) as otherwise may be defined by applicable law.
ANTENNA — Any device that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic
wireless radio waves or signals for voice, data, or video communications
purposes, including, but not limited to, television, text, AM/FM radio,
microwave, cellular telephone, communications service, or otherwise.
APPLICANT — Any person who has applied for a ROW agreement,
franchise, license, ROW permit, or any other permit or other authorization
A. Applicability. Except as provided for herein, and where limited by
applicable law, this Chapter shall apply to all excavations and all use,
construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities or structures in
the rights-of-way of the City. No person shall commence or continue
with the operation of any facilities or structures in the rights-of-way
except as provided and in compliance with this Chapter. Because
numerous types of users and uses of the rights-of-way may be subject to
various or changing regulatory schemes under Federal or state law, any
such limitation or qualification that may be applicable to less than all
users and uses of the rights-of-way are not duplicated herein, but are
nevertheless incorporated herein, whenever application is so required
by law, including but not limited to applicable provisions of Chapter 67,
RSMo., and other applicable State and Federal law.
B. Preemption. No provision of this Chapter shall apply to any
circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under
superseding Federal or State law and furthermore, if any Section,
Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is now
or in the future superseded or preempted by State or Federal law or
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such
provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by
law.
74.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 510, Excavations, containing Sections 510.010 — 510.100,
which derived from R.O. 2006 §§ 530.010 — 530.100; Ord. No. 300 §§ 1, 3 — 10, 5-17-1971;
Ord. No. 976 § 1, 3-16-1987; Ord. No. 1629 § 1, 9-21-1992; Ord. No. 3019 §§ 2 — 6,
4-23-2009, was repealed 2-23-2017 by § 2 of Ord. No. 3663.
Section
510.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.020
AO:557
to install, maintain, repair or otherwise physically access facilities in the
rights-of-way.
CITY FACILITIES — Any facilities located in the rights-of-way and owned by
the City.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The transmission via facilities, in whole
or in part, of any writings, signs, signals, pictures, sounds, or other forms
of intelligence through wire, wireless, or other means, including, but not
limited to, any telecommunications service, enhanced service, information
service, or internet service, as such terms are now, or may in the future, be
defined under applicable law, and including all instrumentalities, facilities,
apparatus (communications facilities), and services (among other things,
the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of telecommunications) incidental to
such transmission or designed to directly or indirectly facilitate or accept
such transmission and shall also include "video services" as defined in
Section 67.2677, RSMo. The term "communications service" does not
include the rental of conduit or physical facilities.
DIRECTOR — The City's Community Development Director or such other
person designated thereby to administer and enforce this Chapter.
EXCAVATION PERMIT — A permit authorizing excavation for the
construction and installation of facilities in the ROW or other City property.
EXCAVATION, EXCAVATING, or EXCAVATE — Any act by which earth,
asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock or any other material in or on the
ground is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, or otherwise displaced, by
means of any tools, equipment or explosives, except as excluded by
applicable law.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE or MAINTENANCE — The construction,
installation, repair, upgrade, or other physical access to the facility in the
rights-of-way that does not involve excavation.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE PERMIT — A permit issued by the City for a
ROW user to provide maintenance to its facilities or otherwise perform work
in the rights-of-way that does not involve excavation but requires physical
access to the facilities in the rights-of-way.
FACILITIES or FACILITY — Any equipment, installation, or structure
located in the rights-of-way, including without limitation, cables, wires,
lines, poles, towers, antenna, conduit facilities, vaults, pedestals,
transmitters, meters, fiber, foundations, and any other equipment,
infrastructure, structures or obstruction. Facilities shall not include
mailboxes, lawful vehicular parking or use of lawful minor incidental uses
such as driveway aprons, private utility connections or other incidental
facilities which may be permitted by license issued by the Director as
provided herein.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — The rights and obligations extended by the City to certain
ROW users to occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose of providing,
Section
510.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.020
AO:558
transporting or distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy
or sewer service to any person or area in the City's limits and boundaries.
LICENSE — The rights and obligations extended by the City to a person
to use and occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose of installing temporary
facilities within the rights-of-way or incidental uses such as ingress and
egress facilities, lateral utility lines, or driveway aprons. A license shall not
be required for installation of mailboxes.
PERSON — A corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity or any natural person.
PSC — The Missouri Public Service Commission.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The City's Public Works Director and his/her
designee.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") AGREEMENT — The rights and obligations
extended by the City to a person to occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose
of providing any form of communications service to any person or area
within the City's limits and boundaries, or any other person desiring to use
the rights-of-way for which a franchise or license is not applicable, subject
to the regulations and requirements herein.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") PERMIT — An excavation permit and/or a
facilities maintenance permit.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") USER — All persons and entities, whether
a PSC registered utility or otherwise, owning, controlling, leasing,
maintaining, using or installing facilities in the rights-of-way of the City, not
otherwise expressly exempted. To the extent permitted by law, ROW user
shall not include the City.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Action by a ROW user to:
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW — The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street or alleyway in which the City has an ownership interest or
right of management, and including such adjacent areas within such public
ways within such City control, except as may be limited by law.
Install, change, replace, relocate, remove, maintain, or repair facilities
within the rights-of-way, or
1.
To conduct work of any kind within or adjacent to the rights-of-way that
results in an excavation, obstruction, disruption, damage, or physical
invasion or impact of any kind to the rights-of-way or the use thereof.
The routine inspection of facilities shall not be considered ROW work
unless the inspection requires the conduct of any of the activities or
actions noted herein.
2.
Section
510.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.020
AO:559

ARTICLE II
Rights-Of-Way Management
Section 510.030. General Rights-Of-Way Obligations. [Ord. No.
3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
A. Zoning, Safety, And Building Code Compliance. ROW users shall at all
times be subject to the lawful exercise of the police powers of the City,
including but not limited to all police powers regarding zoning,
supervision of the restoration of the rights-of-way, building and safety
regulations, and control of the rights-of-way. Installation of all facilities
in the rights-of-way are subject to and must be in compliance with all
zoning and safety and building code requirements. For applications for
installation of any facility in the rights-of-way: (1) the most restrictive
adjacent underlying zoning district classification shall apply unless
otherwise specifically zoned and designated on the Official Zone
District Map, and (2) no application for a wireless facility shall be
submitted for approval without attaching the City's consent to use the
rights-of-way for the specific construction application in accordance
with Chapter 67, RSMo., and compliance with this Chapter, specifically
Section 510.050.
B. Condition Precedent To ROW Permit. Unless otherwise required by
applicable law, no ROW permit may be issued to any person unless or
until such person has a valid franchise, ROW agreement, or license with
the City that authorizes that person's use of the rights-of-way. Unless
prohibited by applicable law, in addition to any other reason provided
herein, the Director and Public Works Director may deny a ROW permit
to any person that does not have a valid franchise, ROW agreement, or
license with the City.
C. Transferability/Subletting. Except as provided in this Chapter or as
otherwise required by law, no franchise, ROW agreement, license, or
ROW permit may be transferred or assigned without the written
application to and consent of the City based on the requirements and
policies of this Chapter. The City shall not unreasonably withhold its
consent as provided herein, but any costs incurred shall be paid by the
ROW user to the extent allowed by law. In the case of the City granting
consent to transfer, the transferee shall be subject to the terms and
conditions of this Chapter.
D. Agreement, Franchise, Or License Required. Except where otherwise
authorized or required by applicable law, no person may own, control,
lease, use, or install facilities or other structures in the rights-of-way
without a franchise, ROW agreement, or license with the City as
provided herein and as follows:
1. Franchise. A franchise shall be obtained in conformance with all
applicable franchise procedures for any ROW user seeking to use
the rights-of-way for the purpose of providing, transporting, or
Section
510.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.030
AO:561
distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy, or sewer
service to any person or area in the City's limits and boundaries.
2. ROW Agreement. A ROW agreement shall be required for all other
ROW users, except as provided herein or otherwise required by
law. Such ROW agreement shall conform to all applicable laws and
requirements, but shall not be subject to procedures applicable to
franchises.
3. License For Incidental Uses. Persons desiring to install an
incidental use, which includes installation of temporary structures
or minor incidental uses in the rights-of-way, such as driveway
aprons, ingress or egress facilities, and similar incidental uses that
utilize a small area of the rights-of-way and serves the principal
structure, may be permitted without a franchise or ROW
agreement pursuant to a license issued by the Director. The
Director shall have discretion to establish such application form
and the terms and conditions applicable to each license based on
the proposed use consistent with the purposes of this Chapter or as
otherwise established by law, including maintenance,
indemnification, bonds, and insurance requirements. The applicant
shall be required to pay an application fee and an inspection fee as
established by the City. Any person granted a license hereunder
shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this Chapter.
E. Grant And Nature Of Approval; Terms And Compensation. The authority
granted by the City in any ROW agreement, license, or franchise shall
be for non-exclusive use of the rights-of-way. Such grant does not in any
way limit the continuing authority of the City through the proper
exercise of its statutory powers to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional agreements or other rights to use the rights-of-way for any
purpose and to any other person, including itself, as it deems
appropriate, subject to all applicable laws. The granting of any
agreement, license, or franchise shall not be deemed to create any
property interest of any kind in favor of the ROW user. All franchises
and ROW agreements shall be approved by ordinance or resolution of
the Board of Aldermen on a non-discriminatory basis provided that the
person is in compliance with all applicable requirements. Licenses may
be approved by the Director on a non-discriminatory basis provided that
the person is in compliance with all applicable requirements. Each
franchise, license, and ROW agreement shall include terms of use and
be deemed to incorporate the terms of this Chapter and other
applicable laws of the City, except as may be expressly stated in such
ROW agreement, license, or franchise. The City may require
compensation for use of the rights-of-way or other public property as
may be reasonably required by the Board of Aldermen, subject to
applicable law.
Section
510.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.030
AO:562
F. Use Of City Or Third-Party Facilities. No ROW agreement, franchise, or
license shall grant the right to use facilities owned or controlled by the
City or a third party, and no such use shall occur, nor shall any
franchise, ROW agreement or license excuse such person from first
obtaining a pole attachment agreement or other express consent for
such right or use before locating on facilities controlled or owned by the
City or a third party.
G. Lease Required For Public Lands. Unless otherwise provided, use or
installation of any facilities or other structure within non-rights-of-way
public property of the City shall be permitted only if a lease agreement
or other separate written approval has been negotiated and approved
by the City with such reasonable terms as the City may require.
H. No Warranties. The City makes no express or implied representation or
warranty regarding its rights to authorize the installation or
construction of facilities on any particular segment of rights-of-way and
shall not be liable for any damages therefrom. The burden and
responsibility for making all such determinations in advance of
construction or installation shall be entirely upon the ROW user. The
ROW user shall be solely liable for any damages to facilities or other
property due to excavation, facilities maintenance, or other ROW work
performed prior to obtaining the location of all facilities that have been
properly identified prior to such work. The ROW user shall not make or
attempt to make repairs, relocation, or replacement of damaged or
disturbed facilities without the approval of the owner of the facilities.
I. ROW User Responsible For Costs. The ROW user shall be responsible
for all reasonable costs borne by the City that are directly associated
with ROW user's installation, maintenance, repair, operation, use, and
replacement of its facilities in the rights-of-way that are not otherwise
accounted for as part of the ROW permit fee established pursuant to
this Chapter, to the extent permitted by law. All such costs shall be
itemized and the City's books and records related to these costs shall be
made available upon request of the ROW user.
J. No Cause Of Action Against The City. A ROW user shall have no
damages, remedy, or monetary recourse whatsoever against the City
for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions
or requirements of any ROW agreement or franchise, or because of the
enforcement thereof by said City, or from the use of the rights-of-way.
Nothing herein shall preclude the ROW user from seeking injunctive or
declaratory judgment relief against the City where such relief is
otherwise available and the requirements therefor are otherwise
satisfied.
K. Forfeiture Of Agreement And Privilege. In case of failure on the part of
the ROW user, including its successors and assigns, to comply with any
of the provisions of this Chapter or a ROW agreement, franchise, or
license, or if the ROW user, its successors and assigns should do or
cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of this
Section
510.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.030
AO:563
Section 510.040. Franchise And ROW Agreement Requirements;
Application. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
Chapter or the terms of the authorization of such use, or otherwise
loses authority to provide its service in the City, the ROW user, its
successors and assigns shall forfeit all rights and privileges permitted
by any ROW agreement, franchise, or license, and all rights hereunder
shall cease, terminate, and become null and void, provided that said
forfeiture shall not take effect until the City shall carry out the following
proceedings: Before the City declares the forfeiture or revocation of
a ROW agreement, franchise, or license, it shall first serve a written
notice upon the person setting forth in detail the neglect or failure
complained of, and the person shall have thirty (30) days thereafter,
or such other reasonable period established by the Director, in which
to cure the default by complying with the conditions of the such ROW
agreement, franchise, or license and fully remedying any default or
violation. If at the end of such period, the City determines that the
conditions have not been complied with and that the person did not
reasonably and in the public interest require more than the established
time to cure the default, the City shall take action by an affirmative
vote of the Board of Aldermen present at the meeting and voting to
terminate the ROW agreement, franchise, or license, setting out the
grounds upon which said authorization is to be forfeited or revoked.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City from invoking any other remedy
or from declaring immediate forfeiture where the default is incapable
of being cured by the ROW user, including where such defaults or
violations have repeatedly occurred.
L. No Waiver. No action or omission of the City shall operate as a future
waiver of any rights of the City under this Chapter. Except where rights
are expressly granted or waived by a ROW permit, ROW agreement,
franchise, or license they are reserved, whether or not expressly
enumerated.
A. Application Requirements.
1. Application Form. An application for a franchise or ROW agreement
shall be submitted on a form provided by the City to the Director in
writing and shall include all such information as is required herein
and all such information required to determine compliance with
this Chapter. The ROW user shall be responsible for accurately
maintaining the information in the application during the term of
any franchise or ROW agreement and shall be responsible for all
costs incurred by the City due to the failure to provide or maintain
as accurate any application information required herein. Each
application shall at minimum contain the following information,
unless otherwise waived by the Director:
a. The identity and legal status of the proposed applicant;
Section
510.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.040
AO:564
b. The name, address, email, fax, and telephone number of each
officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
application. Each officer, agent, or employee shall be familiar
with the local facilities of the applicant, shall be the person(s)
to whom notice shall be sent, and shall be responsible for
facilitating all necessary communications, including, but not
limited to, certification to the City of any material changes to
the information provided in such completed application during
the term of any franchise or agreement;
c. The name, address, email, fax, and telephone number of a local
officer whom the City may notify or contact at any time (i.e.,
twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week)
concerning ROW work;
d. Proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration, franchise, or any other authorization, required by
any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited
to, the FCC or the PSC;
e. A description of applicant's intended use of the rights-of-way,
including such information as to proposed services so as to
determine the applicable Federal, State, and local regulatory
provisions as may apply to such ROW user;
f. A list of authorized agents, contractors, and subcontractors
eligible to obtain ROW permits on behalf of the applicant. An
application may be updated to add such person at the time of
ROW permit application if the updated information on the
application is submitted by an authorized representative of the
applicant;
g. Information sufficient to determine the amount of net assets of
the applicant;
h. Information sufficient to determine whether the applicant is
subject under applicable law to franchising, service regulation,
payment of compensation for the use of the rights-of-way,
taxation, or other requirements of the City;
i. Any request including one (1) or more antennas shall also
include all requirements for installation of antennas and
wireless facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless
Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act (Sections
67.5090, et seq. RSMo.), Chapter 491 of this Code, and other
applicable laws or ordinances; and
j. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
City to determine requirements and compliance with
applicable regulations.
Section
510.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.040
AO:565
Section 510.050. Work And Facilities Regulations In The ROW.
[Ord. No. 3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
k. Deposit Fees. Each such application for a franchise or ROW
agreement shall be accompanied by a two hundred dollar
($200.00) application deposit fee for review, documentation,
and approval of such agreement or franchise to recover any
actual costs anticipated and incurred by the City in reviewing,
documenting, or negotiating such agreement or franchise,
provided that no costs shall be included if such inclusion is
prohibited by applicable law as to that person. If the actual
costs are thereafter determined to be less than the application
deposit fee, such amount shall be returned to the person, after
written request therefrom; if the actual costs exceed the
application deposit fee, such person shall pay such additional
amount prior to issuance of any final City approval after
written notice from the City, subject to applicable law.
2. Standard For Approval Or Renewal. In reviewing an application for
a new or renewal ROW agreement or franchise, the City may
consider prior conduct of the person in performance of its
obligations or compliance with the City's ordinances in the past, or
the existence of any outstanding violations or deficiencies. The City
may deny or condition any ROW agreement or franchise where the
proposed use would interfere with the public use of the rights-ofway
or otherwise conflict with the legitimate public interests of the
City, to fulfill the requirements and objectives of this Chapter or as
otherwise provided by law.
3. Approval Process. After submission by the applicant of a duly
executed and completed application, application deposit fee, and
executed franchise or ROW agreement as may be provided by the
Director or as modified by the Director in review of the specific
circumstances of the application, all in conformity with the
requirements of this Chapter and all applicable laws, the Director
shall submit such agreement to the Board of Aldermen for
approval. Upon determining compliance with this Chapter, the
Board of Aldermen may authorize execution of the franchise or
ROW agreement (or a modified agreement otherwise acceptable to
the City consistent with the purposes of this Chapter) and such
executed franchise or ROW agreement shall constitute consent to
use the rights-of-way; provided that nothing herein shall preclude
the rejection or modification of any executed franchise or ROW
agreement submitted to the City to the extent applicable law does
not prohibit such rejection or modification, including where
necessary to reasonably and in a uniform or non-discriminatory
manner reflect the distinct engineering, construction, operation,
maintenance, public work, or safety requirements applicable to the
person or use.
Section
510.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:566
A. No Interference. Every ROW user shall construct and maintain its
facilities so as not to interfere with other users of the rights-of-way. The
ROW user shall not interfere with or alter the facilities of the City or
other ROW user without their consent and shall be solely responsible
for such. Except as may otherwise be provided or as determined by the
Director and Public Works Director, the ROW user shall, prior to
commencement of ROW work, execute a City-approved residentnotification
plan to notify residents affected by the proposed work. All
construction and maintenance by the ROW user or its subcontractors
shall be performed in accordance with industry standards. All facilities
and other structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum
interference with the rights and convenience of property owners, ROW
users, and the City. Facilities and other structures shall not be placed
where they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities, structures, or
public improvements or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various
utilities serving the residents and businesses in the City or public
improvements. Above-ground facilities shall be constructed and
maintained in such a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or
intrusive noise. When reasonable and necessary to accomplish such
purposes, the Director and Public Works Director may require as
alternatives to the proposed ROW work either less disruptive methods
or different locations for facilities, provided that any required
alternative:
1. Shall not increase expenses by more than ten percent (10%) of the
applicant's costs for the work as proposed,
2. Shall not result in a decline of service quality, and
3. Shall be competitively neutral and non-discriminatory.
B. Subordinate Use. The ROW user's use shall be, in all situations,
subordinate and subject to public municipal use. In situations where
multiple users are in the same location, first the municipal use shall
have priority followed by persons with a valid and current ROW
agreement, franchise, or license with the City, followed by all others.
C. Wireless Antennas And Facilities. Pursuant to City authority, including
Section 67.1830(f), RSMo., and the Uniform Small Wireless Facility
Deployment Act (Sections 67.5110, et seq., RSMo.), and to properly
manage the limited space in the City's right-of-way, minimize
obstructions and interference with the use of the right-of-way by the
public, and to ensure public safety, while also seeking to facilitate
delivery of broadband technologies to City residents and businesses,
wireless facilities shall be permitted in the right-of-way in compliance
with the requirements applicable to other facilities and users in the
right-of-way, and subject to the additional requirements set forth in this
Section for wireless antennas and facilities. [Ord. No. 3761 § 2,
12-18-2017; Ord. No. 3888, 12-20-2018]
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:567
1. General Conditions. Any wireless facilities shall be subject to
conditions relating to the location (including prohibited or limited
locations), design, height, appearance, safety, radio frequency, and
other interference issues as may be lawfully imposed by the City
where necessary or appropriate to protect the public, and to
conform to policies and interests of the public as may be set forth in
special district plans, historic areas, or other policies as may be
reasonably adopted by the City to address changing infrastructure,
technology, and uses of the right-of-way and/or City facilities. A
wireless facility shall not be located or installed in a manner that
results in interference with or impairs the operation of existing
utility facilities or City or third-party attachments. Wireless
antennas or facilities shall further comply with: (1) all applicable
requirements for installation of any facilities in the ROW as set
forth in this Chapter including a ROW permit, (2) the requirements
of this Section, and (3) requirements for installation of wireless
antennas and facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless
Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act (Sections 67.5090,
et seq., RSMo.), Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act
(Sections 67.5110, et seq., RSMo.), applicable zoning, building, and
other regulations and approvals, specifically including Chapter
491.
a. Specific Conditions.
(1) Small Wireless Facilities. Any "small wireless facility"
meeting the requirements for "small wireless facility" as
defined by Section 491.020 and as provided in Section
491.040 of the Zoning Code shall be authorized to be
located in the right-of-way with approval of the Director
subject to the following additional requirements:
(a) If proposing to install a new utility pole, compliance
with the spacing requirements herein:
(b) Compliance with Section 67.5113.3(9), RSMo., to the
satisfaction of the City;
(c) For collocations on City utility poles, all make-ready
estimates for the utility pole, including replacement
costs where necessary for the safety and reliability of
the utility pole, as determined by the City;
(d) Attestation that the proposed "small wireless facility"
meets the volumetric requirements to meet the
definition of a "small wireless facility" in Section
491.020 of the Zoning Code; and
(e) Any other requirements which may be applicable to
the proposed "small wireless facility" pursuant to the
Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act
(Sections 67.5110, et seq., RSMo.).
Section
510.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:568
(2) "Fast-Track" Small Wireless Collocation. Any wireless
facility meeting the requirements of a "fast-track" small
wireless facility as defined by Sections 491.020 and
491.060 of the Zoning Code, may be authorized to use and
be located in the right-of-way with approval of the
Director, subject to the following additional requirements:
(a) Attestation that the proposed facilities meet the
volumetric requirements to meet the definition of
"fast-track" in Section 491.020 of the Zoning Code;
(b) No ground equipment shall be authorized, unless
placed underground;
(c) No "fast-track" facility shall be located in a manner
which obstructs or causes a safety concern for vehicle
or pedestrian traffic;
(d) If the proposed structure where the applicant
proposes to locate its "fast-track" facility is not
structurally sound, but the Director finds such to be a
desired location, the Director can require the
applicant to install a new substantially similar
structure at its cost; and
(e) Compliance with the spacing requirements herein if
granted a waiver under the "fast-track" zoning
procedure to install a new structure.
(3) All Other Wireless In Right-Of-Way. Any wireless facility
located on an "existing structure," as defined by Section
491.020 but not meeting the requirements of Subsection
(C)(1)(a)(1), Small Wireless Facilities, or Subsection
(C)(1)(a)(2), "Fast-Track" Small Wireless Collocation,
above, may be approved, subject to reasonable and nondiscriminatory
conditions as may be imposed consistent
with the purposes of this Section, only upon approval by
the Board of Aldermen upon a determination by the Board
of Aldermen that such wireless facility is:
(a) In the public interest to provide a needed service to
persons within the City;
(b) Cannot feasibly meet all of the requirements but
varies from such requirements to the minimum extent
necessary;
(c) Does not negatively impact appearance or property
values in light of the location, design, and
circumstances to be approved;
(d) Does not create any reasonable safety risk; and
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:569
(e) Complies with all applicable zoning, right-of-way, and
other applicable requirements.
2. Wireless Facility Compensation Requirements. If the "small
wireless facility" or "fast-track" is to be located on a City owned
structure in the ROW, an annual payment of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per attachment shall be required.
3. Application Requirements. Any application including one (1) or
more wireless antennas or facilities shall include all applicable and
lawful requirements for:
a. Installation of any facilities in the right-of-way as set forth in
this Section;
b. The requirements of this Subsection; and
c. Requirements for installation of wireless antennas and
facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless Communications
Infrastructure Deployment Act (Section 67.5090, et. seq.,
RSMo.), Chapter 491, and other applicable law, including
written proof of consent of the landowner and of the structure
owner.
D. Underground Facilities And Above-Ground Facilities. [Ord. No. 3888,
12-20-2018]
1. Underground And Collocation Of Facilities Required; Exceptions.
In conjunction with the City's long-standing policy favoring
underground facilities, no person may erect, construct, or install
facilities above the surface of the right-of-way without the written
permission of the City based on good cause established by
applicant and found by the City, except as provided for herein or
where prohibited by applicable law. In addition, all new fiber optics,
coaxial, and similar cable facilities shall be located within existing
conduit, trenches, or other facilities to minimize unnecessary use of
right-of-way space, reduce potential existing or future interference
and obstructions, and to reduce the cost to the public or others
therefrom, and to maximize the public's ability to use and license
appropriate private or public uses of the right-of-way in the public
interest except where preempted by law or where good cause is
established and written permission granted by the City. Such
permission may be granted by the Board of Aldermen when other
similar facilities exist above-ground and conditions are such that
underground construction is impossible, impractical, or unfeasible,
as determined by the City, and when in the City's judgment the
above-ground construction has minimal aesthetic impact on the
area where the construction is proposed. Where reasonable and
appropriate and where adequate right-of-way exists, the ROW user
shall place above-ground facilities underground in conjunction with
City capital improvement projects and/or at specific locations
Section
510.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:570
requested by the City provided that such placement is practical,
efficient, and economically feasible. New utility poles and related
ground mounted equipment shall be permitted to be installed
above ground; provided, however, that to ensure unobstructed
pedestrian use and City maintenance of the ROW and minimize
visual obstructions for vehicular traffic, a new utility pole and
any ground mounted equipment related to that utility pole or the
equipment thereon shall not be installed within one hundred and
fifty (150) feet of another utility pole or other ground mounted
equipment on the same side of the ROW. A replacement utility pole
that is installed in lieu of an existing utility pole and is installed
within ten (10) feet of the existing utility pole, shall not be
considered a new utility pole subject to the spacing requirements
herein. Such spacing regulations as applied to that specific site
may be altered by the Board of Aldermen.
2. Notice Required. In the case of new construction or property
development, the developer or property owner shall give
reasonable written notice, to other potential ROW users as directed
by the City, of the particular date on which open trenching will be
available for installation of facilities. Costs of trenching and
easements required to bring facilities in the development shall be
borne by the developer or property owner; except that if the
facilities are not installed within five (5) working days of the date
the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the
developer or property owner, then once the trenches are thereafter
closed, the cost of new trenching shall be borne by the person
installing the facilities.
3. Excluded Facilities. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the
Director and Public Works Director may designate certain locations
or facilities in the right-of-way to be excluded from use by the
applicant for its facilities. In the event such exclusions conflict with
the reasonable requirements of the ROW user, the City will
cooperate in good faith with the ROW user to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, if available, provided that the City shall not be
required to incur financial cost nor require the City to acquire new
locations for the ROW. Such exclusions, include, but are not limited
to:
a. Ornamental or similar specially designed streetlights;
b. Designated historic areas;
c. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that do not have
electrical service adequate or appropriate for the proposed
facilities or cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading
thereof; provided, however, that a wireless provider, as defined
by Section 67.5111, RSMo., shall be permitted to replace
decorative poles when necessary to collocate a small wireless
facility so long as any such replacement pole reasonably
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:571
conforms to the design aesthetics of the decorative poles being
replaced;
d. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that in the
reasonable judgment of the Director and Public Works Director
are incompatible with the proposed facilities or would be
rendered unsafe or unstable by the installation; and
e. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that have been
designated or planned for other use or are not otherwise
available for use by the applicant due to engineering,
technological, proprietary, legal, or other limitations or
restrictions.
4. Location; Design. The design, location, and nature of all facilities
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director and
Public Works Director. Such review shall be on a nondiscriminatory
basis in application of City policy and approvals
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Above-ground facilities shall be
a neutral color and shall not be bright, reflective, or metallic. Black,
gray, and tan shall be considered neutral colors, as shall any color
that blends with the surrounding dominant color and helps to
camouflage the facilities. Facilities shall be located in such a
manner as to reduce or eliminate their visibility. All underground
mains and service lines with ancillary appurtenances thereto shall,
wherever practicable, be placed between the curb or pavement
edge and sidewalk line in the section of the street known as the
parkway. Where the pavement and sidewalk occupy the entire
street, the underground facilities shall be located under the
sidewalk, unless otherwise directed by the City. City height
limitations, applicable zoning restrictions, and general City policies
with regard to all users of the right-of-way shall also be applicable
to all facilities. The Director may establish such regulations or
policies as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to affect this
provision.
5. Exception. If the application of this Section excludes locations for
above-ground facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts
with the reasonable requirements of the applicant or State or
Federal law, the Director and Public Works Director shall cooperate
in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find suitable
alternatives, but the City shall not be required to incur any financial
cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant.
E. Relocation Of Equipment And Facilities.
1. City Required Relocation. The ROW user shall promptly remove,
relocate, or adjust any facilities located in the rights-of-way as
directed by the City when such is required by public necessity, or
public convenience and security require it, or such other findings in
the public interest that may require relocation, adjustment, or
Section
510.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:572
removal at the cost of the ROW user. Such removal, relocation,
or adjustment shall be performed by the ROW user within the
time frames established by the City and at the ROW user's sole
expense without any expense to the City, its employees, agents, or
authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules,
regulations, and schedules of the City pertaining to such.
2. Emergency Exception. In the event of an emergency or where
construction equipment or facilities create or are contributing to an
imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the City may, to the
extent allowed by law, remove, re-lay, or relocate such construction
equipment or the pertinent parts of such facilities without charge
to the City for such action or for restoration or repair. The City shall
attempt to notify the person having facilities in the rights-of-way
prior to taking such action, but the inability to do so shall not
prevent same. Thereafter, the City shall notify the person having
facilities in the rights-of-way as soon as practicable.
3. Third-Party Relocation. A person having facilities in the rights-ofway
shall, on the reasonable request of any person, other than the
City, holding a validly issued ROW permit, after reasonable advance
written notice, protect, support, or temporarily disconnect or
relocate facilities to accommodate such person and the actual cost,
reasonably incurred, of such actions shall be paid by the person
requesting such action. The person having facilities in the rights-ofway
taking such action may require such payment in advance.
4. Abandonment Exception. Rather than relocate facilities as
requested or directed, a ROW user may abandon the facilities if
approved by the City as provided in Subsection (F) of this Section.
5. ROW User Responsible For Damage. Any damages suffered by the
City, its agents, or its contractors to the extent caused by the ROW
user's failure to timely relocate, remove, or adjust its facilities, or
failure to properly relocate, remove, or adjust such facilities, shall
be borne by the ROW user. Where the ROW user shall fail to
relocate facilities as required by the City, the City may, but shall not
be required to, upon notice to ROW user remove the obstructing
facilities with or without further delay and ROW user shall bear all
responsibility and liability for the consequences therefrom, and the
City shall bear no responsibility to ROW user or others for damage
resulting from such removal.
6. No Vested Rights. No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of
property and no person shall be entitled to any compensation
therefor. No location of any facilities in the rights-of-way shall be a
vested interest or property right.
F. Removal, Abandonment, And Transfer Of Facilities.
1. Abandonment. If a person having facilities in the rights-of-way:
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:573
a. Installs the facilities in the rights-of-way without having
complied with the requirements of this Chapter, or
b. Abandons the facilities,
the City may require the removal of the facilities, remove the
facilities at the expense of the person having facilities in the
rights-of-way, take possession of the facilities in accordance
with applicable law, or require the transfer of the facilities as
provided herein.
2. Removal Required. If the City requires removal of the facilities, the
person shall obtain a ROW permit and shall abide by all
requirements of this Chapter. The liability, indemnity, insurance,
and bonding requirements required herein shall continue in full
force and effect during and after the period of removal and
restoration and until full compliance by the person with the terms
and conditions of the ROW permit and the requirements of this
Chapter.
3. Failure To Remove — Abandonment. If the person fails to remove
the facilities after having been directed to do so, the City may, to
the extent permitted by law, have the removal done at the person's
expense. Alternatively, the City may permit the abandonment,
without removal of the facilities, if the Director and Public Works
Director determines that abandonment is not likely to prevent or
significantly impair the future use, repair, excavation, facilities
maintenance, or construction of the rights-of-way.
4. Failure To Remove — Transfer. If the person fails to remove the
facilities after having been directed to do so, the City may, to the
extent permitted by law, decide that the ownership of the facilities
should be transferred to the City or to such person as directed by
the City. In either case the owner of the facilities shall submit a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to
the City, ownership of the facilities. The City may sell, assign, or
transfer all or part of the facilities so transferred.
5. Notice Required. Except when safety requires it, the City shall not
remove or seek to possess or transfer the facilities until thirty (30)
days have passed following written notice by the Director to the
person having facilities in the rights-of-way of the City's intent to so
act. The Director may choose not to act on good cause shown by the
person having facilities in the rights-of-way.
6. Nuisance. Facilities abandoned or otherwise left unused in
violation of this Chapter are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including,
but not limited to: (a) abating the nuisance, (b) taking possession
and ownership of the facility and restoring it to a useable function,
or (c) requiring the removal of the facility by the ROW user.
Section
510.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:574
G. City Facilities. To the extent permitted by law, during ROW work by a
ROW user, the City shall have the right to install and to thereafter
maintain, at its own cost, any parallel City facilities of its own that do
not unreasonably interfere with the operations of other facilities.
H. Tree Trimming. Upon ten (10) days' written notice and with the
supervision of the City or as otherwise provided by law or agreement,
the City may permit a ROW user to trim trees that overhang rights-ofway
of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with facilities in the ROW, at its own expense, subject to the
supervision and direction of the City. Nothing in this paragraph shall
authorize the trimming of trees on private property without permission
of the property owner. All cut materials shall be properly disposed.
Unless otherwise approved in writing by the City, a ROW user shall not
remove, cut or damage any trees or their roots in the rights-of-way.
I. Crossing Curbs.
1. Operator Prohibition. No person who operates or drives any heavy
equipment or other vehicle used for construction purposes shall
traverse, cross or otherwise drive over, or attempt to traverse,
cross or otherwise drive over, a curb, sidewalk, or crossing in the
rights-of-way at any point other than a properly installed curb cut,
unless the applicable curb, sidewalk, or crossing is sufficiently and
fully protected by the laying down of planks or materials which will
prevent injury thereto.
2. Property Owner Prohibition. No owner or occupant of any real
property shall cause, authorize, or allow any person who operates
or drives any heavy equipment or other vehicle used for
construction purposes to traverse, cross, or otherwise drive over,
or attempt to traverse, cross, or otherwise drive over, a curb,
sidewalk, or crossing in the rights-of-way on or abutting the real
property of such owner or occupant at any point other than a
properly installed curb cut, unless the applicable curb, sidewalk, or
crossing is sufficiently and fully protected by the laying down of
planks or materials which will prevent injury thereto.
3. Responsible For Damages. Any person who causes damage to the
curb, sidewalk, crossing or rights-of-way as a result of the
traversing, crossing, or otherwise driving over, or attempting to
traverse, cross, or otherwise drive over the curb, sidewalk, or
crossing with any heavy equipment or other vehicle used for
construction purposes shall be held responsible to the City for the
cost of repairing any break or injury and be in violation of Section
205.300 (Property Damage), as well as this Chapter.
J. Landscaping In Rights-Of-Way. Shrubs, bushes, flowers, or ornamental
grasses may be permitted within the rights-of-way as long as such does
not obstruct the view of vehicle or pedestrian traffic. New trees shall
not be authorized to be planted within the rights-of-way. In the event
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:575
Section 510.060. Performance And Maintenance Bonds. [Ord. No.
3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
the person severely disturbs or damages any tree or other landscaping
in the rights-of-way to the detriment of its health and safety, the City
shall remove such vegetation to protect the general welfare of the
public at the sole cost of the person that severely damaged of disturbed
the same. If a natural event shall severely disturb or damage a tree or
other landscaping in the rights-of-way, the City shall remove the same
but shall not be obligated to replace the same. In reviewing any ROW
permit application, the City may require the applicant to directionally
bore around or otherwise avoid disturbance to any tree or landscaping,
existing facility, or other protected area in the rights-of-way.
A. Performance And Maintenance Bonds.
1. Bond Required. Prior to any ROW work, a ROW user shall establish
in the City's favor a performance and maintenance bond in an
amount to be determined by the Director to guarantee the
restoration of the rights-of-way as more fully provided in Section
510.080(B)(6). The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a
period of forty-eight (48) months following completion of the work.
The Director may waive this requirement when the work involves,
as determined in the sole discretion of the Director, no or only
minor disruption or damage to the rights-of-way. The bond
requirement herein shall not apply to a ROW user who has on file
with the City an affidavit certifying that it has twenty-five million
dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so
exempted.
2. Failure To Satisfactorily Complete Restoration. If a ROW user fails
to complete the ROW work in a safe, timely, and competent manner
or if the completed restorative work fails without remediation
within the time period for the bond (as determined by the Director
and Public Works Director), then after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to cure, there shall be recoverable, jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or
loss suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the ROW user and the cost of completing work in
or restoring the rights-of-way, up to the full amount of the bond.
The City may also recover against the bond any amount
recoverable against a security fund or letter of credit where such
amount exceeds that available under a security fund or letter of
credit.
3. Release Of Bond. Upon completion of ROW work to the satisfaction
of the Director and Public Works Director and upon lapse of the
bond period, including any extension by the Director, the City shall
release the bond.
Section
510.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:576
4. Bond Terms. The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or
better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/
Casualty Edition, shall be subject to the approval of the City's
Attorney and shall contain the following endorsement: "This bond
may not be cancelled or allowed to lapse until sixty (60) days after
receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not
to renew."
5. Exceptions. In lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may
establish in the City's favor such other security as the Director may
determine to be commensurate with the noted bonding
requirements, including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be
maintained in the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). Additionally, in accordance with Section 67.5121(4),
RSMo., the bonds required for "small wireless facilities" as defined
in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act shall not
exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per "small
wireless facility" or more than seventy-five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) for all "small wireless facilities" within the ROW of a
ROW user. This exception to the City's bonding requirements shall
only apply as related to such "small wireless facilities" and shall not
otherwise alter the obligations of a ROW user to provide
appropriate bonds to the City for any other activities or operations.
[Ord. No. 3888, 12-20-2018]
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:577

ARTICLE III
ROW Permits
Section 510.070. ROW Permits Required. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2,
2-23-2017]
A. ROW Permit.
1. ROW Permit Required. Any person desiring to perform any ROW
work, must first apply for and obtain a ROW permit, in addition to
any other building permit, license, easement, franchise, ROW
agreement, or other authorization required by law. It shall be
unlawful for any person to conduct ROW work without a ROW
permit unless otherwise provided.
a. Excavation Permit. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
person shall install new facilities or perform excavation
without an excavation permit. Any person desiring to excavate
shall first apply for an excavation permit, on an application
form provided by the City, unless such excavation must be
performed on an emergency basis as provided herein. An
excavation permit should be obtained for each project unless
otherwise provided for in this Chapter. All excavation permits
shall expire after sixty (60) days from the date of issuance,
unless otherwise specified in the excavation permit. Each
excavation permit shall reference the restoration duty,
performance bond, and insurance requirements. An applicant
whose excavation permit application has been withdrawn,
abandoned, or denied for failure to comply with this Chapter
shall not be refunded the application fee.
b. Facilities Maintenance Permit. No person shall perform
facilities maintenance at a specified location in the rights-ofway
without first obtaining a facilities maintenance permit
from the Director, except where such facilities maintenance is
expressly authorized by an existing valid excavation permit for
the applicable facilities maintenance location. In addition to
the applicable conditions and obligations set forth in this
Chapter, conditions of a facilities maintenance permit shall be
as established in such permit and shall include requirements of
notice to and approval by the City whenever traffic lanes are to
be obstructed, manhole covers or safety barriers removed or
altered, temporary or other barricades installed, and other
events set forth in the facilities maintenance permit. All
facilities maintenance permits shall expire after sixty (60) days
from the date of issuance, unless otherwise specified in such
permit. A facilities maintenance permit shall not be required
for:
(1) ROW users performing routine maintenance which does
not require excavation, does not disrupt traffic or
Section
510.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.070
AO:579
pedestrians, and requires no more than four (4) hours to
complete, provided that at minimum two (2) hours' notice
is provided to the City during normal business hours;
(2) Emergency situations as more fully described in
Subsection (2) below; or
(3) Contractors working on the construction or reconstruction
of public improvements and which are operating pursuant
to a contract with the City for such construction.
(4) Routine maintenance on previously approved "small
wireless facilities," as defined by Section 67.5111, RSMo.,
replacement of such "small wireless facilities" that are the
same or smaller in size, weight, and height, or installation
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of
"micro wireless facilities," as defined by Section 67.5111,
RSMo., that are strung on cables between utility poles in
compliance with applicable safety and building codes,
when such work will not involve excavation, affect traffic
patterns, obstruct traffic in the ROW, or materially impede
the use of a sidewalk, and provided the ROW user submits
as-builts of such new "small wireless facilities" or "micro
wireless facilities" so the City may maintain an accurate
inventory of facilities installed in the ROW. [Ord. No.
3888, 12-20-2018]
2. Emergency Exception. In the event of an emergency requiring
immediate attention to avoid loss of damage to person or property,
it shall be sufficient that the person conducting the work shall as
soon as practicable notify the City of the location of the ROW work
and shall apply for the required ROW permit as soon as practicable
following the commencement of the work, not to exceed the third
business day thereafter.
3. Bulk Or Individual ROW permits. The Director may issue individual
ROW permits for each specific location or may issue bulk ROW
permit covering multiple projects, types of actions or locations
during a period of up to one (1) year that may be thereafter
performed during that year. Where a bulk ROW permit is proposed,
the applicant shall provide sufficient information regarding the
types of actions and locations to be approved so as to allow the
Director to condition and ensure compliance with safety and other
regulations herein.
4. Joint ROW Permit Applications. Applicants may apply jointly for
ROW permits at the same time and place. All joint applicants must
jointly execute all required documents and shall be jointly and
severally liable for all duties and obligations hereunder. Persons
who apply jointly may share in the payment of the application
Section
510.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.070
AO:580
deposit fee. Such persons must agree among themselves as to the
portion each shall pay.
5. ROW Permit Application. An application in the form provided by the
City for a ROW permit shall be submitted to the Director. The
Director may design and make available standard forms for such
applications, requiring such information as allowed by law and as
the Director determines in his or her discretion to be necessary and
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and to accomplish
the purposes of this Chapter. Each application shall at minimum
contain the following information, unless otherwise waived by the
Director:
a. The information required for a franchise or ROW agreement;
b. A description of the proposed ROW work, including a
conceptual master plan and an engineering site plan or other
technical drawing or depiction showing the nature,
dimensions, proposed depth of any conduit or any other
enclosures, location and description of the applicant's
proposed work or facilities, their proximity to other facilities
and streets that may be affected by the proposed work, the
number of street crossings and entrance crossings and their
locations and dimensions, if applicable, and the number and
character of each proposed cut or excavation;
c. Projected commencement and termination dates and
anticipated duration of the ROW work or, if such dates are
unknown, a representation that the applicant shall provide the
Director with reasonable advance notice of such dates once
they are determined;
d. Copies of any required certificates of insurance or
performance and maintenance bonds; and
e. ROW permit application fee as established by the City.
6. ROW Permit Review. The Director and Public Works Director shall
review each application on a form provided by the City for an
excavation permit and shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny
all such applications as provided herein within thirty-one (31) days
of receipt thereof. The Director and Public Works Director shall
review each application for a facilities maintenance permit and
shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny all such applications as
provided herein within a reasonable time.
7. ROW Permit Denial. The Director and Public Works Director may
deny an application for a ROW permit to the extent allowable by
State and Federal law, if denial is deemed to be in the public
interest, including for the following reasons:
Section
510.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.070
AO:581
a. Failure to provide information required by the application or
this Chapter;
b. Failure to return the rights-of-way to its previous condition
under previously issued ROW permits or after prior
excavations by the applicant;
c. For reasons of environmental, historic, or cultural sensitivity,
as defined by applicable Federal, State, or local law;
d. For the applicant's refusal to comply with alternative ROW
work methods, locations, or other reasonable conditions
required by the Director and Public Works Director;
e. For any other violations of or non-compliance caused by or
through the ROW user of any applicable City, State, or Federal
law or regulation, except where such violation is prohibited by
applicable law for being a basis for denial; and
f. For any other lawful reason to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the PSC or interfere with a ROW user's
right of eminent domain and, provided further, that such denial
is imposed on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory
basis. In determining whether the denial of a ROW permit is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, the
Director and Public Works Director may consider one (1) or
more of the following factors:
(1) The extent to which the rights-of-way space where the
ROW permit is sought is available, including the
consideration of competing demands for the particular
space in the rights-of-way, or other general conditions of
the rights-of-way;
(2) The applicability of any ordinance, code provision, or other
regulations that affects the location of facilities in the
rights-of-way;
(3) The degree and nature of disruption to surrounding
communities and businesses that will result from the use
of that part of the rights-of-way, including whether the
issuance of a ROW permit for the particular dates and/or
times requested would cause a conflict or interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event; and
(4) The failure to comply with applicable City ordinances, or
any other violation, unsafe conditions, or damage or
threatened harm to the rights-of-way or public, except
where such circumstance would otherwise not constitute a
lawful basis for denial of a ROW permit.
Section
510.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.070
AO:582
8. ROW Permit Issuance. Each ROW permit issued by the Director and
Public Works Director shall include: [Ord. No. 3888, 12-20-2018]
a. Projected commencement and termination dates or, if such
dates are unknown at the time the ROW permit is issued, a
provision requiring the applicant to provide the Director with
reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
b. Length of affected area, number of road crossings, and
identification and description of any pavement or curb cuts
included in the work;
c. Information regarding scheduling and coordination of work, if
necessary;
d. The location of any of the applicant's work or facilities, both
those proposed and existing, and the location of any known
facilities or other structures owned by another person that may
be affected by the proposed work; and
e. An acknowledgment and representation by the applicant to
comply with the terms and conditions of the ROW permit and
this Chapter.
Installation and collocation of a "small wireless facility" as defined by
Section 67.5111, RSMo., shall be completed within one (1) year of
issuance of the ROW permit or the ROW permit shall become null and
void and shall no longer authorize installation or collocation of such
"small wireless facility."
9. ROW Permit Specific Conditions. The Director and Public Works
Director may also impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance
of a ROW permit and the performance of ROW work in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and
safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the
disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. Such
reasonable conditions may include, but are not limited to:
a. The amount of excavation or facilities maintenance which may
occur at one (1) time and the amount of rights-of-way which
may be obstructed during construction;
b. The number or size of conduits or other facilities that may be
installed by each ROW user based on the reasonable needs to
ensure that no one (1) ROW user may unreasonably consume a
disproportionate amount of the available rights-of-way to deter
competition or deprive the public or others of the reasonable
use of the rights-of-way;
Section
510.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.070
AO:583
c. Posting of an additional or larger performance and
maintenance bond for additional facilities, except as otherwise
provided in Section 510.060 hereof, when the established
amount is reasonably determined to be insufficient;
d. The design, location, and nature of all facilities, based on a
non-discriminatory basis in ensuring the safe, efficient, and
appropriate use of the rights-of-way consistent with this
Chapter and applicable law; and
e. Other reasonable conditions regarding the timing, safety
precautions, space, or specific implementation of the specific
work proposed.
10. ROW Permit Revocation. The Director and Public Works Director
may, to the extent allowed by applicable law, revoke a ROW permit
without fee refund after notice and an opportunity to cure, but only
in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and material
conditions of the ROW permit or this Chapter or as otherwise
permitted by applicable law. Prior to revocation, the Director shall
provide written notice to the ROW user identifying any substantial
breach and allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than
thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure period may be
immediate if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public
safety. The cure period shall be extended by the Director on good
cause shown by the ROW user. A substantial breach, includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
a. A material violation of a provision of the ROW permit or this
Chapter;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
ROW permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW permit
application;
d. A failure to complete ROW work by the date specified in the
ROW permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW
user's control;
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Director, work that does not conform to
applicable national safety ordinances, industry construction
standards, this Chapter, or any other applicable ordinances;
and
f. Any other lawful reason.
Section
510.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.070
AO:584
11. Other Remedies. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a ROW
permit shall also be deemed a violation of this Chapter and in lieu
of revocation, the Director may initiate prosecution of the ROW
user for such violation.
12. Law Compliance Incorporation. Every ROW permit issued
hereunder shall incorporate the requirements and terms of this
Chapter, and all applicable ordinances, to the extent permitted by
law. The ROW user shall perform such work in accordance with the
issued ROW permit and applicable provisions of this Chapter and
any subsequent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted by
the City regarding excavation or facilities maintenance work. In
addition, all ROW users shall be subject to all technical
specifications, design criteria, policies, resolutions and ordinances
now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the
reasonable exercise of its police power relating to ROW permits
and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, facility location,
construction coordination, surface restoration, and other
requirements on the use of the rights-of-way. A ROW user shall
perform all excavations or facilities maintenance in full compliance
with all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved by the
City, and in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of
Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the PSC, FCC, and any
other local, State, or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the
parties. The ROW user shall comply with the excavation
requirements of Missouri One Call established by Sections 319.010
et seq., RSMo., as amended. A ROW user shall be responsible for all
excavations or facilities maintenance done in the rights-of-way on
its behalf, regardless of by whom the excavation or facilities
maintenance is done.
13. Subsurface Utility Engineering Survey. Unless determined by the
Director as unnecessary, prior to the commencement of any
construction or alteration of its facilities located in the rights-ofway,
the ROW user shall furnish to the Director a subsurface utility
engineering study on the proposed route of construction,
expansion, or alteration, which shall consist of the following:
a. All available plans, plats, and other location data indicating the
existence and approximate location of all facilities along the
proposed construction route;
b. Completion of a visual survey and written record of the
location and dimensions of any above-ground features of any
underground facilities along the proposed construction route
including, but not limited to, manholes, pedestals, valve boxes,
utility boxes, posts, and visible street cut repairs;
c. Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of
tasks (a) and (b) above onto the provider's proposed facilities
route maps, plan sheets, and digital files; and
Section
510.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.070
AO:585
d. Provide all such data collected into a digital file (or other
format as may be identified by the Director) and deliver a copy
to the Director.
Section
510.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.070
AO:586
ARTICLE IV
ROW Work Standards
Section 510.080. Standards For All ROW Work. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2,
2-23-2017]
A. Property Repair And Alterations.
1. No Damage. During any ROW work, the person doing the work
shall protect from damage any and all existing structures and
property belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all
rights-of-way, public property, or private property disturbed or
damaged during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the
person doing the work or the person on whose behalf the work is
being done and such person shall immediately notify the owner of
the fact of any damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall
be completed within a reasonable time specified by the Director
and Public Works Director and to their satisfaction.
2. Alterations. Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or
drainage system, or to any City, State, or other public structures or
facilities in the rights-of-way required on account of the
construction, installation, repair, or maintenance of facilities in the
rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the
owner of such facilities.
B. Restoring And Maintaining The Rights-Of-Way And Excavated Area.
1. Restoration. To complete any ROW work, the ROW user shall
restore the rights-of-way and surrounding areas, including, but not
limited to, any pavement, foundation, concrete slabs or curbs,
screening, landscaping or vegetation and shall comply with other
reasonable conditions of the Director and Public Works Director.
The Director and Public Works Director shall have the authority to
approve landscaping restoration that does not include street tree
replacement in accordance with the policy of this Chapter.
Restoration of the rights-of-way shall be completed within the dates
specified in the ROW permit unless the Director issues a waiver,
extension, or a new or revised ROW permit.
2. Backfill Requirements. It shall be the duty of any person making an
excavation in the rights-of-way to backfill such excavations and
restore the surface in accordance with the City's minimum
prescribed standards for such surfaces, this Chapter, and the
following standards as determined by the Public Works Director:
a. The Director shall be notified at least four (4) hours before
backfilling is begun and shall inspect the excavation as often as
is necessary. No excavated materials shall be allowed to
accumulate on the site of the work. Substitution may be made
Section
510.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.080
AO:587
for granular backfill only with the specific approval of the
Public Works Director.
b. Approved granular backfill material shall be composed of a
mixture of crushed stone or gravel and sand, free from clay
lumps and trash and conforming to the following analysis:
Passing one (1) inch screen one hundred percent (100%);
passing one-half (1/2) inch screen thirty-five percent (35%) to
sixty-five percent (65%); passing No. 50 screen not more than
twenty percent (20%); total clay and silt not more than twenty
percent (20%). Other materials may be used only when they
have the approval of the Public Works Director. Granular
backfill is to be placed in horizontal layers not greater than
four (4) inches before compacting and shall be thoroughly
compacted by mechanically operated tamping.
c. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of the
rights-of-way, twelve (12) inches of granular backfill will be
placed over exposed facilities and controlled low strength
material (CLSM) will fill the hole within eight (8) inches of the
finished surface for concrete pavements. There will be a plastic
membrane placed between the rock base and the CLSM to
prevent the material from bleeding into the rock base. The
remaining eight (8) inches will be restored by placing a twentyeight-
day minimum strength, four thousand five hundred
(4,500) psi concrete mix.
d. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of an
asphalt or combination street, twelve (12) inches of granular
backfill will be placed over exposed facilities and CLSM will fill
the hole within nine (9) inches of the finished surface. There
will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock base and
the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into the rock
base. The remaining nine (9) inches will be restored by placing
a six-inch thick, twenty-eight-day minimum strength, four
thousand five hundred (4,500) psi concrete mix under a three
(3) inch asphalt concrete lift of type C mix to meet existing
grades.
e. Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in residential
rights-of-way will be constructed of six (6) inches of compacted
rock base and three (3) inches of type C asphalt concrete mix.
Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in commercial
rights-of-way will be constructed of four (4) inches of
compacted rock base, seven and one-half (7.5) inches of type X
and three (3) inches of type C asphalt concrete mix. Concrete
driveway approaches will consist of a four-inch compacted
rock base and be a minimum of six (6) inches thick in
residential rights-of-way and eight (8) inches thick in
commercial rights-of-way.
Section
510.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.080
AO:588
3. Methods Of Pavement Removal, Excavation And Backfill. The
person making an excavation shall abide by the following
conditions:
a. The initial cut in a street pavement shall be equal to the width
of the trench with the option of being jack hammered or saw
cut. The final cut in an asphaltic concrete street pavement shall
be one (1) foot wider than the trench width and shall be made
only by saw cutting of the pavement.
b. For cuts in concrete paved streets, concrete pavement
replacement shall be full slab length (joint-to-joint) and full
slab width (curb or gutter to street centerline) unless
specifically authorized otherwise by the Public Works Director.
c. Refill excavation with suitable unfrozen materials free from
trash, rubbish, vegetative and deleterious material, and/or
rocks over three (3) inches in maximum dimension, in layers
not exceeding eight (8) inches in depth and each layer shall be
compacted thoroughly.
d. Compaction shall meet or exceed the most current version of
the standards and conditions of the City and the ASTM
International (American Society for Testing and Materials). If
inspections were not requested or a valid excavation permit
obtained, the City may require compaction testing by a
registered professional engineer licensed in the State of
Missouri at the ROW user's expense.
4. Failure To Restore. If a ROW user fails to restore the rights-of-way
to its reasonable before condition (including placement of sod to
restore any grassy areas unless such requirement is waived by the
Public Works Director in his/her sole discretion based on area
disturbed and weather conditions) within the date specified either
by the ROW permit or any extension thereof as granted by the
Director, the City may perform its own restoration. If the City
performs the restoration, the ROW user shall be responsible for
reimbursing the City's reasonable actual restoration costs within
thirty (30) days of invoice. The City may use the required
performance bond to repair the same, if necessary.
5. Inspection. If any person fails to contact the Director for an
inspection within a reasonable time, as determined by the
excavation permit issued for the excavation, after completion of the
work, to ensure that the rights-of-way or other public place has
been restored to as good a condition as it was previous to such
excavation being made, the excavation shall not be deemed
complete and the ROW user shall be in violation of this Chapter.
6. Guarantee. Every ROW user in restoring the rights-of-way, shall
guarantee its work and shall maintain it for forty-eight (48) months
following its completion in accordance with Section 67.1834,
Section
510.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.080
AO:589
RSMo. During the forty-eight (48) months, the ROW user shall,
upon notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using any method as required by the Director
and Public Works Director. Said work shall be completed within
a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, of
the receipt of notice from the Director (not including days during
which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting
force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable). In the event the ROW user is required to perform
new restoration pursuant to the foregoing guarantee, the Director
shall have the authority to extend the guarantee period for such
new restoration for up to an additional forty-eight (48) months,
or other greater period allowed by law, from the date of the new
restoration requirements. The foregoing shall not apply to living
materials restored in the rights-of-way, but living materials in the
rights-of-way shall be replaced (with the exception of street trees
unless otherwise directed by the Director and Public Works
Director to carry out the intent of this Chapter) and all reasonable
efforts shall be taken to assure their survival.
7. No Waiver. ROW user shall not be relieved of the obligation to
complete the necessary rights-of-way restoration and maintenance
because of the existence of any performance bond required by this
Chapter.
C. ROW Permit Displayed. At all times during the ROW work, ROW permits
shall be conspicuously displayed at the work site and shall be available
for inspection by the Director or Public Works Director.
D. Modification Requiring New ROW Permit. If at any time it appears that
the duration or scope of the ROW work is or will become materially
different from that allowed by the ROW permit, the ROW user shall
inform the Director. The Director may issue a waiver, an extension or
revised ROW permit, or require that the ROW user reapply for a ROW
permit in accordance with all requirements of this Chapter.
E. Hours. The ROW user shall perform ROW work effecting traffic at such
times that will allow the least interference with the normal flow of
traffic and the peace and quiet of the neighborhood as permitted by the
Director and Public Works Director. Unless otherwise provided by the
Director in the ROW permit, non-emergency ROW work on arterial and
collector streets may not be accomplished during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. in order to minimize disruption
of traffic flow.
F. Notification Of Street Closure. The ROW user shall notify the City no
less than five (5) working days in advance of any ROW work that would
require any street closure or would reduce traffic flow to less than two
(2) lanes of moving traffic for more than four (4) hours. Except in the
event of emergency ROW work as provided herein, no such closure
shall take place without notice and prior authorization from the City.
Section
510.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.080
AO:590
G. Barricades Required. All ROW work that affects vehicular or pedestrian
traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected at
the ROW users expense. In addition, whoever shall excavate adjacent to
and bordering any highway, thoroughfare, or public place, shall, during
the night, cause same to be fenced in with a substantial fence at least
three (3) feet high and shall cause a yellow light or other approved
warning light to be kept burning thereon during the night. Whoever
shall dig or cause to be dug in any highway, thoroughfare, or sidewalk a
vault or trench, shall arch or cover the same over and secure the
grating or covering of the opening thereof in such a manner as to
prevent persons, animals and vehicles from falling therein. Every ROW
user shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic control to the
area surrounding the work as determined by the Director and Public
Works Director.
H. Cleaning Up; Removing Mud From Vehicles. The person performing
ROW work under the requirements of this Chapter shall immediately,
after the work is completed and the refill is made, clean up and haul
away all surplus earth, rock, debris, or other rubbish. The person shall
remove dirt from the wheels of all vehicles leaving any site where mud
has accumulated on the wheels before such vehicles enter any public
street of the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any
vehicles to leave such place with mud on the wheels which is liable to
be dispersed over any public street of the City and it shall be unlawful
for any driver of a vehicle to enter upon the public streets of the City
without having removed or had mud removed from the wheels prior to
such entry. Each occurrence shall be a separate offense. The person
shall be responsible for damages to the City, or its contractors, resulting
from such failure and shall indemnify the City and its contractors as
provided herein and pay the costs for remedying such failure.
I. Safety Code Compliance. All ROW work shall be in accordance with all
applicable Sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970,
the National Electrical Safety Code, and other Federal, State, or local
laws and regulations that may apply including, without limitation, local
health, safety, construction, and zoning ordinances and laws and
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted. In the event of a conflict among ordinances and standards, the
most stringent ordinance or standard shall apply (except insofar as that
ordinance or standard, if followed, would result in a facility or other
structure that could not meet requirements of Federal, State or local
law).
J. Quality. All facilities and other structures shall be of good and durable
quality. All facilities shall be maintained in good and safe condition.
K. Safety Precautions. All safety practices required by law shall be used
during ROW work, including commonly accepted methods and devices
to prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury,
or nuisance to the public. All ROW work shall be conducted in
accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced
Section
510.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.080
AO:591
Section 510.090. Insurance And Indemnification. [Ord. No. 3663
§ 2, 2-23-2017]
and properly trained personnel so as not to endanger any person or
property or to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the rightsof-
way or legal rights of any property owner, including the City, or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
L. Contractor/Subcontractor Responsibility. Any contractor or
subcontractor of a person performing excavation or a ROW user must
be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable local
ordinances and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same
obligations with respect to its work as a ROW user would have pursuant
to this Chapter. All persons performing excavation and all ROW users:
1. Must ensure that contractors, subcontractors, and all employees
performing ROW work are trained and experienced;
2. Shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed
consistent with the ROW permit and applicable law;
3. Shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of contractors or
subcontractors; and
4. Shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by
any contractor or subcontractor.
M. No Advertising. A person performing excavation or a ROW user shall
not place or cause to be placed any sort of signs, advertisements, or
other extraneous markings on facilities or in the rights-of-way, whether
relating to the person performing excavation, ROW user or any other
person, except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City
as necessary to identify facilities for service, repair, maintenance or
emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be affixed by
applicable law or regulation.
N. Street Boring. Street crossings will be bored at the direction of the
Director and Public Works Director.
O. As-Built Required. After the completion of ROW work, the person
performing the ROW work or the ROW user shall provide to the City asbuilt
drawings, maps or other comparable records as determined by the
Director, drawn to scale and certified to the City as reasonably
depicting the location of all facilities or other structures constructed
pursuant to the ROW permit. Such records may be provided to the
Director in the form maintained by the person performing excavation or
the ROW user, but when available, shall be submitted in automated
formats that are compatible with City systems, as determined by the
Director, or in hard copy otherwise.
A. Insurance.
Section
510.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.090
AO:592
1. Insurance Required. Before a ROW agreement, franchise, or ROW
permit as herein provided is issued, before any excavation begins,
and before a ROW user has facilities in the rights-of-way, the
applicant shall file with the City evidence that such applicant has
comprehensive general liability and property damage insurance
that includes contractual liability coverage with minimum limits in
no event less than the maximum amounts of liability set forth in
Section 537.610, RSMo., applicable to political subdivisions. The
insurance shall protect the City from and against all claims by any
person whatsoever for loss or damage from personal injury, bodily
injury, death, or property damage that may arise from the
excavation or use of the ROW. Any deductible above fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) is not permitted. All general liability insurance
policies shall name the City, its officers, boards, board members,
commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees as additional
insureds with full an equivalent coverage as the insured under the
policy and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction
in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days' prior
written notice thereof has been given to the Director. A person
performing excavation or ROW user shall not cancel any required
insurance policy without submission of proof that it has obtained
alternative insurance that complies with this Chapter.
2. Form. All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do
business in the State of Missouri with an "A" or better rating of
insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition
and in a form approved by the City.
3. Copy Required. A copy of the insurance certificates and any other
documentation necessary to show compliance with the insurance
requirements herein must be on file with the City Clerk.
4. Exceptions.
a. The Director may exempt in writing from these insurance
requirements any self-insured person performing excavation or
ROW user, provided that the person performing excavation or
ROW user demonstrates to the Director's satisfaction that the
self-insurance plan is commensurate with said requirements,
that the person performing excavation or ROW user has
sufficient resources to meet all potential risks, liabilities, and
obligations contemplated by the requirements of this Chapter,
and that such waiver is in the public interest. The Director may
require a security fund or letter of credit as a condition to a
self-insured's exemption.
b. The Director may waive this requirement or reduce the amount
of insurance so required when in the Director's sole discretion,
the work involves no or only minor disruption or damage to the
rights-of-way.
Section
510.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.090
AO:593
c. The insurance requirements in this Section or otherwise shall
not apply to an entity to the extent and for such period during
an agreement, franchise, license, or ROW permit issued
hereunder if such person is exempted from such requirements
pursuant to Section 67.1830(6)(a), RSMo., and has on file with
the City an affidavit certifying that the entity has twenty-five
million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise
therefore so exempted unless otherwise provided by
agreement or franchise. Additionally, in accordance with
Section 67.5121(3), RSMo., a self-insured ROW user shall not
be required to obtain insurance naming the City as an
additional insured solely to the extent such ROW user is
utilizing "small wireless facilities" as defined in the Uniform
Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act within the ROW. This
exception to the City's insurance requirements shall only apply
as related to such "small wireless facilities" and shall not
otherwise alter the obligations of a ROW user to provide
appropriate insurance to the City for any other activities or
operations. [Ord. No. 3888, 12-20-2018]
B. Indemnification. Any person performing excavation or a ROW user as a
condition of use of the right-of-way shall at its sole cost and expense
fully indemnify, protect, defend (with counsel acceptable to the City),
and hold harmless the City, its municipal officials, officers, employees,
and agents, from and against any and all claims, demands, suits,
proceedings, and actions, liability, and judgment by other persons for
damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including attorney fees, arising,
directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from the action or inaction of
the person performing excavation or ROW user, its agents,
representatives, employees, contractors, subcontractors, or any other
person for whose acts the person performing excavation or ROW user
may be liable, in constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing,
restoring, or removing facilities or other structures, or use of the rightof-
way or the activities performed, or failed to be performed, by the
person performing excavation or ROW user under this Chapter or
applicable law, or otherwise, except to the extent arising from or caused
by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the City, its
elected officials, officers, employees, agents, or contractors. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to prevent the City or any agent from
participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at
their own expense. Such participation shall not under any
circumstances relieve the person from the duty to defend against
liability or its duty to pay any judgment entered against the City or its
agents. This indemnification shall survive the expiration or termination
of any ROW agreement, license, or ROW permit for a period of five (5)
years after the effective date of expiration or termination. Provided,
however, that in accordance with Section 67.5121(2), RSMo., a ROW
user which is a wireless provider, as defined by Section 67.5111,
RSMo., for and in relation to that wireless providers operation of "small
wireless facility" as defined in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility
Section
510.090
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.090
AO:594
Section 510.100. Interference Standards For All Excavation Work.
[Ord. No. 3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
Section 510.110. Jurisdiction, Inspection, Stop Work Orders,
Penalties, And Appeals. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2, 2-23-2017]
Deployment Act within the ROW shall only indemnify and hold the City,
its officers, and employees, harmless against any damage or personal
injury caused by the negligence of the ROW user, its employees, agents,
or contractors. This exception shall only apply to the ROW user's "small
wireless facilities" and shall not otherwise alter the obligations of a
ROW user to provide indemnification to the City for any other activities
or operations. [Ord. No. 3888, 12-20-2018]
A. Least Interference Required. All excavation in the rights-of-way or
other public place shall be placed where they will cause the least
possible inconvenience to the public. The width and length of the
excavation shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work and
sheathing and bracing shall be used as necessary to keep the sides of
the trench vertical and to prevent caving. Adequate provision for the
proper drainage of the areas surrounding the work shall be maintained
at all times.
B. Minimum Encumbrance Required. No person shall open or encumber
more of the rights-of-way than is reasonably necessary to complete the
excavation or ROW work in the most expeditious manner or allow an
excavation to remain open longer than is necessary to complete the
work.
C. Interference Control. The person performing excavation shall cause the
excavation to be done with the least possible injury to the pavement,
sidewalk, curbing, parkway, or other surface and shall place the
materials from the excavation where they will cause the least possible
inconvenience to the public and permit the uninterrupted passage of
water along the gutters. The width of the excavation shall be no greater
than is necessary for doing the work.
D. Erosion Control. Before new excavation or construction is commenced
and until sodding, planting, concreting, paving, or other final surfacing
is in place, which will avoid washing or spreading of dirt and mud onto
other property, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the rights-of-way,
the person performing excavation shall erect and maintain approved
temporary erosion control measures to prevent such washing or
spreading of materials. At the end of each day and as required
throughout the day during the course of excavating or construction, dirt
and mud on the sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the rights-of-way
resulting from work must be removed.
A. Inspections. All ROW work and facilities shall be subject to inspection
by the City and the supervision of all Federal, State, and local
authorities having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance
Section
510.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.110
AO:595
Section 510.120. Reservation Of Rights. [Ord. No. 3663 § 2,
2-23-2017]
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the City by this Chapter,
the City reserves unto itself every right and power which is required to
be reserved by a provision of any ordinance under any registration, ROW
with all applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and
regulations, and the ROW permit.
B. Stop Work Orders. The Director and Public Works Director shall have
full access to all portions of the ROW work and may issue stop work
orders and corrective orders to prevent unauthorized work or
substandard work as established herein. Except in cases of an
emergency or with approval of the Director or Public Works Director, no
ROW work may be done in violation of a stop work order issued by the
Director. Such orders:
1. May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the address(es)
listed on the application for the ROW permit or the person in
charge of the construction site at the time of delivery;
2. Shall state that substandard work or work not authorized by the
ROW permit is being carried out, summarize the substandard or
unauthorized work, and provide a period of no longer than thirty
(30) days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate
if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety;
and
3. May be enforced by equitable action in the Circuit Court of St.
Louis County, Missouri and in such case the person responsible for
the substandard or unauthorized work shall be liable for all costs
and expenses incurred by the City in enforcing such orders,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, in addition to any and all
penalties established in this Chapter.
C. Appeals. Unless otherwise required by law, the review procedures set
forth in Chapter 160 of this Code shall govern appeals by any aggrieved
person of a final action of any City officer, employee, board,
commission, or the Board of Aldermen under this Chapter that are
claimed by an aggrieved person to be unlawful or an unconstitutional
taking of property without compensation. To the fullest extent
permitted by law, the review procedures of Chapter 160 shall be
exhausted before any action may be filed in any court against the City
or its officers, employees, boards, officials, or commissions.
D. Penalties. In addition to any other penalties and remedies for violations
that may exist in law or equity, any person that violates any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to such penalties as set forth in Section
100.060 of the City Code per day for each and every day the violation
exists or continues.
Section
510.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
510.120
AO:596
permit, or other authorization granted under this Chapter, and as may
be authorized by Chapter 67, RSMo., and other authority applicable to
regulation of the use of the rights-of-way. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall not infringe
upon the rights of any person pursuant to any applicable State or Federal
statutes, including, but not limited to any right that may exist to occupy the
rights-of-way.
Section
510.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.120
AO:597
Chapter 515
FLOODWAY FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section 515.010. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and
Purposes. [R.O. 2006 §535.010; Ord. No. 1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord.
No. 3478 §2, 12-18-201475]
A. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in
Section 79.110, RSMo., delegated to the City the power to enact and
ordain any and all ordinances not repugnant to the constitution and
laws of this State that the City deems expedient for the good
government of the City, the preservation of peace and good order, the
benefit of trade and commerce and the health of the inhabitants which
would include adopting floodplain management regulations designed to
protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Board of
Aldermen of the City of Fenton, Missouri, ordains as follows:
B. Findings Of Fact.
1. Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of the City of Fenton, Missouri, are subject to
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
2. General Causes Of The Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused
by:
a. The cumulative effect of development in any delineated
floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities;
and
b. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
3. Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard
engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a
series of interrelated steps.
a. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors
as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated,
and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this
75.Editor’s Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 3478 also adopted the Federal Insurance
Administrator’s FIS and illustrative map materials for St. Louis County dated 2-4-2015, as
amended.
Section
510.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.010
AO:598
Section 515.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §535.020; Ord. No. 1872
§1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2, 12-18-2014]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood".
Chapter is representative of large floods which are
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this Chapter. It is in the general
order of a flood which could be expected to have a one-percent
chance of occurrence in any one (1) year as delineated on
the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative
materials for St. Louis County dated February 4, 2015, as
amended, and any future revisions thereto.
b. Calculation of water surface profiles is based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
c. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood
without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any
point.
d. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in
flood height.
e. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base
flood.
C. Statement Of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses
described in this Chapter; to establish or maintain the community's
eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3);
and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the
provisions of this Chapter to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction; and
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
Section
515.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:599
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "appurtenant structure".
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "risk premium rates".
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and livestock.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.
APPEAL — A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Is the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure".
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER or CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The official
of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and
administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY or PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
Section
515.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:600
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of
inland and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in
any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:601
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, or structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a Registered Historic District;
2.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
4.
Section
515.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:602
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE or FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior, or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:603
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — Also known as an "eligible community",
means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of
flood insurance.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and
local governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least fifty-one percent (51%) of
the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management
regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard".
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and
AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial-improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
515.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:604
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State government,
or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by State Statute
at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL-DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss
buildings (see definition). For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. The term
does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year
period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the building.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
3. Any improvement to a building.
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:605
For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
done. The term does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequent frequencies in the floodplain.
Section 515.030. General Provisions. [R.O. 2006 §535.030; Ord. No.
1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2, 12-18-2014]
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized
as repetitive loss.
3.
A. Land To Which This Chapter Applies. This Chapter shall apply to all
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Fenton, Missouri, identified
as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for St. Louis County on map panels
29189C0311K, 29189C0312K, 29189C0313K, 29189C0314K,
29189C0316K, 29189C0318K, and 29189C0319K dated February 4,
2015, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas
covered by this Chapter, no development shall be permitted except
through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by
Section
515.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:606
Section 515.040. Administration. [R.O. 2006 §535.040; Ord. No.
1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2, 12-18-2014]
the Board of Aldermen or its duly designated representative under
such safeguards and restrictions as the Board of Aldermen or the
designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion
and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the
community, and as specifically noted in Section 515.050.
B. Floodplain Administrator. The Maintenance Worker III/Project
Management is hereby designated as the official Floodplain
Administrator under this Chapter (hereinafter "Floodplain
Administrator"). [Ord. No. 3655 § 1, 12-19-2016]
C. Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard
areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
E. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State
Statutes.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does not imply that areas
outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Chapter
shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Fenton, any officer or
employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance
on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
G. Severability. If any Section, clause, provision, or portion of this Chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
A. Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development permit shall
be required for all proposed construction or other development,
including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described
in Section 515.030(A). No person, firm, corporation, or unit of
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.040
AO:607
government shall initiate any development or substantial-improvement
or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate
floodplain development permit for each structure or other
development.
B. Designation Of Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this
Chapter.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited to:
1. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the
floodplain development permit requirements of this Chapter have
been satisfied.
2. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for
proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local
law.
3. Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
4. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications.
5. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
6. Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall
be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse.
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures.
8. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential
structures have been floodproofed.
9. When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall require
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
Section
515.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.040
AO:608
Section 515.050. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction. [R.O.
2006 §535.050; Ord. No. 1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2,
12-18-2014]
D. Application For Floodplain Development Permit. To obtain a floodplain
development permit, the applicant shall first file an application, in
writing, on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain
development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe
or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Project/Code Enforcement Manager;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
A. General Standards.
1. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any
numbered or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied.
2. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the one-hundred-year flood; however, the
base flood elevation is not provided. Development within
unnumbered A Zones is subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If
Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or
Section
515.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:609
floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other
sources.
3. Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be
permitted within any numbered A Zone or AE Zone on the FIRM,
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point
within the community.
4. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantialimprovements,
prefabricated structures, placement of
manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:
a. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
b. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
c. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood
damages;
d. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
e. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal
systems be located so as to avoid impairment or
contamination; and
f. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located
within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
Section
515.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:610
(4) All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5)
acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within
such proposals base flood elevation data.
5. Storage, material, and equipment.
a. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
b. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after a flood warning.
6. Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and
limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on
the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than four
hundred (400) square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wetfloodproofed
provided there is no human habitation or occupancy
of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance
has been granted from the standard floodplain management
requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain development permit
has been issued.
7. Critical facilities.
a. All new or substantially improved critical non-residential
facilities, including, but not limited, to governmental buildings,
police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal
institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping
stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation
maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency
aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated above the fivehundred-
year flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the fivehundred-
year flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
regulations.
b. All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the
elevation of the five-hundred-year flood.
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:611
8. Hazardous materials. All hazardous material storage and handling
sites shall be located out of the floodplain.
9. Non-conforming use. A structure, or the use of a structure or
premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the
ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
a. If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for
twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building
shall conform to this Chapter.
b. If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost
is more than fifty percent (50%) of the pre-damaged market
value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost
of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local
inventory of historic places upon determination.
B. Specific Standards. In all areas identified as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, where base flood elevation data
have been provided, as set forth in Section 515.050(A)(2), the following
provisions are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantialimprovement
of any residential structures, including manufactured
homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
two (2) feet above base flood elevation.
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantialimprovement
of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to two (2) feet above
the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of
this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Section 515.040(C)(7).
3. Require, for all new construction and substantial-improvements
that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
Section
515.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:612
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
b. The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Manufactured Homes.
1. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones, on the community's FIRM shall
be required to be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may,
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors.
2. Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones,
on the community's FIRM on sites:
a. Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
b. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c. In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
d. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial-damage
as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be
securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
3. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE
Zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the
provisions of Section 515.050(C)(2), of this Chapter, be elevated so
that either:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet
above the base flood level; or
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:613
b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height
above grade and be securely attached to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
D. Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
Section 515.030(A) of this Chapter are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following
provisions shall apply:
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one
(1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial-improvements, and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
3. If Section 515.050(D)(2) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial-improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Section 515.050.
4. In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from Federal, State, or other sources as set
forth in Section 515.050(A)(2) of this Chapter.
E. Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on
the community's FIRM either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use76, or
3. Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes of this Chapter.
76.Editor's Note: A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Section
515.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.060
AO:614
Section 515.060. Floodplain Management Variance Procedures.
[R.O. 2006 §535.060; Ord. No. 1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2,
12-18-201477]
A. Establishment Of Appeal Board. The Board of Adjustment as
established by the City of Fenton shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements
of this Chapter.
B. Responsibility Of The Appeal Board. Where an application for a
floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations is denied by the Floodplain
Administrator the applicant may apply for such floodplain development
permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment, as defined in
Section 515.060(A) of the Chapter.
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
C. Further Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the St. Louis
County Circuit Court, as provided in Chapter 536, RSMo.
D. Floodplain Management Variance Criteria. In passing upon such
applications for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all
technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this Chapter, and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood
damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
77.Editor’s Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 3478 also changed the title of Section 515.060 from
"Variance Procedures" to "Floodplain Management Variance Procedures."
Section
515.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.060
AO:615
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets,
and bridges.
E. Conditions For Approving Floodplain Management Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subsections (E)(2) through (E)(6) below have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of
historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity
will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
6. A community shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the
signature of a community official that:
Section
515.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.060
AO:616
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required by this Chapter.
F. Conditions For Approving Variances For Accessory Structures. Any
variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Sections 515.060(E)
and 515.060(D) of this Chapter and any other conditions the Board
finds are necessary to protect the public health and safety.
In order to minimize flood damages during the one-hundred-year flood
and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions,
at minimum, shall be included for any variance issued for accessory
structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
1. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
2. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (e.g.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Section 515.050(A)(4)(b) of
this Chapter.
3. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with 515.050(A)(4)(a) of this Chapter. All of the
building's structural components must be capable of resisting
specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
4. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Section 515.050(A)(4)(d) of this Chapter.
5. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one-hundred-year
flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
Section
515.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.060
AO:617
Section 515.070. Penalties For Violation. [R.O. 2006 §535.070; Ord.
No. 1872 §1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2, 12-18-2014]
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Fenton
or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 515.080. Amendments. [R.O. 2006 §535.080; Ord. No. 1872
§1, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 3478 §2, 12-18-2014]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 515.050(B)(3) of this
Chapter.
6. The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions in Section
515.050(D)(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the one-hundred-year
flood.
7. Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from
any flood damage.
8. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the accessory structures.
9. A community shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the
signature of a community official that, one (1) The issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result
in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage, and (2) Such construction below
the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such
notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this Chapter.
10. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the community and registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
Section
515.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
515.080
AO:618
inconsistency. This Chapter shall be amended as required by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
All subsequent amendments to this Chapter are subject to the approval
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and/or the Missouri State
Emergency Management Agency.78
Chapter 600
INTOXICATING LIQUOR
Section 600.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-201679]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
CLOSED PLACE — A place where all doors are locked and where no patrons
are in the place or about the premises.
DISORDERLY PLACE OR HOUSE — A licensee under this Chapter is
maintaining or operating a disorderly place or house when the following
violations occur:
1. Any acts of immorality;
2. Any acts of lewd conduct (including as set forth in Section 600.056);
3. Breaches of the peace;
4. Exceeding occupancy limit of premises;
5. Suffering or permitting any acts prohibited under this Chapter;
6. Violation(s) of any provision of this Chapter;
Violation(s) of other City ordinances or State law or State regulations
applicable to the premises;
7.
The liquor and/or business license was obtained through materially
false statements in the application for such license;
8.
The licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all pertinent
information in the application for such liquor and/or business license;
9.
The licensee, since the issuance of such license, has ceased to be the
person actually engaged in the active control and management of the
10.
78.Editor's Note: Former Section 515.090, Additional Standards Recommended By FEMA
Region VII, which immediately followed, derived from R.O. 2006 §535.090; Ord. No. 1872
§1, 6-20-1995, was repealed 12-18-2014 by §2 of Ord. No. 3478.
79.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 600, Intoxicating Liquor, containing Sections 600.010
through 600.110, which derived from R.O. 2006 §§ 600.020, 600.060, 600.130, 600.260,
600.300 — 600.310; Ord. No. 1530 § 1, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 1687 § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No.
1792 § 1, 9-20-1994; Ord. No. 2610 § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 3613 §§ 1 — 5, 7-28-2016,
was repealed 9-22-2016 by § 1 of Ord. No. 3625.
Section
515.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:619
FAILED TO KEEP AN ORDERLY PLACE OR HOUSE — A licensee under this
Chapter has:
FESTIVAL — Any music festival, dance festival, rock festival or similar
musical activity likely to attract five thousand (5,000) or more people at
such an activity which will continue for a period of twelve (12) hours or
more, at which music is provided by paid or amateur performers or by
prerecorded means, and which is held at any place within the City, and to
which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — All interest, legal or beneficial, direct and
indirect, in the capital devoted to the licensed enterprise and all such
interest in the net profits of the enterprise, after the payment of reasonable
and necessary operating business expenses and taxes, including interest in
dividends, preferred dividends, interest and profits, directly or indirectly
paid as compensation for or in consideration of interest in or for use of
the capital devoted to the enterprise, or for property or money advanced,
loaned or otherwise made available to the enterprise, except by way of
ordinary commercial credit or bona fide bank credit not in excess of credit
customarily granted by banking institutions, whether paid as dividends,
interest or profits, or in the guise of royalties, commissions, salaries, or any
other form whatsoever.
particular establishment for which the liquor and/or business license
was issued;
The licensed premises are no longer used for the purposes permitted by
the liquor and/or business license and after five (5) days' written notice,
the licensee has failed to respond or satisfactorily explain the change;
or
11.
Anything has occurred which would render the licensed premises
ineligible or unsuitable for a liquor and/or business license under the
provisions of this Chapter.
12.
1. Had the Police called frequently to the licensed premises;
2. Failed to control the licensed premises;
Sold intoxicating liquor or beer at the licensed premises to minors or
persons already intoxicated;
3.
Failed to cooperate with properties neighboring the licensed premises;
and/or
4.
Failed to cooperate with reasonable suggestions pertaining to the
licensed premises made by the Police Department or the Supervisor of
Liquor Control.
The list of examples of failure to keep an orderly place or house shall
be by way of example only and shall not be deemed to be exclusive in
nature.
5.
Section
600.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.010
AO:620
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Alcohol for beverage purposes, including
alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or
combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented,
and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess
of one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) by volume. All beverages having an
alcoholic content of less than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) by volume
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
LIGHT WINES — An intoxicating liquor consisting of wine containing not
in excess of fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight made exclusively
from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables.
MALT LIQUOR — An intoxicating liquor containing alcohol not in excess of
five percent (5%) by weight manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of
hops or pure barley malt, or wholesome grains or cereals, and wholesome
yeast, and pure water.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any package sealed or otherwise closed by the
manufacturer so as to consist of a self-contained unit, and consisting of
one (1) or more bottles or other containers of intoxicating liquor, where the
package and/or container(s) describes the contents thereof as intoxicating
liquor. "Original package" shall also be construed and held to refer to any
package containing one (1) or more standard bottles, cans, or pouches of
beer.
PERSON — An individual, association, firm, joint stock company, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator or any other officer
appointed by any State or Federal court.
PREMISES — The portion of any building in which a licensee under this
Chapter has his/her place of business and any additional building or portion
thereof used in connection therewith, and the entire lot or lots, parcel or
parcels of land on which said buildings are situated, or which are used in
connection with the buildings.
RESIDENT CORPORATION — A corporation incorporated under the laws of
this State, all the officers and directors of which, and all the stockholders,
who legally and beneficially own or control sixty percent (60%) or more
of the stock in amount and in voting rights, shall be qualified legal voters
and taxpaying citizens of the County and municipality in which they reside
and who shall have been bona fide residents of the State for a period
of three (3) years continuously immediately prior to the date of filing
of application for a license, provided that a stockholder need not be a
voter or a taxpayer, and all the resident stockholders of which shall own,
legally and beneficially, at least sixty percent (60%) of all the financial
interest in the business to be licensed under this law; provided, that no
corporation, licensed under the provisions of this law on January 1, 1947,
nor any corporation succeeding to the business of a corporation licensed on
January 1, 1947, as a result of a tax-free reorganization coming within the
provisions of Section 112, United States Internal Revenue Code, shall be
disqualified by reason of the new requirements herein, except corporations
engaged in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages containing alcohol in
excess of five percent (5%) by weight, or owned or controlled, directly or
Section
600.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:621
indirectly, by non-resident persons, partnerships or corporations engaged in
the manufacture of alcoholic beverages containing alcohol in excess of five
percent (5%) by weight.
RESORT — Any establishment having at least thirty (30) rooms for the
overnight accommodation of transient guests having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least sixty percent (60%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food, or means
a restaurant provided with special space and accommodations where, in
consideration of payment, food, without lodging, is habitually furnished
to travelers and customers, and which restaurant establishment's annual
gross receipts immediately preceding its application for a license shall not
have been less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per year
with at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts from
non-alcoholic sales, or means a seasonal resort restaurant with food sales
as determined in Subsection (2) of Section 311.095, RSMo. Any facility
which is owned and operated as a part of the resort may be used to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises of such
facility and, for the purpose of meeting the annual gross food receipts
requirements of this definition, if any facility which is a part of the resort
meets such requirement, such requirement shall be deemed met for any
other facility which is a part of the resort.
RESTAURANT-BAR — Any establishment having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income of
which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such
premises.
SALE BY THE DRINK — The sale of any intoxicating liquor except malt
liquor, in the original package, in any quantity less than fifty (50) milliliters.
Section 600.020. License Required — Classes Of Licenses. [Ord. No.
3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
A. License Required. No person shall sell or offer for sale intoxicating
liquor in the City of Fenton without a currently valid liquor license
issued by the City. A separate liquor license shall be required for each of
the categories and subcategories of liquor sales in which the licensee
desires to engage as set forth herein.
B. General Licenses. A separate license shall be taken out for each of the
following classes of licenses subject to annual renewal and payment of
fees as set forth herein:
1. Manufacturing, Brewing, Etc. — Licenses.
a. For the privilege of manufacturing and brewing in this City
malt liquor and the privilege of selling to duly licensed
wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of malt liquors,
to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within this City,
the sum of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00).
Section
600.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.020
AO:622
b. For the privilege of manufacturing in this City intoxicating
liquor containing not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of
alcohol by weight and the privilege of selling to duly licensed
wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating
liquor containing not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of
alcohol by weight, to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler
within this City, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
c. For the privilege of manufacturing, distilling or blending
intoxicating liquor of all kinds within this City and the privilege
of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for
the sale of intoxicating liquor of all kinds, to, by or through a
duly licensed wholesaler within this City, the sum of six
hundred seventy-five dollars ($675.00).
2. Liquor Solicitor.
a. For the privilege of selling to a duly licensed wholesaler and
soliciting orders for the sale of malt liquor or beverage
containing not in excess of five percent (5%) of alcohol by
weight, to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within this
City, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
b. For the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and
soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor containing
not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of alcohol by weight,
to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler, within this City,
the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
c. For the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and
soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor of all kinds,
to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler within this City,
the sum of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00).
3. Liquor Manufacturer/Solicitor — Licenses.
a. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor containing not in
excess of five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight by a wholesaler
to a person duly licensed to sell such malt liquor at retail and
the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and
soliciting orders for the sale of malt liquor containing not in
excess of five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight, to, by or
through a duly licensed wholesaler within this City, the sum of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
b. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor containing not in
excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of alcohol by weight by a
wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating
liquor at retail and the privilege of selling to duly licensed
wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating
liquor containing not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of
Section
600.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.020
AO:623
alcohol by weight, to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler
within this City, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
c. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor of all kinds by a
wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating
liquor at retail the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00); provided, however, that a license authorizing the
holder to sell to duly licensed wholesalers and to solicit orders
for sale of intoxicating liquor, to, by or through a duly licensed
wholesaler shall not entitle the holder thereof to sell within the
City of Fenton, direct to retailers; provided, further, a
wholesaler's license shall not authorize or entitle the holder
thereof to sell to other wholesalers or to solicit orders for the
sale of intoxicating liquors to, by or through a duly licensed
wholesaler, within this City.
4. Original Package — Licenses.
a. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor at retail in the
original package, where such liquor shall not be consumed
upon, or such original package not be opened upon, the
premises where sold, the sum of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
b. For a permit authorizing the sale of malt liquor by grocers and
other merchants and dealers in the original package direct to
consumers but not for resale, a fee of seventy-five dollars
($75.00) per year. This license may include Sunday sales from
9:00 a.m. to Midnight.
c. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor in the original
package at retail between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and Midnight
on Sundays, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
5. Liquor By The Drink — Licenses. Sales by the drink may be made
only by a holder of a retail liquor dealer's license and, when so
made, the container in every case shall be emptied and the
contents thereof served as other intoxicating liquors sold by the
drink are served.
a. For the privilege of selling at retail by the drink, for
consumption on the premises where sold, malt liquor or
beverages containing alcohol not in excess of five percent (5%)
by weight, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). This license
may include Sunday sales from 9:00 a.m. to Midnight.
b. For the privilege of selling at retail by the drink, for
consumption on the premises where sold, all kinds of
intoxicating liquor, including the sale of intoxicating liquor in
the original package, the sum of four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00).
Section
600.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.020
AO:624
c. For the privilege of selling malt liquor or light wines, or both
such malt liquor and wine, to be sold by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises where sold, the sum of seventyfive
dollars ($75.00).
d. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor by the drink on
Sundays in a "restaurant-bar" the licensee shall pay an
additional fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for Sunday
sales.
e. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor by the drink on
Sundays in a "resort" the licensee shall pay an additional fee of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for Sunday sales.
C. Miscellaneous Licenses/Permits. A separate license shall be taken out
for each of the following:
1. Temporary Permit For Sale By Drink. Any person who possesses the
qualifications, meets the requirements and complies with the
provisions of this Chapter, including Section 600.030(C) below, may
apply for a special permit to sell intoxicating liquor for
consumption on premises where sold pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter. The fee for said temporary permit for sale by the drink
to be limited to a maximum of seven (7) days, shall be thirty-seven
dollars fifty cents ($37.50).
2. Tasting Permit. Any person who is licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor in the original package at retail under Subsections (B)(4)(a)
and (c) of this Section above may apply for a special permit to
conduct wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the
licensed premises; however, nothing in this Section shall be
construed to permit the licensee to sell wine, malt beverages or
distilled spirits for on-premises consumption. The fee for said
annual tasting permit shall be thirty-seven dollars fifty cents
($37.50).
3. Caterers. Any person who possesses the qualifications, meets the
requirements and complies with the provisions of this Chapter,
including Section 600.040 below, may apply for a caterer's license
for a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per each calendar day, pursuant
to the provisions of this Chapter.
4. Independence Day (4th of July). Any person who possesses the
qualifications, meets the requirements and complies with the
provisions of this Chapter, including Section 600.044 below, may
apply for an Independence Day license for a fee of thirty-seven
dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per each event to sell intoxicating
liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
5. Festivals. Any person who possesses the qualifications, meets the
requirements and complies with the provisions of this Chapter,
Section
600.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.020
AO:625
Section 600.030. License Regulations. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
including Section 600.045 below, may apply for a festival license
for a fee of thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per each
festival to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter.
D. Prorated Fees. Each license that may be obtained after the start of the
license year shall have the license fee prorated for the remainder of the
license year. In computing such pro rata license fee, the applicant shall
pay as many twelfths (12ths) as there are months (or part of a month
counted as a month) remaining from the date of the license to the next
succeeding July 1. [Ord. No. 3782 § 1, 3-22-2018]
E. No Refund. In case any license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter is revoked, surrendered or forfeited by the licensee, not used
or used only for a part of the license period, after the effective
beginning date of such license, no refund of any license fee or part
thereof shall be made.
A. Package Sales, Limitations. No license shall be issued for the sale of
intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed upon the
premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in
connection with, the operation of one (1) or more of the following
businesses: a drug store, a cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a
general merchandise store, a confectionery or delicatessen store, nor to
any such person who does not have and keep in his/her store a stock of
goods having a value according to invoices of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. Under
such license, no intoxicating liquor shall be consumed on the premises
where sold nor shall any original package be opened on the premises of
the vendor except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or law.
B. Temporary Permit For Sale By Drink — Certain Organizations.
1. The City Clerk may issue a permit for the sale of intoxicating liquor
for consumption on premises where sold to any church, school,
civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or
organization for sale at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering.
The permit shall be issued only for the day or days named therein
and it shall not authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor for more
than seven (7) days by any such club or organization.
2. If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall authorize the
sale of intoxicating liquor on that day beginning at 11:00 a.m.
3. At the same time that an applicant applies for a permit under the
provisions of this Subsection, the applicant shall notify the Director
of Revenue of the holding of the event by certified mail and by such
Section
600.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.030
AO:626
notification shall accept responsibility for the collection and
payment of any applicable sales tax.
4. No provision of law or rule or regulation of the City shall be
interpreted as preventing any wholesaler or distributor from
providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for
use by the permit holder at such picnic, bazaar, fair or similar
gathering.
C. Operating Hours, Days.
1. No person having a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, nor any
employee of such person shall sell, give away or permit the
consumption of, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the
hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., upon or about his/her premises.
Any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink shall
keep a closed place during the aforementioned prohibited times.
Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor
by the drink are held by clubs, hotels, or bowling alleys, this
Subsection (D) shall apply only to the room or rooms in which
intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where such licenses are held
by restaurants or bowling alleys whose business is conducted in
one (1) room only, then the licensee shall keep securely locked
during the hours and on the days specified in this Section all
refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes, and taps from which
intoxicating liquor is dispensed.
2. When January 1st, March 17th, July 4th or December 31st falls on
Sunday, and on the Sundays prior to Memorial Day and Labor Day
and on the Sunday on which the national championship game of the
National Football League is played, commonly known as "Super
Bowl Sunday," any person having a license to sell intoxicating
liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating
liquor by the drink under the provisions of his/her license on that
day from the time and until the time which would be lawful on
another day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of this
Chapter to the contrary.
D. General License Regulations.
1. Each license issued hereunder shall be conspicuously posted on the
premises for which the license has been issued.
2. A separate license shall be required for each place of business.
Every license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall
particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor may
be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to
authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor at any place other
than that described therein.
Section
600.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.030
AO:627
Section 600.035. Sales Of Liquor Prohibited Near Schools And
Churches. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
3. No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or
assignable except as herein provided. In the event of the death of
the licensee, the widow or widower or the next of kin of such
deceased licensee, who shall meet the other requirements of this
Chapter, may make application and the Clerk may transfer such
license to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for
the remainder of the period for which a license fee has been paid by
the deceased. Whenever one (1) or more members of a partnership
withdraws from the partnership, the Clerk, upon being requested,
shall permit the remaining partner or partners originally licensed
to continue to operate for the remainder of the period for which the
license fee has been paid without obtaining a new license.
4. In the event any licensee desires to change the location of his/her
place of business in the City, it shall be necessary for him/her to file
an application in the same manner as herein provided for an
original application, except that no additional fee shall be charged
and the amended license, describing the new location, shall be
issued immediately upon the approval of the application by the
Board. Any change of location of the enterprise prior to issuance of
such an amended license shall constitute a violation of this Section.
A. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor, as defined
in this Chapter, within two hundred (200) feet of any school, church or
other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the
applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the
Board of Aldermen, except that when a school, church or place of
worship shall hereafter be established within two hundred (200) feet of
any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license
shall not be denied for this reason. Such consent shall not be granted
until at least ten (10) days' written notice has been provided to all
owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed
licensed premises.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to a license for the sale of
intoxicating liquor pursuant to Section 600.020(C)(4), or to a license
issued to any church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political
or charitable club or organization which has obtained an exemption
from the payment of Federal taxes.
C. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to any premises that was
issued a license by the City before January 1, 2004, for the sale of
intoxicating liquor and which premises has not: (1) changed its license
type; (2) amended the legal description of the premises; or (3) been
without a liquor license for more than ninety (90) days at any time
during that period.
Section
600.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.040
AO:628
Section 600.040. Temporary Location For Liquor By The Drink,
Caterers — Permit — Fee Required. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
Section 600.044. Temporary Location For Liquor By The Drink,
Independence Day — Permit — Fee Required. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
A. The City may issue a temporary permit to caterers and other persons
holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter
who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function,
occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed
premises, but not including a "festival" as defined herein. The
temporary permit shall be effective for a period not to exceed one
hundred sixty-eight (168) consecutive hours, and shall authorize the
service of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion or event
during the hours at which alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or
served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for onpremises
consumption. For every permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Section, the permittee shall pay to the City an amount
as set out in Section 600.020(C)(3) above, or fraction thereof, for which
the permit is issued.
B. Except as provided in Subsection (C), all provisions of the Liquor
Control Law and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, in
which is located the premises in which such function, occasion or event
is held shall extend to such premises and shall be in force and
enforceable during all the time that the permittee, its agents, servants,
employees or stock are in such premises. Except for Missouri-produced
wines in the original package, the provisions of this Section shall not
include the sale of packaged goods covered by this temporary permit.
C. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any caterer who
possesses a valid State and valid local liquor license may deliver
alcoholic beverages, in the course of his/her catering business. A
caterer who possesses a valid State and valid local liquor license need
not obtain a separate license for each City the caterer delivers in, so
long as such City permits any caterer to deliver alcoholic beverages
within the City.
D. To assure and control product quality, wholesalers may, but shall not be
required to, give a retailer credit for intoxicating liquor with an alcohol
content of less than five percent (5%) by weight delivered and invoiced
under the catering permit number, but not used, if the wholesaler
removes the product within seventy-two (72) hours of the expiration of
the catering permit issued pursuant to this Section.
A. Other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a
permit for the sale of light wine and malt liquor for consumption on the
premises where sold may be issued to any church, school, civic, service,
fraternal, veteran, political, or charitable club or organization for sale
Section
600.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.044
AO:629
Section 600.045. Temporary Location For Liquor By The Drink,
Festival — Permit — Fee Required. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
Section 600.047. Consumption Off The Premises, Sale Of Beer
Permitted For Restaurant-Bar Without An On-Site Brewery, When.
[Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any restaurantbar
without an on-site brewery that serves twenty (20) or more different
of such wine and malt liquor at any picnic, bazaar, fair, festival or
similar gathering or event held to commemorate the annual anniversary
of the signing of the Declaration of Independence of the United States.
B. Such permit shall be issued only during the period from June 15th to
July 15th annually and only for the day or days named therein and it
shall not authorize the sale of wine and malt liquor except between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and Midnight and for not more than seven (7) days
by any such organization.
C. The permit may be issued to cover more than one (1) place of sale
within the general confines of the place where the gathering or event is
held; provided, however, no permit shall be issued to any organization
which selects or restricts the membership thereof on the basis of race,
religion, color, creed, or place of national origin.
D. No provision of this Chapter shall prevent any wholesaler or distributor
from providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for
use by the holder of the permit at such gathering or event.
A. An application for a permit under this Section shall be made to the City
Clerk at least five (5) business days prior to the festival. The temporary
permit shall be effective for a period not to exceed one hundred sixtyeight
(168) consecutive hours, and shall authorize the service of
alcoholic beverages at such festival during the hours at which alcoholic
beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section, the permittee shall
pay to the City the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each calendar day, or
fraction thereof, for which the permit is issued.
B. All provisions of the Liquor Control Law (Chapter 311 and the
regulations promulgated thereto) and the ordinances of the City shall
extend to festival premises and shall be in force and enforceable during
all the time that the permittee, its agents, servants, employees, or stock
are in such premises. This temporary permit shall allow the sale of
intoxicating liquor in the original package.
C. No provision of this Chapter shall be interpreted as preventing any
wholesaler, retailer, or distributor from providing customary storage,
cooling, or dispensing equipment for use at a festival.
Section
600.044
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.047
AO:630
types of draft beer may sell thirty-two (32) fluid ounces or more of such beer
to customers for consumption off the premises of such bar or tavern.
Section 600.050. Application For License. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
A. Application — Form And Content.
1. All applications for licenses under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be made in writing to the Board of Aldermen, on forms
provided by the City. Such forms, at a minimum, shall provide for
and shall contain spaces for:
a. Designation of the kind of license desired (including date(s) of
event, in the case of a temporary license);
b. Description of the premises to which such licenses apply and
the location or address thereof ("Description of the premises"
shall include a site plan and a line drawing of the room(s) and/
or areas in the buildings in which the controlled substances are
stored, exhibited for sale, and served and consumed);
c. Name, place of residence and mailing address of the person,
individual, association, partnership and names of partners or
corporation managing officer thereof for whom or which a
license is sought;
d. Term of the license;
e. Signature of the applicant;
f. Verification that the applicant meets the qualifications of
Section 600.055; and
g. Such other information as may be necessary to the City Clerk
in administering this Chapter.
2. In the event a license is sought for the sale of intoxicating liquor in
the original package, the application form shall provide for and
contain spaces for a description of the business engaged in by the
applicant and the kind of stock or goods, and invoice value thereof,
exclusive of fixtures, and intoxicating liquors kept in the business
store of applicant. There shall be attached to applications a recent
photograph of both the applicant and the place of business.
3. In the event a license is sought for the sale at retail by the drink for
consumption on the premises where sold, of all kinds of
intoxicating liquor, including the sale of intoxicating liquor in the
original package, the application forms shall provide for and
contain spaces for information relating to the applicant's
compliance with any criteria and requirements concerning the
granting of such license, as the same are set forth and defined in
Section
600.047
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.050
AO:631
Section 600.055. Qualifications For Licenses — Resident
Corporation And Financial Interest Defined. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
the Municipal Code of Ordinances of the City of Fenton, including,
but not limited to, building and sanitary codes.
4. In the event a license is sought for a premises which was issued a
valid license for the previous license term, the application form
shall verify that there were no instances of Sections 600.056 —
600.060 or any of the grounds for suspension or revocation
contained in Section 600.080.
B. Filing Of An Application. Each application for a license shall be filed
with the City Clerk on a form to be provided by the City, signed and
sworn to by the applicant. Each application shall be accompanied by a
proper remittance reflecting the appropriate license fee made payable
to the City.
C. Denial. The Board may deny a license for any reason that would support
revocation or suspension of a license under Section 600.080.
D. Approval. Upon approval of any application for a license, the Clerk shall
grant the applicant a license to conduct business in the City for a term
to expire with the thirtieth (30th) day of June next succeeding the date
of such license, unless such license be revoked or suspended for cause
before the expiration of such time.
E. Licenses For Subsequent License Periods. Applications for issuance of
licenses for a premises that was granted a license during the previous
license period must be filed on or before the first (1st) day of May of
each calendar year. Such application shall be reviewed by the Board at
its next meeting or as soon thereafter as is practical. Upon approval of
the majority of the Board and payment of the license fee provided
herein, the Clerk shall issue a new license.
F. Prior Issuance Creates No Right To License Approval. The issuance of a
license for any license period does not create an automatic right to
approval of a license for a subsequent license period. Every application
shall be reviewed for compliance with the provisions of this Code.
A. No person shall be granted a license hereunder unless such person is of
good moral character and a qualified legal voter, nor shall any
corporation be granted a license hereunder unless the managing officer
of such corporation is of good moral character and a qualified legal
voter of the City; and no person shall be granted a license or permit
hereunder whose license as such dealer has been revoked, or who has
been convicted, since the ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to
the Constitution of the United States, of a violation of the provisions of
any Federal, State, City or County law or State regulation applicable to
the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor, or who employs in his/her
Section
600.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.055
AO:632
Section 600.056. Certain Acts Prohibited In Premises Licensed To
Sell At Retail Intoxicating Liquor, Malt Liquor Or Light Wines. [Ord.
No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
business as such dealer, any person whose license has been revoked or
who has been convicted of violating such law since the date aforesaid;
provided, that nothing in this Section contained shall prevent the
issuance of licenses to non-residents of Missouri or foreign corporations
for the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting
orders for the sale of intoxicating liquors to, by or through a duly
licensed wholesaler, within this State.
B. Qualifications.
1. No person, partnership or corporation shall be qualified for a
license under this law if such person, any member of such
partnership, or such corporation, or any officer, director or any
stockholder owning, legally or beneficially, directly or indirectly,
ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of such corporation, or
other financial interest therein, or ten percent (10%) or more of the
interest in the business for which the person, partnership or
corporation is licensed, or any person employed in the business
licensed under this law shall have had a license revoked under this
law or shall have been convicted of violating the provisions of any
law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor
since the ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States, or shall not be a person of good
moral character.
2. No license applied for or issued under this Chapter or Chapter 311,
RSMo., shall be denied, suspended, revoked or otherwise affected
based solely on the fact that an employee of the licensee has been
convicted of a felony unrelated to the manufacture or sale of
intoxicating liquor so long as any such employee does not directly
participate in retail sales of intoxicating liquor. Each employer
issued a valid liquor license in the City shall report the identity of
any employee convicted of a felony to the City Clerk.
3. No wholesaler license shall be issued to a corporation for the sale
of intoxicating liquor containing alcohol in excess of five percent
(5%) by weight, except to a resident corporation as defined in this
Section.
C. The supervisor shall by regulation require all applicants for licenses to
file written statements, under oath, containing the information
reasonably required to administer this Section. Statements by
applicants for licenses as wholesalers and retailers shall set out, with
other information required, full information concerning the residence of
all persons financially interested in the business to be licensed as
required by regulation. All material changes in the information filed
shall be promptly reported to the supervisor.
Section
600.055
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.056
AO:633
A. It shall be unlawful for any retail licensee, licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor, malt liquor or light wine, or his/her employee to permit in, upon
or about the licensed premises:
1. The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
2. The displaying of any portion of the areola of the female breast or
failure to cover the entire areola and front of the breast with
opaque clothing;
3. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
4. The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals or failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with
opaque clothing;
5. Any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes
to public view any portion of his/her genitals or anus or fails at any
time to have and keep opaque clothing over all parts of his/her
genitals and anus; and
6. The displaying of films, video or DVD programs or pictures
depicting acts, the live performances of which are prohibited by
this regulation or by any other law.
B. Additional unlawful acts for any retail licensee, licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or light wine, or his/her employee:
1. At no time, under any circumstances, shall any licensee or his/her
employees immediately fail to prevent or suppress any violent
quarrel, disorder, brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful
conduct of any person upon the licenses premises, nor shall any
licensee or his/her employees allow any indecent, profane or
obscene language, song, entertainment, literature or advertising
material upon the licensed premises.
2. In the event that a licensee or his/her employee knows or should
have known, that an illegal or violent act has been committed on or
about the licenses premises, they immediately shall report the
occurrence to the Fenton Police Department and shall cooperate
with all law enforcement authorities and agents of the Division of
Liquor Control during the course of any investigation into an
occurrence.
C. In addition to the licensee and/or his/her employee being subject to all
penalties contained in Section 600.110 of this Code, violation of any act
or any provision contained herein shall be grounds for the license of the
licensee to be suspended or revoked or, in the case of an application for
issuance of a subsequent license for a premises, denial.
Section
600.056
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.057
AO:634
Section 600.057. Compliance Of Premises With Land Use Code.
[Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
In addition to the requirements and licenses herein, as a condition
precedent to a grant or continued viability of a liquor license for any
premises, all applicants for and holders of liquor licenses must conform
to the City's Land Use Code regulations on the placement and permitting
of certain types of liquor establishments, as well as requirements for an
occupancy permit and other required permits. Refer to Title IV of the
Municipal Code.
Section 600.060. Minors. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
A. Persons Eighteen (18) Years Of Age Or Older May Sell Or Handle Liquor
Or Beer, When.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or
dispensing of intoxicating liquor.
2. In any place of business licensed in accordance with this Chapter,
persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange
displays, operate the cash register or scanner connected to a cash
register, accept payment for, and sack for carry-out intoxicating
liquor. Delivery of intoxicating liquor away from the licensed
business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of
twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this Subsection,
shall, when at least fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's gross sales
does not consist of non-alcoholic sales, have an employee twentyone
(21) years of age or older on the licensed premises during all
hours of operation.
3. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor or beer in places of business which sell food for
consumption on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%) of all
sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this
Section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age
to mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages.
B. Sales To Minor — Exceptions.
1. No licensee, his/her employee or any other person shall procure for,
sell, vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor in
any quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years, except that this Section shall not apply to the parent or
guardian of the minor nor to the supplying of intoxicating liquor to
a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for medical
purposes only or to the administering of such intoxicating liquor to
such person by a duly licensed physician. No person shall be denied
Section
600.057
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.060
AO:635
a license under this Chapter solely due to a conviction for unlawful
sale or supply to a minor while serving in the capacity as an
employee of a licensed establishment.
2. Any owner, occupant or other person or legal entity with a lawful
right to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who
knowingly allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to
drink or possess intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) from drinking or
possessing intoxicating liquor on such property, unless such person
allowing the person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or
possess intoxicating liquor is his/her parent or guardian, is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
3. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Subsection if:
a. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking
establishment or caterer or holds a temporary permit or an
employee thereof;
b. The defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21)
or more years of age; and
c. To purchase the intoxicating liquor, the person exhibited to the
defendant a driver's license, Missouri non-driver's
identification card or other official or apparently official
document, containing a photograph of the minor and
purporting to establish that such minor was twenty-one (21)
years of age and of the legal age for consumption of
intoxicating liquor.
C. Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor To Obtain Liquor — Use Of Altered
Driver's License, Passport Or I.D. Cards, Penalties.
1. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall represent,
for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving
any intoxicating liquor, that he/she has attained the age of twentyone
(21) years, except in cases authorized by law.
2. In addition to Subsection (C)(1) of this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall use a reproduced, modified or
altered chauffeur's license, motor vehicle operator's license,
identification card issued by any uniformed service of the United
States, passport or identification card established in Section
302.181, RSMo., for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any
way receiving any intoxicating liquor.
D. Minors In Possession Of Intoxicating Liquor.
1. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who purchases
or attempts to purchase or has in his/her possession any
Section
600.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.060
AO:636
Section 600.070. Miscellaneous Offenses. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
intoxicating liquor as defined in Section 600.010 of this Code, or
who is visibly intoxicated as defined in Section 577.001, RSMo.,
or has a detectable blood alcohol content of more than twohundredths
of one percent (0.02%) or more by weight of alcohol in
such person's blood is in violation of this Section.
2. A first violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). A second or subsequent
violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not to exceed one (1) year and/or a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Prior pleas of guilty and prior
findings of guilt shall be pleaded and proven in the same manner as
required by Section 558.021, RSMo.
3. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to a student who:
a. Is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
b. Is enrolled in an accredited college or university and is a
student in a culinary course;
c. Is required to taste, but not consume or imbibe, any beer, ale,
porter, wine or other similar malt or fermented beverage as
part of the required curriculum; and
d. Tastes a beverage under Subsection (D)(2)(c) of this Section
only for instructional purposes during classes that are part of
the curriculum of the accredited college or university.
The beverage must at all times remain in the possession and
control of any authorized instructor of the college or
university, who must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
Nothing in this Subsection, may be construed to allow a
student under the age of twenty-one (21) to receive any beer,
ale, porter, wine or other similar malt or fermented beverage
unless the beverage is delivered as part of the student's
required curriculum and the beverage is used only for
instructional purposes during classes conducted as part of the
curriculum.
E. Prosecution Burden. For purposes of prosecution under this Section, a
manufacturer-sealed container describing that there is intoxicating
liquor therein need not be opened or the contents therein tested to
verify that there is intoxicating liquor in such container. The alleged
violator may allege that there was no intoxicating liquor in such
container, but the burden of proof of such allegation is on such person,
as it shall be presumed that such a sealed container describing that
there is intoxicating liquor therein contains intoxicating liquor.
Section
600.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.070
AO:637
A. Unlawful For Licensed Retailer To Purchase From Other Than Licensed
Wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to purchase any
intoxicating liquor except from, by or through a duly licensed wholesale
liquor dealer in this State. It shall be unlawful for such retail liquor
dealer to sell or offer for sale any intoxicating liquor purchased in
violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Damaged Carton; Misleading, Omitted Or Obscured Labels. Any
retailer licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall not:
1. Sell intoxicating liquor with an alcohol content of less than five
percent (5%) by weight to the consumer in an original carton
received from the wholesaler that has been mutilated, torn apart or
cut apart; or
2. Repackage intoxicating liquor with an alcohol content of less than
five percent (5%) by weight in a manner misleading to the
consumer or that results in required labeling being omitted or
obscured.
C. Mixing Liquor With Drugs Prohibited. No licensee, or any other person,
shall for any purpose whatsoever mix or permit or cause to be mixed
with any intoxicating liquor kept for sale, sold or supplied by him/her as
a beverage any drug or form of methyl alcohol or impure form of
alcohol.
D. Unlawful To Sell Unlabeled Liquor — Penalty. It shall be unlawful for
any person to sell any intoxicating liquor which has not been inspected
and labeled according to the provisions of the Liquor Control Law of
Missouri, and any such person upon conviction shall have his/her
license revoked and shall be ineligible to receive any subsequent liquor
license for a period of two (2) years thereafter.
E. Only Those Liquors Authorized By License To Be Kept On Premises.
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the
premises to keep in or upon the premises described in such license
any intoxicating liquor other than the kind of liquor expressly
authorized to be sold by such licensee.
2. Any retailer licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall not:
a. Sell intoxicating liquor with an alcohol content of less than five
percent (5%) by weight to the consumer in an original carton
received from the wholesaler that has been mutilated, torn
apart or cut apart; or
b. Repackage intoxicating liquor with an alcohol content of less
than five percent (5%) by weight in a manner misleading to the
consumer or that results in required labeling being omitted or
obscured.
Section
600.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.070
AO:638
Section 600.080. Administration Of Law — License Suspension/
Revocation. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
F. Persons Apparently Intoxicated Not To Be Provided With Intoxicating
Liquor. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or his/her employee or
agent, to sell or supply intoxicating liquor, or permit such to be sold or
supplied, to a habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or
apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of License — When — Manner. The Board
may suspend or revoke the license of any person for cause shown. In
such cases, the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing before the Board not
less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of revocation or
suspension, and, prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall give not less
than ten (10) days' written notice to the licensee specifying the grounds
for the suspension or revocation thereof and the time, date, and place of
the hearing. Notice may be accomplished by personal delivery, U.S.
Mail, or by posting on the licensed premises. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 600.085 of this Chapter.
B. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation. A license may be suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. Violating any of the provisions of either this Chapter, Chapter 311,
RSMo., the Code of State Regulations applicable to the conduct of
licensees or any employee, agent or servant of the licensee, or any
ordinance of the City;
2. Failing to obtain or keep a license from the State Supervisor of
Alcohol and Tobacco Control;
3. Making a false affidavit in an application for or otherwise using
materially false statements in the application for such license
under this Chapter;
4. Failing to keep an orderly place or house;
5. Selling, offering for sale, possessing or knowingly permitting the
consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of intoxicating
liquors, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not
authorized under the license;
6. That the conduct of the business violates, or the licensed premises
or the licensee are in violation of, any provision of the City Code;
7. The licensed premises have been discontinued or abandoned;
8. The licensee, since the issuance of such license, has ceased to be
the person actually engaged in the active control and management
of the particular establishment for which the license was issued; or
Section
600.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.080
AO:639
Section 600.085. Hearings Upon Suspension Or Revocation Of
Licenses. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
9. Selling, giving, or otherwise supplying intoxicating liquor to any
person on the licensed premises during a term of suspension as
ordered by the Board of Aldermen.
C. Automatic Revocation/Suspension. A license shall be revoked
automatically if:
1. A licensee's State liquor license is revoked or if the licensee is
convicted in any court of any violation of Chapter 311, RSMo., or of
any felony violation of Chapter 195, RSMo., in the course of
business. A license shall be suspended automatically if the
licensee's State liquor license is suspended, and the suspension
shall be for a term not less than that imposed by the State.
2. A licensee is or has been convicted in any court of a violation of
State laws relating to intoxicating liquors, or a conviction of a
violation of this Chapter.
3. A violation of Section 600.056.
D. Effect Of A Suspension. No person whose license shall have been
suspended by order of the Board of Aldermen shall sell or give away any
intoxicating liquor, malt liquor, light wines during the time such
suspension is in effect. Any licensee desiring to keep premises open for
the sale of food or merchandise during the period of suspension shall
display the Board's order of suspension in a conspicuous place on the
premises so that all persons visiting the premises may readily see the
same.
E. Appeal. Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the Board
of Aldermen may appeal such decision pursuant to the procedures of
Chapter 160 of the Municipal Code provided such appeal is filed within
ten (10) days of the date of the Board of Aldermen's decision. The Board
may delay the implementation of its order pending appeal.
A. Testimony — Evidence. The licensee shall be given reasonable notice of
hearing and the grounds upon which discipline will be considered.
Hearings before the Board of Aldermen shall be in the nature of
informal investigations. Testimony of witnesses and other evidence
pertinent to the inquiry may be taken in such hearings, and all
proceedings in such hearings shall be recorded. Any person residing or
conducting a business within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed
establishment shall have the right to produce witnesses and testimony.
B. Witnesses — How Summoned. Subpoenas may be issued by the Board
for any person whose testimony is desired at any hearing. Such
subpoenas may be served and returns thereon made by any agent and
in the same manner as provided by law for the service of subpoenas in
civil suits in the Circuit Courts of this State. The Board also may issue
Section
600.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.085
AO:640
Section 600.090. Warning Sign Displayed — Liquor Licenses. [Ord.
No. 3625 § 1, 9-22-2016]
Section 600.100. Restaurant-Bar — Audit Of Books. [Ord. No. 3625
§ 1, 9-22-2016]
The City shall have full authority to inspect and audit the books and
financial records of any licensee hereunder where a condition of the
acquisition of said license is that a percentage of the gross receipts of
the licensee shall be from non-alcohol (e.g., prepared meals or food) sales.
Should at any time the licensee fail to produce the books upon demand
of the City, then this shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of
the liquor license. When a new establishment makes application, and no
financial records presently exist, there shall be an audit performed after
three (3) months of business to determine compliance with the applicable
provisions herein. But in no case shall any liquor license be granted wherein
a condition is that a percentage of gross receipts shall be from other than
subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of documents or other
items pertaining to the subject of the inquiry.
C. Witnesses To Be Sworn. Before any witness shall testify in any such
hearing, he/she shall be sworn by the City Clerk to tell the truth and
nothing but the truth. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross
examination by an attorney representing the licensee as well as
attorneys representing other interested parties.
D. Decision — Suspension Or Revocation. If the evidence supports a
finding that the license should be revoked or suspended, the Board shall
issue a written order which shall include specific findings of fact setting
forth the grounds for the action taken. If the evidence fails to support a
finding that the license should be revoked or suspended, then no such
order shall be issued.
E. Appeal. Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the Board
of Aldermen may appeal such decision pursuant to the procedures in
Chapter 160 of the Municipal Code, provided such appeal is filed within
ten (10) days of the date of the Board's decision. The Board may delay
the implementation of its order pending appeal.
A. Any person who is licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages at any
establishment shall place on the premises of such establishment a
warning sign as described in this Section. Such sign shall be at least
eleven (11) inches by fourteen (14) inches and shall read "WARNING:
Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy may cause birth
defects." The licensee shall display such sign in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
B. Any employee of the Supervisor of Alcohol and Tobacco Control may
report a violation of this Section to the Supervisor, and the Supervisor
shall issue a warning to the licensee of the violation.
Section
600.085
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.100
AO:641
alcoholic sales unless the application for said liquor license substantiates
and projects the new establishment to be in compliance with the law within
a three-month period.
Section 600.110. Penalties For Violation. [Ord. No. 3625 § 1,
9-22-2016]
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set out in
Section 100.060 of this Code. The establishment of this penalty shall in
no way take the place of or interfere with any suspension or revocation
proceeding or the disapproval of any application for a subsequent license at
a premises.
Chapter 605
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
600.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
600.110
AO:642
ARTICLE I
Soliciting a Residence Without Invitation
Section 605.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-201880]
CANVASSER — A Person traveling by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any
type of conveyance from house to house, place to place, street to street,
or positioned on or near street corners, public ways, or places of public
assembly or congregation who attempts to make personal contact with
another Person without prior specific invitation or appointment from such
Person for the primary purpose of:
PEDDLER — A Person traveling by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any
type of conveyance from house to house, place to place, or street to street,
who attempts to make personal contact with another Person without prior
specific invitation or appointment from such Person for the primary purpose
of attempting to sell goods, wares, merchandise, or services with minimal
or no delay.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms,
partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals and
agents of same.
SOLICITING — Any actions taken by a Solicitor or a Peddler.
SOLICITOR — A person traveling by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any
type of conveyance from house to house, place to place, or street to street,
who attempts to make personal contact with another Person without prior
specific invitation or appointment from such Person for the primary purpose
of:
Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular purpose,
including, but not limited to the following: education, philanthropy,
charity, religion, philosophy, ideology, or political party, issue, or
candidate;
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or
service; or
2.
Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular purpose, including, but
not limited to the following: education, philanthropy, charity, religion,
philosophy, ideology, or political party, issue, or candidate.
3.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or
service, or
1.
Taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise, and/or services.
2.
80.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 605, Peddlers, Solicitors And Canvassers, containing
Sections 605.010 through 605.180, was repealed 5-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3814.
Section
605.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.020
AO:643
Section 605.020. Exception. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
This Article shall not apply to a Federal, State, or local government
employee or a public utility employee in the performance of his/her duty for
his/her employer.
Section 605.030. Soliciting A Residence Without Invitation. [Ord.
No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
A. Permit Required. Unless a permit is obtained by the company and each
participating individual Solicitor or Peddler, it shall be unlawful for any
Solicitor or Peddler to go in and upon any private residence in the City
not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant
of such residence. No permit issued under this Article is transferrable.
A Canvasser is not required to obtain a permit.
B. Application Requirements And Processes.
1. The application for and issuance of a permit shall be done in
accordance with and subject to the following City permitting
requirements.
2. The application for the permit shall be submitted on City forms and
must contain at minimum the following information:
a. Business name, telephone number, physical address, and email
address;
b. A brief description of the proposed Soliciting related to this
permit. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be
substituted for this description at the option of the applicant);
c. Name of applicant, cellular phone number, date of application,
email address, and physical address;
d. Criminal background report from local agency regarding the
company applying and all Solicitors and Peddlers whom
proposes to engage in Soliciting in the City;
e. Proposed dates(s) of the proposed Soliciting in the City;
f. Hours of operation;
g. Location and schedule of proposed Soliciting;
h. Number of proposed individuals who will be Soliciting per day;
i. Name of local coordinator or manager, cellular phone number,
the permanent and (if any) local address, and number of total
individuals proposed to be performing permitted Soliciting in
the City throughout the proposed date(s) of the permitted
Soliciting;
Section
605.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.030
AO:644
j. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and State license
plate number of any vehicle which will be used by each
individual for whom a permit is requested;
k. The name, physical description, and photo identification;
l. A copy of the Person's sales tax license as issued by the State of
Missouri, provided that no copy of a license shall be required of
any business which appears on the City's annual report of sales
tax payees as provided by the Missouri Department of
Revenue;
m. The location where books and records are kept of sales which
occur within the City and which are available for City
inspection to determine that all City sales taxes have been
paid;
n. The web address for the Person (or other address) where
residents having subsequent questions can go for more
information;
o. A signed acknowledgement that the Person has read this
Article and will comply with all applicable requirements; and
p. A copy of the registration number issued by the State of
Missouri for charitable solicitations, if applicable.
3. Following the submission of a complete application to the City and
payment of a five dollars ($5.00) application fee, the City shall
investigate as to the truth and accuracy of the information
contained in the application. Upon completion of such investigation
and if the application meets all requirements of this Article, the
City Clerk shall issue the permit within a reasonable time, not to
exceed thirty (30) days, and in accordance with applicable law. If
the City has not completed this investigation within a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, and in accordance with
applicable law, the permit will nonetheless be issued, subject,
however, to administrative revocation upon completion of the
investigation.
4. Upon satisfactory completion of the application, the City Clerk shall
not issue the permit if:
a. The applicant or any Solicitor or Peddler whom the applicant
proposes to solicit a residence without invitation is registered
on the National Sex Offender Registry;
b. The applicant or any Solicitor or Peddler whom the applicant
proposes to solicit a residence without invitation has been
convicted of an offense pursuant to Chapter 565 RSMo., within
the past ten (10) years;
Section
605.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.030
AO:645
Section 605.040. Validity Of Permit. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
Section 605.050. "No Visit" List. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
The City Clerk shall maintain a list of persons within the City who restrict
visits to their property (including their leasehold, in the case of a tenant)
by Peddlers, Solicitors, and Canvassers. The City Clerk may provide a
form to assist property owners and tenants, and this form may allow the
property owners and tenants to select certain types of visits they find
acceptable while refusing permission to others. This "no visit" list shall be a
public document, reproduced on the City's web site and available for public
inspection and copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided to each
applicant for, and each recipient of, a permit. It will be the responsibility
of that Canvasser to obtain in some other way a copy of the current "no
visit" list. In addition, to restrict visits to their property, property owners
and tenants may also choose to post a sign of the type described in Section
605.070.
c. The applicant or any Solicitor or Peddler whom the applicant
proposes to solicit a residence without invitation has been
convicted of an offense pursuant to Chapter 569 or Chapter
570 RSMo., within the past ten (10) years;
d. The applicant or any Solicitor or Peddler whom the applicant
proposes to solicit a residence without invitation has been
convicted of an offense involving fraud or dishonesty within the
past ten (10) years;
e. The applicant or any Solicitor or Peddler whom the applicant
proposes to solicit a residence without invitation has been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the past twelve (12) years;
f. Any statement upon the application is false, unless the
applicant can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of
excusable neglect; or
g. In accordance with Section 605.040.
The applicant shall be notified that the permit will not be issued and
the reason for the same.
A. No individual may be granted more than one (1) Permit within a fourmonth
period with each Permit being valid for a period of no longer
than two (2) days.
B. No individual Soliciting on behalf of a Person may receive a Permit for
purposes of Soliciting if other individuals have been issued Permits
within the previous four (4) months for Soliciting on behalf of the same
Person.
Section
605.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.060
AO:646
Section 605.060. Safety Regulations. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
No Solicitor, Canvasser, or Peddler shall operate in or on any right-of-way,
sidewalk, or street corner, whether public or private, in such a manner as
to endanger himself or others or so as to impede traffic. The judgment of a
Police Officer, exercising good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether public
safety is jeopardized or traffic impeded. For purposes of promoting public
safety, a Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser wishing to operate within a rightof-
way or street may only operate on the median or raised island and must
remain thereon unless summoned by the Person solicited.
Section 605.070. Additional Regulations. [Ord. No. 3814,
5-24-2018]
A. The individual Soliciting shall wear the issued permit on their outer
clothing so as to be reasonably visible to any person who might be
approached by said individual during the permitted Soliciting.
B. The individual Soliciting shall display on his or her person any object
provided by the City to clearly and readily identify the individual to
other citizens and law enforcement as a permittee.
C. The activities regulated under this Article shall immediately cease upon
observation of a "no solicitation" sign at any residence.
D. No Solicitor or Peddler shall enter upon the property of another except
between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. unless such person has an
express invitation to enter from the owner, resident, or occupant of the
property.
E. No Person shall remove any yard, door, or entrance sign that gives
notice to such Person that the resident or occupant does not invite
visitors.
F. No Person shall enter upon any private property for the activities
regulated under this Article where the current occupant has posted the
property on the City's "no visit" list without a specific invitation (except
where the posting form indicates the occupant has given permission for
this type of visit), regardless of whether a sign is posted.
G. A Solicitor or Canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers about
the community shall observe the following regulations:
1. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any sign, utility
pole, transit shelter, or other structure within the public right-ofway.
The Police and City staff are authorized to remove any handbill
or flyer found within the right-of-way.
2. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any privatelyowned
property in a manner that causes damage to such privately
owned property.
Section
605.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.070
AO:647
Section 605.080. Ice Cream Truck Additional Regulations. [Ord. No.
3814, 5-24-2018]
Section 605.090. Permit — Not An Endorsement. [Ord. No. 3814,
5-24-2018]
No Person who obtained a permit or an agent, member, or representative
of the same, shall advertise, represent, or hold out in any manner that the
permit is an endorsement of the holder by the City or by any member of
the City administration or Board of Aldermen thereof or by any organization
which any of the same may represent.
Section 605.100. Denial — Administrative Revocation — Hearing.
[Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
If the City Clerk denies (or upon completion of an investigation revokes)
the permit, he/she shall immediately convey the decision to the applicant
orally and shall, within a reasonable time and in accordance with applicable
law, prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which shall
be immediately made available to the applicant. Upon receipt of the oral
notification, and even before the preparation of the written report, the
3. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any property
having a "no solicitation" sign.
H. Persons performing the activities regulated by this Article shall follow
all applicable City, Sjtate, or Federal laws and regulations.
A. Ice Cream Trucks, as defined in Article II, shall be subject to the
following additional regulations:
1. Operators of Ice Cream Trucks shall comply with all applicable
health laws or regulations that the health authority has adopted or
may adopt relating to Ice Cream Trucks.
2. Before operating an Ice Cream Truck in the City, the Person shall
provide the City:
a. A copy all necessary approvals, licenses, and permits from the
applicable health department;
b. A copy of the Ice Cream Truck's license and registration form
reflecting the vehicle identification number of the Ice Cream
Truck; and
c. A copy of proof of Ice Cream Truck's insurance coverage.
3. Notwithstanding the timing regulations herein, Ice Cream Trucks
may only operate within the City between the hours of 11:00 A.M.
to 7:00 P.M. on week days and 11:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. on the
weekends.
Section
605.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.100
AO:648
applicant shall have at his/her option an appeal of the denial of his/her
application.
Section 605.110. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
Section 605.120. Appeal. [Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
If the applicant appeals any decision made by the City under this Article,
review from the decision shall be had pursuant to Chapter 160 of the
Municipal Code.
Section 605.130. Violation To Be Prosecuted In Municipal Court.
[Ord. No. 3814, 5-24-2018]
In addition to any other remedy of the City hereunder, any Person violating
any part of this Article, including trespass, shall have committed a
municipal violation and shall be prosecuted in Municipal Court. The penalty
for such violation shall be the same as for general penalty under Section
100.060 of the Municipal Code.
A. Any permit issued under this Article may be suspended or revoked, or
otherwise subject to adverse permit action, at the discretion of the
Board of Aldermen, for violation of any of the following:
1. Subsequent knowledge by the City of fraud, misrepresentation, or
incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the application
form.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the
course of the permitted Soliciting.
3. Any violation of this Article by the applicant or any Solicitor or
Peddler during the course of the permitted Soliciting.
4. Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on the permitted Soliciting.
5. Conducting the permitted Soliciting in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety,
or general welfare of the public.
6. Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the granting of the
permit could have been denied under this Article.
7. Violation of any law relating to public safety, health and welfare,
zoning, or any Missouri or Federal law.
Section
605.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.130
AO:649

ARTICLE II
Regulation of Food Trucks
Section 605.190. Purpose And Definitions. [Ord. No. 3815,
5-24-2018]
Section 605.200. Food Truck Permit. [Ord. No. 3815, 5-24-2018]
A. Purpose. The City finds that allowing Food Trucks to operate, subject to
practical regulations and limitations, is beneficial to persons living and
working within the City. This Article recognizes the unique physical and
operational characteristics of Food Trucks, establishes standards for
Food Truck operations, and promotes practices that serve the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
B. Exemptions: The following types of businesses shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Article:
1. Delivery persons delivering food that has been purchased or
ordered previously.
2. Deliveries of food items being made to businesses for resale or for
business use.
3. Ice Cream Trucks which operate within the City otherwise
permitted under Article I of this Chapter.
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and
their derivatives shall have the following meaning:
FOOD TRUCK — An automobile or trailer designed and used for
cooking, preparation, assembling, and/or serving of a full or limited
menu of single service food items from the automobile or trailer for use
by consumers.
FOOD TRUCK OPERATOR — The owner of the Food Truck and/or any
person driving and/or selling food items from the Food Truck.
FOOD TRUCK PERMIT — A permit issued by the City for the operation
of a Food Truck.
ICE CREAM TRUCK — A vehicle from which the operator sells only prepackaged
frozen dairy or water-based food products and pre-packaged
beverages.
LOCATION — Any single property, parcel, or any combination of
contiguous parcels that are owned or controlled by a single entity or
affiliated entities.
A. Food Truck Permit Required. It is a violation to operate a Food Truck at
any Location in violation of the requirements of this Article or without a
Food Truck Permit issued by the City Clerk. Prior to receiving a Food
Truck Permit, an applicant must demonstrate that the applicant has all
Section
605.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.200
AO:651
necessary approval, licenses, and permits from the applicable health
department.
B. Application. An applicant shall submit an application for a Food Truck
Permit on a form provided by the City. The application shall include, at
minimum, the following information:
1. Name, phone number, email, and address of the owner of the
vehicle;
2. Name, phone number, email, and address of the owner of the Food
Truck company, if different;
3. Name, phone number, email, and address of the operator of the
vehicle, if different;
4. Color photo of the exterior (front, side, and back) of the vehicle;
5. A copy of the vehicle license and registration form reflecting the
vehicle identification number of the vehicle;
6. A copy of proof of vehicular insurance coverage;
7. A copy all necessary approvals, licenses, and permits from the
applicable health department;
8. A copy of any liquor license, if applicable;
9. Desired duration for the Food Truck Permit;
10. General description of the food that will be offered for sale;
11. A signed acknowledgement that the owner/operator has read this
Article and will comply with all applicable requirements;
12. A copy of the Person's sales tax license as issued by the State of
Missouri, provided that no copy of a license shall be required of any
business which appears on the City's annual report of sales tax
payees as provided by the Missouri Department of Revenue;
13. The location where books and records are kept of sales which occur
within the City and which are available for City inspection to
determine that all City sales taxes have been paid; and
14. Any additional information required by the City Clerk to ensure the
requirements of this Article are met.
C. Display. The Food Truck Permit must be prominently displayed when
the Food Truck is in operation. Permittees operating under this Article
must keep such Permit issued by the City available and present it upon
request of any customer, City Official, or Law Enforcement Officer.
D. Fee. Submittal of an application for a Food Truck Permit must be
accompanied by a Food Truck Permit fee as follows:
Section
605.200
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.200
AO:652
Section 605.210. Regulations. [Ord. No. 3815, 5-24-2018]
Duration: Fee:
One (1) Day $10.00
Two (2) Day $20.00
Six (6) Months $100.00
Twelve (12) Months $150.00
E. Change Of Information. Each Permittee shall have an ongoing duty to
provide the City with notice of any change to any of the information
submitted with the Food Truck Permit application.
F. Issuance. A Food Truck Permit shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
verification that an application has been completed in accordance with
the requirements of this Section. No Food Truck Permit shall be issued
to an applicant whose Permit had been revoked in the preceding twelve
(12) months.
G. Renewal. A Food Truck Permit may be renewed provided that all
applicable requirements are met and the Permittee is in compliance
with the requirements of this Article. The fee for renewal shall be the
same as for a new Food Truck Permit.
H. Transferability. A Food Truck Permit is not transferrable.
A. Persons that are issued a Food Truck Permit to operate from a Food
Truck within the City of Fenton shall comply with the following
provisions:
1. Location Regulations.
a. No Food Truck shall operate in residential areas.
b. A Food Truck permitted hereunder may not remain at a
Location over night or for more than six (6) consecutive hours.
c. Food Trucks shall not be permitted on unimproved Locations
or at a Location where the Food Truck would be the primary
use of that Location.
d. Where a commercial business located in the City has posted
signs requesting "no solicitors" or "no peddlers," Food Trucks
shall not call on such businesses or persons inside such
businesses without a prior, specific invitation.
e. No Food Truck may operate on a Location that:
(1) Blocks fire lanes, sidewalks, designated traffic lanes, or
ingress or egress to or from a building or street;
Section
605.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.210
AO:653
(2) Impedes the ingress to or egress from another business or
otherwise causes undue interference with access to
another business;
(3) Blocks the lawfully placed signage of another business; or
(4) Blocks any of the required number of parking spaces of
any Location.
f. Issuance of a Food Truck Permit under this Article by the City
in no way authorizes the Food Truck to trespass on any
property. If parking or remaining idle on private property in
order to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, the Food
Truck Operator shall obtain prior, written permission from the
owner(s) of such private property for the time period the Food
Truck plans to remain on such private property, and the Food
Truck shall keep such written permission in the Food Truck at
all times the Food Truck is parked or idle on any such private
property and provide it upon request of any City Official or Law
Enforcement Officer.
g. If at one (1) Location for more than two (2) hours, the Food
Truck Operator shall obtain a written agreement from a
business within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Food Truck,
allowing employees of the Food Truck to have use of flushable
restrooms (or other facilities as approved by the health
authority) during hours of operation.
h. No Food Truck may go into a City park or park or remain idle
on any public property including streets and right-of-way) to
sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the Food Truck
Operator's activity has received prior, written authorization
from the Board of Aldermen or unless the Food Truck is
operating as a vendor at the Fenton Community and Farmers'
Market in accordance with the City's rules and policies for the
same or operating on City property in conjunction with a City
event in accordance with the City's rules and regulations for
such specific City event. [Ord. No. 3935, 5-23-2019; Ord.
No. 3965, 8-22-2019]
2. Safety And Operational Regulations.
a. No power cord, cable, or equipment shall be extended across
any parking lot, public street, sidewalk, or other public
property. No Food Truck Operator may use stakes, rods, or any
other method of support that must be drilled, driven, or
otherwise fixed into or onto asphalt, pavement, curbs, ground,
sidewalks, or buildings.
b. In no event shall any Food Truck Operator invite or allow
customers into the Food Truck.
Section
605.210
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.210
AO:654
Section 605.220. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 3815, 5-24-2018]
c. A Food Truck Operator may only sell a food item(s) described
in the Food Truck Permit and may not sell a non-food item. A
Food Truck shall serve pedestrians only. Drive-through or
drive-in service is prohibited.
d. A Food Truck Operator shall comply with all applicable health
laws or regulations that the health authority has adopted or
may adopt including regarding time, temperature, plumbing,
operation, maintenance requirements, and any other related
regulation.
e. The Food Truck must be kept neat and orderly at all times.
During each period of operation at a Location, the Food Truck
Operator must provide proper trash receptacles for public use
that are sufficient and suitable to contain all trash generated
by the Food Truck.
f. A Permittee operating a Food Truck shall demonstrate that the
vehicle is readily moveable if requested by the City.
g. All food and supplies must be stored within the Food Truck.
h. In operating the Food Truck, a Food Truck Operator shall
follow all applicable City, State, or Federal laws and
regulations.
A. Suspension Or Revocation. The Board may suspend or revoke a Food
Truck Permit of any person for cause shown. In such cases, the City
Clerk shall schedule a hearing before the Board not less than ten (10)
days prior to the effective date of revocation or suspension, and, prior
to the hearing, the City Clerk shall give not less than ten (10) days'
written notice to the Food Truck owner specifying the grounds for the
suspension or revocation thereof and the time, date, and place of the
hearing. Notice may be accomplished by personal delivery or U.S. Mail
to the owner of the Food Truck as provided on the application. The
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 605.230 of this
Chapter.
B. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation. A Food Truck Permit may be
suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. The applicant for the Food Truck permit knowingly provided false
information on the application;
2. Violating any provision of this Article;
3. That the conduct of the business violates any provision of the Code;
4. The operator of a Food Truck fails to maintain a current, valid
vehicle registration, health department permit, or proof of required
vehicular insurance; or
Section
605.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.220
AO:655
Section 605.230. Hearing Upon Suspension Or Revocation Of Food
Truck Permit. [Ord. No. 3815, 5-24-2018]
Section 605.240. Appeals. [Ord. No. 3815, 5-24-2018]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Clerk or Board of Aldermen
under this Article may appeal such decision pursuant to the procedures of
Chapter 160 of the Municipal Code provided such appeal is filed within
5. A Food Truck is operating in a manner that threatens the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
C. Effect Of A Suspension. No person whose Food Truck Permit shall have
been suspended by order of the Board of Aldermen shall operate a Food
Truck in the City.
D. Violation. Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code. The establishment of this
penalty shall in no way take the place of or interfere with any
suspension or revocation proceeding or the disapproval of any
application for a subsequent Food Truck Permit.
A. Testimony — Evidence. The Food Truck owner shall be given reasonable
notice of hearing and the grounds upon which discipline will be
considered. Hearings before the Board of Aldermen shall be in the
nature of informal investigations. Testimony of witnesses and other
evidence pertinent to the inquiry may be taken in such hearings, and all
proceedings in such hearings shall be recorded.
B. Witnesses — How Summoned. Subpoenas may be issued by the Board
for any person whose testimony is desired at any hearing. Such
subpoenas may be served and returns thereon made by any agent and
in the same manner as provided by law for the service of subpoenas in
civil suits in the Circuit Courts of this State. The Board also may issue
subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of documents or other
items pertaining to the subject of the inquiry.
C. Witnesses To Be Sworn. Before any witness shall testify in any such
hearing, he/she shall be sworn by the City Clerk to tell the truth and
nothing but the truth. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross
examination by an attorney representing the licensee as well as
attorneys representing other interested parties.
D. Decision — Suspension Or Revocation. If the evidence supports a
finding that the Food Truck Permit should be revoked or suspended, the
Board shall issue a written order which shall include specific findings of
fact setting forth the grounds for the action taken. If the evidence fails
to support a finding that the Food Truck Permit should be revoked or
suspended, then no such order shall be issued.
Section
605.220
FENTON CITY CODE Section
605.240
AO:656
ten (10) days of the date of the decision. The Board may delay the
implementation of its order pending appeal.
Section
605.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.240
AO:657
Chapter 610
PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND ORGANIZED PHYSICAL
ACTIVITIES
Section 610.010. Definitions and Prohibited Practices. [R.O. 2006
§635.010; Ord. No. 497 §158, 6-26-1979; Ord. No. 1423 1,
10-15-1990]
Section 610.020. Application — Generally. [R.O. 2006 §635.020;
Ord. No. 497 §159, 6-26-1979]
A. Any group of more than three (3) vehicles or more than four (4)
pedestrians traveling upon the streets or sidewalks together, or in a
procession, or in a race, shall be deemed to be a parade within the
meaning of this Chapter, provided however, that funerals, the forces of
the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this State, the
forces of the Police and Fire Department or any group of residents of
this City who are out for a walk for pleasure and not for the purpose of
advertising, demonstrating, or promoting any idea or thing, or being
involved in any organized physical activity such as a marathon,
walkathon, bikeathon or the like shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Chapter.
B. The following acts shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be a
misdemeanor:
1. The conduct of, or participation in, a procession or parade or
organized physical activity as defined above, without having a valid
permit hereunder;
2. The willful falsification of an application or accompanying
documents in any material respect;
3. The transfer of a permit to any person, other than the rightful
holder;
4. The commission of any acts of trespass, violence, force, damage to
property (public or private) or the use of any abusive, obscene or
vital language or cursing while engaged in any such parades; or
5. The failure to carry the permit while engaged in the permitted
activity hereunder.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or take part in any
procession or parade or organized physical activity, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, upon the roadways or sidewalks of the
City without first having obtained a permit from the office of the City
Clerk designating the street or streets such processions shall traverse,
and the hours within which the same shall proceed.
Section
605.240
FENTON CITY CODE Section
610.020
AO:658
Section 610.030. Grounds For Refusal To Issue License. [R.O. 2006
§635.030; Ord. No. 497 §161, 6-26-1979]
If the applicant or applicants for a permit required by this Chapter fail
to give all the information and accompanying data, documents, and fee
required, the permit shall be immediately refused by the City Clerk.
Section 610.040. Application Forwarded To Police. [R.O. 2006
§635.040; Ord. No. 1423 §3, 10-15-1990; Ord. No. 1918 §3,
11-20-1995]
Upon the filing of the application for a permit required by this Chapter in
duplicate and duly and properly executed under oath, and accompanied by
the proper documents and information, the City Clerk shall immediately
furnish a copy thereof to the Police Department for investigation and report.
Section 610.050. Investigation of Application. [R.O. 2006 §635.050;
Ord. No. 1918 §3, 11-20-1995]
Upon receipt of a copy of the application for a permit required by this
Chapter, the Police Department shall immediately make an investigation
of the truth and accuracy of the information set out in the application
A. Any person desiring to conduct, sponsor or participate in a procession
or parade or organized physical activity in the City shall make written
application under oath for a parade permit on a form to be provided by
the City Clerk.
B. In said application, the applicant shall state the name or names, date of
birth, present residence, business and name and address of employer of
the applicant or applicants; and if the application is made by a firm or
organization, such information should be furnished with respect to the
managing heads of such firm or organization and those who will be in
charge of the parade, procession or organized physical activity.
C. The application shall also contain an adequate physical description of
the applicant or other persons mentioned who are required to make
such application, with information as to height, weight, color of hair, of
eyes and other identifying characteristics.
D. Where literature, letters, pamphlets, or other printed or written
material are to be distributed, the application shall be accompanied by
a sample or copy of each piece to be distributed. The application shall
state the applicant's best estimate of the number of vehicles, and of the
number of pedestrians or participants that are expected to participate
in such procession or parade or organized physical activity.
E. The application shall be made in duplicate, shall be signed by the
person or persons required to sign such application under the above
provisions.
Section
610.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.050
AO:659
including, but not limited to, the route sought by applicants, and report the
findings to the City Clerk.
Section 610.060. Issuance. [R.O. 2006 §635.060; Ord. No. 1423 §4,
10-15-1990]
Chapter 615
WATER SERVICE
Section 615.010. License Tax — Gross Receipts. [R.O. 2006
§640.010; Ord. No. 636 §1, 4-18-1983]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying water
service connected therewith for compensation for any purpose in the City
of Fenton, and every manufacturing corporation now or hereafter engaged
in the supply of water or water services for compensation for any purpose
in the City of Fenton, shall pay to the City of Fenton, as a license tax, a
sum equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from such business
except that the collection of the license tax on the gross receipts from
residential customers shall be in abatement until reinstated by ordinance.
No residential customer or utility shall be held responsible or liable for
sums not collected during the period of abatement.
A. The Police Department using the information provided by the applicant
shall conduct an investigation and make a recommendation to the City
Clerk concerning the advisability of approving a permit. Should the
Police Department have further questions or comments to protect the
safety of the participants or onlookers, the Police Department shall
convey such remarks with its recommendation to the City Clerk.
B. The City Clerk shall issue a permit if there is no danger to the public
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
C. The permit shall carry the following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Time and place of parade, procession or physical activity.
3. Description of activity.
4. Conditions of activity.
5. Map indicating streets/parks/sidewalks of the route.
6. Any restrictions which apply.
7. Insurer, if applicable.
Section
610.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:660
Section 615.020. Gross Receipts — Defined. [R.O. 2006 §640.020;
Ord. No. 484 §1, 1-16-1979]
The term "gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and
charges of commodities or services as herein described from the business as
herein described, in the City of Fenton, St. Louis County, during any period
less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible accounts
actually charged off.
Section 615.030. Statement of Gross Receipts — Payment of Tax.
[R.O. 2006 §640.030; Ord. No. 484 §1, 1-16-1979]
Section 615.040. Authority To Investigate Statements. [R.O. 2006
§640.040; Ord. No. 28 §3, 8-17-1959]
The City Clerk and such other person or persons as may be designated by
the Mayor from time to time is and are hereby authorized to investigate
the correctness and accuracy of the statement so filed, and for that purpose
shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers
and records of any person making such return in order to ascertain the
accuracy thereof.
Section 615.050. License Tax — No Exemptions From Other Taxes.
[R.O. 2006 §640.050; Ord. No. 28 §4, 8-17-1959]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be so construed as to exempt any person, firm
or corporation to which this Chapter is applicable from the payment to the
City of Fenton of the tax which the City levies upon the real or personal
property belonging to such person, firm or corporation.
Chapter 620
ELECTRIC SERVICE
A. It is hereby made the duty of every person engaged in the business
described to file with the City Clerk of the City of Fenton on or before
the last day of April, 1979, a verified statement of the gross receipts of
such person, firm or corporation derived from the transaction of such
business in the City for the month of March, 1979, and pay to the City
Collector the tax thereon as hereinabove set forth; provided however,
that it shall not be necessary to include in such statement nor calculate
the tax upon any receipts derived from any such service furnished the
City or any governmental unit therein.
B. Thereafter, such statements and payments shall be due and made on or
before the last day of each calendar month for the gross receipts
derived during the preceding month. Such payment shall be for a
license to operate for the month following the month in which the
payment is due.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
620.010
AO:661
Section 620.010. License Tax — Gross Receipts. [R.O. 2006
§645.010; Ord. No. 633 §1, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 826 §1, 9-16-1985;
Ord. No. 3219 §1, 9-22-2011]
Section 620.020. Statement of Gross Receipts — Payment of Tax.
[R.O. 2006 §645.020; Ord. No. 483 §1, 1-16-1979]
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business hereinbefore set
forth, in the City of Fenton, is hereby required to file with the City Clerk
of Fenton on or before the last day of each calendar month commencing
with February, 1979, a sworn statement showing the gross receipts derived
from the transaction of such business in the City for the preceding calendar
month; and at the same time pay to the City Collector the tax hereinbefore
set forth; provided however, that it shall not be necessary to include in such
statement nor calculate the tax upon any receipts derived from such service
furnished the City or any other governmental unit therein.
Section 620.030. Authority To Investigate Statements. [R.O. 2006
§645.030; Ord. No. 27 §3, 8-17-1959]
The City Clerk and such other person or persons as may be designated by
the Mayor from time to time is and are hereby authorized to investigate
the corrections and accuracy of the statement so filed, and for that purpose
shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers
and records of any person making such return in order to ascertain the
accuracy thereof.
Section 620.040. License Tax — No Exemptions From Other Taxes.
[R.O. 2006 §645.040; Ord. No. 27 §4, 8-17-1959]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be so construed as to exempt any person, firm
or corporation to which this Chapter is applicable from the payment to the
City of Fenton of the tax which the City levies upon the real or personal
property belonging to such person, firm or corporation.
A. Every person, firm or corporation now or hereafter engaged in the
business of supplying or furnishing electricity or electrical power in the
City of Fenton as a license or occupational tax, shall pay five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts derived from such business within the City
except that the collection of the license tax on the gross receipts from
residential customers shall be in abatement until reinstated by
ordinance. No residential customer or utility shall be held responsible
or liable for sums not collected during the period of abatement.
B. The gross receipts tax imposed upon electric corporations, including,
but not limited to, Ameren Missouri, pursuant to Section 620.010 of the
Municipal Code of Fenton, Missouri shall be maintained at its existing
rate of five percent (5%), despite the tariff increase awarded by the PSC
to Ameren Missouri effective January 3, 2013. [Ord. No. 3313 §1,
2-28-2013]
Section
620.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
620.040
AO:662
Chapter 625
GAS SERVICE
Section 625.010. License Tax — Gross Receipts. [R.O. 2006
§650.010; Ord. No. 634 §1, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1636 §1,
10-19-1992]
Section 625.020. Gross Receipts — Defined. [R.O. 2006 §650.020;
Ord. No. 461 §1, 2-20-1978]
The term "gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and
charges of the commodities or services as hereinabove described in the City
of Fenton, during any period, less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes
and uncollectible accounts actually charged off.
Section 625.030. Statement of Gross Receipts — Payment of Tax.
[R.O. 2006 §650.030; Ord. No. 485 §1, 1-16-1979]
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business hereinbefore set
forth, in the City of Fenton, is hereby required to file with the City Clerk
of Fenton on or before the last day of February, 1979, a sworn statement
showing the gross receipts derived from the transaction of such business in
the City for the preceding calendar month and thereafter, on or before the
last day of each month, a sworn statement showing the gross receipts so
derived for the preceding calendar month; and at the same time pay to the
City Collector the tax hereinbefore set forth; provided however, that it shall
A. Every person, firm or corporation now or hereafter engaged in the
business of supplying or furnishing gas or gas service in the City of
Fenton, shall pay to the City as a license or occupational tax, five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts derived from such business within
the City except that the collection of the license tax on the gross
receipts from residential customers shall be in abatement until
reinstated by ordinance. No residential customer or utility shall be held
responsible or liable for sums not collected during the period of
abatement. However, every such person, firm or corporation, in the
application of the term "residential customer" shall be governed by an
exemption or non-exemption certification issued by the City Clerk or
such other City Official as may from time to time be designated in
writing, and upon authorization of the Board of Aldermen. "Residential
customer" is defined herein as a person or persons living in a building
used as a home.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 393.275(2), RSMo., the license tax
on gross receipts derived by Laclede Gas Company from the transaction
of such business in the City shall be maintained after August 23, 1992
at the rate of five percent (5%) except collection of the license tax on
the gross receipts from residential customers shall remain in
abatement until reinstated by ordinance.
Section
620.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
625.030
AO:663
not be necessary to include in such statement nor calculate the tax upon
any receipts derived from any such service furnished the City or any other
governmental unit therein.
Section 625.040. Authority To Investigate Statements. [R.O. 2006
§650.040; Ord. No. 29 §3, 8-17-1959]
The City Clerk and such other person or persons as may be designated by
the Mayor from time to time is and are hereby authorized to investigate
the correctness and accuracy of the statement so filed, and for that purpose
shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers
and records of any person making such return in order to ascertain the
accuracy thereof.
Section 625.050. License Tax — No Exemptions From Other Taxes.
[R.O. 2006 §650.050; Ord. No. 29 §4, 8-17-1959]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be so construed as to exempt any person, firm
or corporation to which this Chapter is applicable from the payment to the
City of Fenton of the tax which the City levies upon the real or personal
property belonging to such person, firm or corporation.
Chapter 630
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
Section 630.010. License Tax — Gross Receipts. [R.O. 2006
§655.010; Ord. No. 635 §1, 4-18-1983]
Every person, firm, company or corporation now or hereafter engaged in
the business of furnishing telecommunications service in the City of Fenton,
shall pay the said City as an annual license tax, five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts derived from the furnishings of such service within said City,
as hereinafter set forth except that the collection of the license tax on
the gross receipts from residential customers shall be in abatement until
reinstated by ordinance. No residential customer or utility shall be held
responsible or liable for sums not collected during the period of abatement.
Section 630.020. Statement of Gross Receipts — Payment of Tax.
[R.O. 2006 §655.020; Ord. No. 486 §1, 1-16-1979]
All such persons, firms, companies or corporations mentioned in Section
630.010 hereof shall file with the City Clerk of the said City on or before
March 31, 1979, a sworn statement of the gross receipts derived by such
person, firm, company or corporation from the furnishing of such service
during the period from September 1, 1978, to February 28, 1979, and
on or before the last day of April, 1979, and on the last day of each
calendar month thereafter a similar statement of gross receipts derived
by such person, firm, company or corporation from the furnishing of such
service during the preceding calendar month. At the time of filing any such
Section
625.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
630.020
AO:664
statement, the person, firm, company or corporation involved shall pay to
the City Collector of the said City five percent (5%) of such receipts. The
telephone company shall have the privilege of crediting such sums as may
be due hereunder with any unpaid balance due said company for telephone
service rendered or facilities furnished to said City.
Section 630.030. Payments in Lieu of Other Charges — Exception.
[R.O. 2006 §655.030; Ord. No. 278 §4, 6-15-1970]
The payments required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be in lieu of
all other excises, charges, exactions, rentals, impositions or other license
or occupation taxes heretofore imposed upon any person, firm, company or
corporation engaged in the business described in Section 630.010 hereof;
but nothing herein contained shall be construed to exempt such person,
firm, company or corporation from any general or special ad valorem tax
imposed upon the public generally by said City.
Section 630.040. Raising and Lowering of Wires. [R.O. 2006
§655.040; Ord. No. 278 §5, 6-15-1970]
All such persons, firms, companies, or corporations mentioned in Section
630.010 on the request of any person shall remove or raise or lower its
wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall
be paid by the party or parties requesting such raising or lowering of wires,
and payment in advance may be required. Not less than forty-eight (48)
hours advance notice shall be given to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
Section 630.050. Right To Trim Trees, Etc.. [R.O. 2006 §655.050;
Ord. No. 278 §6, 6-15-1970]
The right is hereby granted to all such persons, firms, companies or
corporations mentioned in Section 630.010 to trim trees, brush or hedges
upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places
of said City, so as to prevent such foliage from coming in contact with
telephone wires and cables, all of said trimming to be done under the
supervision and direction of the governing body of said City or of any City
Official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.
Chapter 635
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY CODE
Section 635.010. General Provisions. [R.O. 2006 §660.010; Ord. No.
1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
A. Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable
Communications Regulatory Code".
Section
630.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.010
AO:665
Section 635.020. Definitions and Word Usage. [R.O. 2006 §660.020;
Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
B. Purpose. The City finds that further development of cable systems has
the potential to be of great benefit to the City and its residents and
businesses. Cable technology is rapidly changing, and cable plays an
essential role as part of the City's basic infrastructure. cable systems
extensively make use of scarce and valuable public rights-of-way, in a
manner different from the way in which the general public uses them,
and in a manner reserved primarily for those who provide services to
the public, such as utility companies. A cable company currently
typically faces very limited competition; thus, the grant of a franchise
has the effect of giving the holder extensive economic benefits and
places the holder in a position of public trust. Because of the facts, the
City finds that public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best
be served by establishing regulatory powers vested in the City or such
persons as the City so designates to protect the public and to ensure
that any franchise granted is operated in the public interest. In light of
the foregoing, the following goals, among others, underlie the
provisions set forth in this Chapter:
1. Cable service should be available to as many City residents and
businesses as possible and provide the widest possible diversity of
information sources and services to the public.
2. A cable system should be capable of accommodating both present
and reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs to the
public.
3. A cable system should be constructed and maintained during a
franchise term so that changes in technology may be integrated to
the maximum extent possible into existing system facilities, taking
into account all relevant factors including costs.
4. A cable system should grow and develop and be responsive to the
needs and interests of the community.
The City intends that all provisions set forth in this Chapter
be construed to serve the public interest and the foregoing
public purposes, and that any franchise issued pursuant to this
Chapter be construed to include the foregoing findings and
public purposes as integral parts thereof.
C. Existing Franchise And Agreements. To the extent permitted by law,
this Chapter shall apply to franchises and other agreements in effect at
the time of adoption of this Chapter. Ordinance 517 as amended, is
hereby repealed.
Section
635.010
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.020
AO:666
present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and vice versa, and the masculine
gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly
stated or clearly contrary to the context, terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in
Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, 47 U.S.C.
§§521 et seq., as amended, and regulations issued pursuant thereto, and, if
not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. For convenience,
Federal definitions are set forth in Section 635.150, which Section may
be revised by the City Attorney to reflect subsequent changes in Federal
law without the need for an amendment of this Chapter. For further
convenience, the first letter of terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations
defined in this Chapter or by Federal law have been capitalized, but an
inadvertent failure to capitalize such letter shall not affect meaning.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — "Board of Aldermen" or "Board" shall mean the
Governing Body of the City.
CABLE ACT — Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter
V-A, 47 U.S.C. §§521 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY — The City of Fenton, Missouri, and its agencies, departments, agents,
and employees acting within their respective areas of authority.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee or any
successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets
forth, subject to this Chapter, the terms and conditions under which a
franchise will be exercised.
FRANCHISE AREA — The area of the City that a franchisee is authorized to
serve by its franchise agreement.
FRANCHISE TRANSFER —
Any transaction in which:
Any ownership or other right, title, or interest of more than ten
percent (10%) in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred,
sold, assigned, leased, sublet, mortgaged or otherwise disposed of
or encumbered directly or indirectly, voluntarily or by foreclosure
or other involuntary means, in whole or in part; or
a.
There is any change in or substitution of, or acquisition or transfer
of control of, the franchisee or any person which has more than ten
percent (10%) interest in a franchisee or has responsibility for or
control over a franchisee's operations or over the system; or
b.
The rights or obligations held by the franchisee under the franchise
are transferred, directly or indirectly, to another person.
c.
1.
Section
635.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.020
AO:667
FRANCHISEE — A person that has been granted a franchise by the City in
accordance with this Chapter.
GROSS REVENUES — Any and all cash, credits, property or other
consideration of any kind or nature, received directly or indirectly, by a
franchisee or its affiliates or any person, arising from, attributable to, or
in any way derived from the operation of a cable system to provide cable
services, including the studios and other facilities associated therewith,
within the City. "Gross revenues" include, by way of illustration and not
limitation, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional,
"Control" means the legal or practical ability to direct the affairs of
another person, either directly or indirectly whether by contractual
agreement, majority ownership interest, any lesser ownership interest,
or in any other manner.
2.
A rebuttable presumption that a change, acquisition, or transfer of
control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation
of a ten percent (10%) or larger ownership interest by any person or
group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already have more
than fifty percent (50%) ownership interest, alone or collectively.
3.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, "franchise transfer" does not include:
Disposition or replacement of worn out or obsolete equipment,
property or facilities in the normal course of operating a cable
system, including the renewal or extension of equipment or
property leases and contracts; or
a.
Acquisition, transfer, sale or other disposition or leases, licenses,
easements, and other interests in real property in the normal
course of operating a cable system and not involving the
relinquishment of any right or power affecting the franchisee's
ability to provide services in whole or in part; or
b.
Pledge or mortgage of a franchisee's assets to a financial institution
in return for sums necessary to construct or operate (or both) the
cable system, provided that such pledge or mortgage and related
agreements obligate and limit such financial institution as follows:
Any foreclosure or exercise of lien over the franchise or facilities
shall only be by assumption of control over the entire cable system;
prior to assumption of control, the institution shall notify the City
that it or a designee acceptable to the City will take control of
and operate the system, and shall submit a plan for such operation
insuring continued service and compliance with this Chapter and
all franchise obligations during the term the institution exercises
such control; and the institution shall not exercise control for
longer than one (1) year unless extended by the City for good cause
and shall prior to the expiration of such period (as extended) obtain
the City's approval of a franchise transfer for the remaining term of
the franchise or award a new franchise to another qualified person
pursuant to this Chapter.
c.
4.
Section
635.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.020
AO:668
premium, per-channel, per-program, or other service; installation,
disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel
fees; late fees and processing fees; fees or payments received from
programmers for carriage of programming on the system (which does not
include contributions to joint marketing efforts); revenues from rentals or
sales of converters or other equipment; studio rental and production fees;
advertising revenues; revenues from program guides; and revenues from
home shopping and bank-at-home channels. "Gross revenues" shall not
include any franchise fees hereunder or any taxes on services furnished by
a franchisee or other person which are imposed directly on any subscriber
or user by the United States, the State of Missouri, the City, or other
governmental unit and which are collected by a franchisee or other person
on behalf of said governmental unit. "Gross revenues" shall not include
revenues of another person to the extent already included in the "gross
revenues" of one (1) person hereunder, or any proceeds from the sale or
exchange of the system. "Gross revenues" shall not include revenues for
goods and services which are not provided over the system, even if such
goods and services are ordered using the system. In the event a person
receives revenues for operations within and without the City of which no
specific portion can be attributed to operations in the City, "gross revenues"
with respect to such revenues shall mean the portion thereof derived by
multiplying such revenues by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
number of subscribers in the City and the denominator of which is the total
number of subscribers in the area generating such revenues.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through
Friday.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions that are
within the control of a franchisee. Conditions that are not within the control
of a franchisee, include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages in excess of two (2) hours in length, telephone
network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions
that are within the control of a franchisee include, but are not limited
to, special promotions, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand
periods, maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, and power outages of
two (2) hours or less in length.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation or other entity, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof, but such term does not include the City.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space above the surface,
and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway,
easement or similar property in which the City now or hereafter holds any
property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was
dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable
system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a "public
right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the
City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is
Section
635.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.020
AO:669
sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be
deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the City and as
the City may have the undisputed right and power to give.
RFP — Stands for request for proposal.
SALE — Any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more
cable channels.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives any cable service
delivered over a cable system and the City in its capacity as a recipient of
such service.
USER — A person utilizing a part or all of a cable system for purposes
of producing or transmitting video programming or other programming
services as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a
subscriber.
Section 635.030. Grant of Franchise. [R.O. 2006 §660.030; Ord. No.
1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
A. Grant Of Franchise. The City may grant one (1) or more cable television
franchises containing such provisions as are reasonably necessary to
protect the public interest, and each such franchise shall be awarded in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. This
Chapter may be amended from time to time, and in no event shall this
Chapter be considered a contract between the City and a franchisee
such that the City would be prohibited from amending any provision
hereof; provided, no such amendment shall in any way impair any
contract right or increase obligations of a franchisee under an
outstanding and effective franchise except in the lawful exercise of the
City's Police power.
B. Franchise Required.
1. No person may construct, operate or maintain a cable system or
provide cable service over a cable system within the City without a
franchise granted by the City authorizing such activity. No person
may be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise
agreement with the City pursuant to this Chapter. For the purpose
of this provision, the operation of part or all of a cable system
within the City means the use or occupancy by facilities of public
rights-of-way within the City whether or not any subscriber within
the City is served. A system shall be deemed as using or occupying
public rights-of-way even though such use or occupancy is solely by
reason of use of distribution facilities furnished by a telephone or
other company pursuant to tariff or contract. A system shall not be
deemed as operating within the City even though service is offered
or rendered to one (1) or more subscribers within the City, if no
public right-of-way is used or occupied. The location within the City
of a microwave or similar relay, interconnection or program
Section
635.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.030
AO:670
origination facility not involving the use or occupancy of public
rights-of-way shall not be deemed operation within the City. In all
respects, franchise agreements shall be issued so as to provide
equal protection under the law and to prevent unlawful disparate
treatment of persons which operate or construct cable systems or
provide cable services over a cable system.
2. To the extent a common carrier (or any other person) is providing
video programming to subscribers using radio communications,
such common carrier (or other person) must obtain a franchise as
required pursuant to this Chapter but shall not be subject to
requirements imposed by the Cable Act through this Chapter. To
the extent a common carrier is providing transmission of video
programming on a common carrier basis, such common carrier
must obtain a franchise as required pursuant to this Chapter but
shall not be subject to requirements imposed by the Cable Act
through this Chapter (but this Section shall not affect the treatment
of a facility of a common carrier as a cable system). To the extent a
common carrier (or any other person) is providing video
programming by means of an open video system pursuant to
certification approved by the FCC, such common carrier (or other
person) need not obtain a franchise pursuant to this Chapter but
shall be subject to requirements imposed by the Cable Act through
this Chapter as permitted by Federal law, and shall pay to the City,
fees on gross revenues for the provision of cable service equal to
and in lieu of the franchise fee imposed hereunder on cable
operators in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. To the
extent that a common carrier is providing video programming to its
subscribers in a manner other than that described above in this
Subsection such common carrier must obtain a franchise as
required pursuant to this Chapter and shall be subject to
requirements imposed by the Cable Act through this Chapter.
C. Length Of Franchise. No franchise shall initially be granted for a period
of more than twenty (20) years or less than four (4) years, except that a
franchisee may apply for renewal or extension pursuant to this Chapter.
D. Franchise Characteristics.
1. A franchisee authorizes use of public rights-of-way for installing,
operating, and maintain cables, wires, lines, optical fiber,
underground conduit, and other devices necessary and
appurtenant to the operation of a cable system to provide cable
service within a franchise area, but does not expressly or implicitly
authorize a franchisee to provide service to, or install a cable
system on private property without owner consent through eminent
domain or otherwise (except for use of compatible easements
pursuant to and consistent with Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. §541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned poles,
ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners.
Section
635.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.030
AO:671
2. A franchise shall not mean or include any franchise, license or
permit for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business
within the City as generally required by the ordinances and laws of
the City other than this Cable Communications Regulatory Code, or
for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether owned
by the City or other person, or for excavating or performing other
work in or along public rights-of-way. A franchise shall not confer
any authority to provide telecommunications services or any other
communications services besides cable services. A franchise shall
not confer any implicit rights other than those mandated by
Federal, State or local law.
3. A franchise is non-exclusive and will not explicitly or implicitly:
preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems
within the City; affect the City's right to authorize use of public
rights-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or for other
purposes as it determines appropriate; or affect the City's right to
itself construct, operate or maintain a cable system, with or without
a franchise.
4. Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by
the City and a franchisee, such franchise agreement shall
constitute a valid and enforceable contract between the franchisee
and the City, and the terms, conditions, and provisions of such
franchise agreement, subject to this Chapter and all other duly
enacted and applicable laws, shall define the rights and obligations
of the franchisee and the City relating to the franchise.
5. All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any
prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way, and the City
reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's
facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way through its
generally applicable permit procedures without materially adding
to the obligations of the franchisee.
6. A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and
personal to the original franchisee. No franchise transfer shall
occur without the prior written consent of the City upon application
made by the franchise pursuant to this Chapter and the franchise
agreement, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, and
any purported franchise transfer made without application and
prior written consent shall be void and shall be cause for the City to
revoke the franchise agreement.
E. Franchisee Subject To Other Laws, Police Powers.
1. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with
all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, including this Chapter.
A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the
Police power of the City including, but not limited to, all rights the
City may have under 47 U.S.C. §552, all powers regarding zoning,
Section
635.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.030
AO:672
supervision of construction, assurance of equal employment
opportunities, control of public rights-of-way, and consumer
protection.
2. No course of dealing between a franchisee and the City, or any
delay on the part of the City in exercising any rights hereunder,
shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the City or
acquiescence in the actions of a franchisee in contravention of such
rights except to the extent expressly waived in writing or expressly
provided for in a franchise agreement.
3. The City shall have full authority to regulate cable systems,
franchisees, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully
permissible. Except where rights are expressly waived by a
franchise agreement, they are reserved, whether or not expressly
enumerated.
F. Interpretation Of Franchise Terms.
1. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and a franchise
agreement, the provisions of the franchise agreement control
except where the conflict arises from the lawful exercise of the
City's Police power.
2. The provisions of this Chapter and a franchise agreement will be
liberally construed in accordance with generally accepted rules of
contract construction and to promote the public interest.
G. Operation Of A Cable System Without A Franchise. Any person who
occupies public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating or
constructing a cable system or provides cable service over a cable
system and who does not hold a valid franchise from the City shall be
subject to all requirements of this Chapter including, but not limited to,
its provisions regarding construction and technical standards and
franchise fees. In its discretion, the City at any time may by ordinance:
require such person to enter into a franchise agreement within thirty
(30) days of receipt of written notice to such person from the City that a
franchise agreement is required; require such person to remove its
property and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the
City within such time period; grant a revocable permit to operate for a
period not to exceed two (2) years provided such period begins on the
expiration date of a franchise previously issued to such person; direct
municipal personnel to remove the property and restore the affected
area to a condition satisfactory to the City and charge the person the
costs therefor, including by placing a lien on the person's property as
provided in connection with abating nuisances; or take any other action
it is entitled to take under applicable law. In no event shall a franchise
be created unless it is issued by an ordinance of the City pursuant to
this Chapter and subject to a written franchise agreement.
H. Acts At Franchisee's Expense. Any act that a franchisee is or may be
required to perform under this Chapter, a franchise agreement, or
Section
635.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.030
AO:673
Section 635.040. Applications For Grant, Renewal, Modification or
Transfer of Franchises. [R.O. 2006 §660.040; Ord. No. 1889 §2,
9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
applicable law shall be performed at the franchisee's expense, without
reimbursement by the City, unless expressly provided to the contrary in
this Chapter, the franchise agreement or applicable law.
I. Eminent Domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to
impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the City's power of eminent
domain.
J. Exclusive Contracts And Anti-Competitive Acts Prohibited.
1. No franchisee or other multichannel video programming
distributor shall enter into or enforce an exclusive contract for the
provision of cable service or other multichannel video
programming with any person, or demand the exclusive right to
serve a person or location, as a condition of extending service to
that or any other person or location.
2. No franchisee or other multichannel video programming
distributor shall engage in acts that have the purpose or effect of
limiting competition for the provision cable service or services
similar to cable service in the City, except for such actions as are
expressly authorized by law.
A. Written Application.
1. A written application shall be filed with the City Clerk for: Grant of
an initial franchise; renewal of a franchise under 47 U.S.C. §546(a)
— (g) or §546(h); modification of a franchise agreement; or
franchise transfer. An applicant shall demonstrate in its application
compliance with all requirements of this Chapter and all applicable
laws.
2. To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall
be submitted together with ten (10) copies. The application must be
accompanied by the required filing fees, conform to any applicable
request for proposals, and contain all required information. All
applications shall include the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant
with respect to the application.
3. All filed applications shall be made available by the City Clerk for
public inspection. Each filed application shall be reviewed promptly
by the City for completeness.
B. Application For Grant Of A Franchise, Other Than A Cable Act Renewal
Franchise.
Section
635.030
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:674
1. Upon receipt of an application for a franchise other than a Cable
Act Renewal franchise, the Board of Aldermen may commence a
proceeding to identify the future cable-related needs and interests
of the community. Upon completion of that proceeding, or after
receipt of the application if no such proceeding is commenced, the
Board of Aldermen shall either evaluate the application or issue an
RFP, which shall be mailed to the applicant and made reasonably
available to any other interested person. The procedures,
instructions, and requirements set forth in an RFP shall be followed
by each applicant as if set forth and required herein. The City may
seek additional information from any applicant and establish
deadlines for the submission of such information. If the City issues
an RFP, it shall evaluate all timely responses.
2. In evaluating an application for a franchise including a response to
an RFP, the City shall consider, among other things, the following
factors:
a. The extent to which the applicant substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any franchises in
other communities.
b. Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any
franchises in other communities, including signal quality,
response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the
like, was reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the
communities served.
c. Whether there is adequate assurance that the applicant has
the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide
cable service in the City.
d. Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the City and is otherwise reasonably likely to
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs
and interests.
e. Whether there is adequate assurance the applicant will provide
suitable public, educational, and governmental access
facilities.
f. Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted and in the public
interest considering the immediate and future effect on the
public rights-of-way that would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services, or use of the public
rights-of-way.
g. Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other cable system in the City, or whether grant of
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:675
the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service in the City.
3. If the Board of Aldermen finds that it is in the public interest to
issue a franchise considering the factors set forth above, the City
shall prepare a final written franchise agreement under this
Chapter that incorporates, as appropriate, the commitments made
by the applicant and establish a deadline for the applicant to sign it
and submit it for approval. If the applicant signs the franchise
agreement and timely submits it for approval, the City shall issue a
franchise by ordinance adopted no less than thirty (30) days after
the filing of the original application.
4. If the Board of Aldermen denies a franchise, it will issue a written
decision explaining why the franchise was denied.
5. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the Board of
Aldermen shall hold a public hearing; however, the City may reject
without hearing any application that is incomplete or fails to
respond fully to an RFP.
6. This Chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant
standing to challenge the issuance of a franchise to another person
or to limit such standing.
C. Application For Grant Of A Cable Act Franchise Renewal. Applications
for franchise renewal under the Cable Act shall be received and
reviewed in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. §546. If neither a franchisee nor the City activates in a timely
manner, or can activate, the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C.
§546(a) — (g) (including, for example, if the provisions are repealed),
and except as to applications submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §546(h),
the provisions of Section 635.040(B) shall apply and a renewal request
shall be evaluated using the same criteria as any other request for a
franchise. The following requirements shall apply to renewal requests
properly submitted pursuant to the Cable Act:
1. a. If the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §546(a) — (g) are properly
invoked, the Board of Aldermen shall, in accordance with the
time limits of the Cable Act, commence and complete a
proceeding to review the applicant's performance under the
franchise during the then current franchise term and to
identify future cable-related community needs and interests.
Upon completion of the proceeding, the Board of Aldermen
may issue a RFP. The Board of Aldermen, or its designee, shall
establish deadlines and procedures for responding to the RFP,
may seek additional information from the applicant, and shall
establish deadlines for the submission of such additional
information. Alternatively, an applicant can submit a proposal
for renewal on its own initiative.
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:676
b. Following receipt of renewal proposals (and such additional
information as may be provided in response to requests), the
Board of Aldermen will provide prompt public notice of such
proposals and thereafter either determine that the franchise
should be renewed or make a preliminary assessment that the
franchise should not be renewed. This determination shall be
made in accordance with the time limits established by the
Cable Act, including sufficient time to comply with the
following procedures.
c. If the Board of Aldermen preliminarily determines that the
franchise should not be renewed, which determination can be
made by resolution, and the applicant that submitted the
renewal proposal notifies the City Clerk in writing within
twenty (20) days after receipt of the preliminary determination
that it wishes to pursue any rights to an administrative
proceeding it has under the Cable Act, then, if required, the
Board of Aldermen shall commence an administrative
proceeding after providing prompt public notice thereof, in
accordance with the Cable Act. The City may also commence
such a proceeding on its own initiative if it so chooses.
d. If the Board of Aldermen decides to grant renewal, which
decision shall be made by resolution, the City shall prepare a
final written franchise agreement that incorporates, as
appropriate, the commitments made by the applicant in the
renewal proposal and establish a deadline for the applicant to
sign it and submit for approval. If the applicant signs the
franchise agreement and timely submits it for approval, the
City shall issue a franchise by ordinance. If the franchise
agreement is not so accepted and approved within the time
limits established by 47 U.S.C. §546(c)(1) and the City, renewal
shall thereupon be deemed preliminary denied, and if the
applicant notifies the City Clerk in writing within twenty (20)
days after the expiration of the time limit established by 47
U.S.C. §546(c)(1) that it wishes to pursue any rights to an
administrative proceeding it has under the Cable Act, then, if
required, the Board of Aldermen shall commence an
administrative proceeding after providing prompt public notice
thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act. The City may also
commence such a proceeding on its own initiative if it so
chooses.
2. If an administrative proceeding is commenced pursuant to 47
U.S.C. §546(c), the applicant's renewal proposal shall be evaluated
considering such matters as may be considered consistent with
Federal law. The following procedures shall apply:
a. The Board of Aldermen shall, by resolution, appoint an
administrative Hearing Officer or Officers (referred to
hereafter as "Hearing Officer"). The Board of Aldermen may
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:677
appoint itself or one (1) or more of its members as Hearing
Officer(s) or any other qualified person.
b. The Hearing Officer shall establish a schedule for proceeding
which allows for written discovery (requests for admissions,
production of documents and interrogatory responses),
production of evidence, and subpoenaing and crossexamination
of witnesses. Depositions shall not be permitted
unless the party requesting the deposition shows that written
discovery and hearing subpoena will not provide it an adequate
opportunity to require the production of evidence necessary to
present its case. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority
to require the production of evidence as the interests of justice
may require, including to require the production of evidence by
the applicant that submitted the renewal proposal and any
affiliate of such applicant. The Hearing Officer shall not
prohibit discovery on the ground that evidence sought is
proprietary or involves business secrets, but rather shall issue
protective orders which allow reasonable and necessary
discovery without making such information available to
competitors. Any order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced
by imposing appropriate sanctions in the administrative
hearing or by action of the Board of Aldermen.
c. The Hearing Officer may conduct a prehearing conference and
establish appropriate prehearing orders. The City and the
applicant shall be the only parties. The City may have special
counsel to represent its interests at the hearing so that the City
Attorney may advise the Board of Aldermen as it makes its
decision.
d. The Hearing Officer may require the City and the applicant to
submit prepared written testimony prior to the hearing. Unless
the parties agree otherwise, the applicant shall present
evidence the first, the City shall present evidence second, and
the applicant shall be allowed the opportunity to present
rebuttal evidence. Any reports or the transcript or summary of
any proceedings conduct pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §546(a) shall
for purposes of the administrative hearing be regarded no
differently than any other evidence. The City and the applicant
must be afforded full procedural protection regarding evidence
related to these proceedings, including the right to refute any
evidence introduced in these proceedings or sought to be
introduced by the other party. Both shall have the opportunity
to submit additional evidence related to issues raised in the
proceeding conducted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §546(a).
e. There shall be a transcribed proceeding during which each
party will be allowed to present testimony (live, or written if so
required) and cross-examine the witnesses of the other party.
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:678
f. Following completion of any hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
require the parties to submit proposed findings of fact with
respect to the matters that the Board of Aldermen is entitled to
consider in determining whether renewal ought to be granted.
Based on the record of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
then prepare written findings with respect to those matters,
and submit those findings including a decision and the reasons
therefor, to the Board of Aldermen and to the parties (unless
the Hearing Officer is the Board of Aldermen, in which case the
written findings shall constitute the final decision of the City).
g. If the Hearing Officer is not the Board of Aldermen, the parties
shall have thirty (30) days from the date the findings are
submitted to the Board of Aldermen to file exceptions to those
findings. The Board of Aldermen shall thereafter issue a
written decision granting or denying the application for
renewal, consistent with the requirements of the Cable Act,
based on the record of such proceeding, stating the reason for
the decision. A copy of the final decision of the Board of
Aldermen shall be provided to the parties.
h. The proceeding shall be conducted with due speed. Any
decision to renew a franchise shall be made by ordinance
enacted no less than thirty (30) days after the filing of the
application, and subsequent to preparation of a written
franchise agreement consistent with the decision by the City
and signature thereof by the applicant.
i. In conducting the proceeding, and except as inconsistent with
the foregoing, the Hearing Officer will follow the Missouri
Administrative Procedures Act, as amended. The Hearing
Officer may request that the Board of Aldermen adopt
additional reasonable and necessary procedures and
requirements by resolution.
3. This Section does not prohibit any franchisee from submitting or
the City from considering an informal renewal application pursuant
to 47 U.S.C. §546(h), which application may be granted or denied in
accordance with the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §546(h). If such an
informal renewal application is granted, including during the
course of formal renewal proceedings, then the steps specified in
Subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this Section need not be taken,
notwithstanding the provisions of those Subsections. However, the
City will provide the public with adequate notice before making a
decision on such an application, and will make any decision to
renew by ordinance enacted no less than thirty (30) days after the
filing of the application, and subsequent to the preparation of a
written franchise agreement by the City and signature thereof by
the applicant. Unless otherwise directed by the City, an informal
renewal application shall contain the information required under
Section 635.040(D).
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:679
4. The provisions of this Chapter shall be read and applied so that
they are consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act 47 U.S.C.
§546, as amended.
D. Contents Of Franchise And Renewal Applications. An RFP for the grant
of a franchise, including for a franchise renewal shall require, and any
application submitted shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
1. Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and
addresses of all persons with more than ten percent (10%)
ownership interest in the applicant and all persons in control of the
applicant and/or the operations or system of the applicant; and any
other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of
each named person.
2. A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed or existing cable system, including
identification of key personnel and their cable television
experience.
3. A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct
and/or operate the proposed or existing cable system including, but
not limited to, a demonstration that the applicant meets the
following criteria:
a. The applicant has not had any cable television franchise validly
revoked by any franchising authority within three (3) years
preceding the submission of the application. If any revocation
action is pending, it must be identified and explained.
b. The applicant has the necessary authority under Missouri law
to operate a cable system.
c. The applicant has authority to hold the franchise as a matter of
Federal law. An applicant must have, or show that it is qualified
to obtain, any necessary Federal franchises or waivers
required to operate the proposed or existing cable system.
d. The applicant and its key personnel have not, at any time
during the ten (10) years preceding the submission of the
application, been convicted of any criminal act or omission or
civil violation of such character that the applicant cannot be
relied upon to comply substantially with its lawful obligations
under applicable law, including obligations under consumer
protection laws and laws prohibiting anti-competitive acts,
fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct. This criteria can
be met by submission of a statement that there are no
convictions, or by submission of a list reflecting that all
convictions are of a minor nature.
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:680
e. The applicant has not filed materially misleading information
in its application or intentionally withheld information that the
applicant lawfully is required to provide.
f. No elected official or employee of the City holds a controlling
interest in the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant, or has
received any promise of such an interest, or has received any
gratuity, commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingency
fee or other compensation for issuance or renewal of a
franchise, or promise thereof.
4. A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete any proposed
construction and to operate the proposed or existing cable system.
5. A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system
ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of
communities in which the applicant or any of its affiliates have, or
have had, a cable franchise or franchise or any interest therein.
6. Identification of the area of the City to be served by the proposed
cable system, including a description of the proposed franchise
area's boundaries.
7. A detailed description of existing and any proposed physical
facilities, including channel capacity, technical design,
performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities.
8. A description of any promised construction including an estimate of
plant mileage and its location; the proposed construction schedule.
9. A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted
from existing facilities to new facilities.
10. A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community,
including descriptions of how the applicant will meet or disagrees
with the needs described in any recent community needs
assessment conducted by or for the City.
11. A description of public, educational, and governmental access
facilities to be provided.
12. If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already
served by an existing franchisee, the identification of the area
where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density
in the area that would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of
the public rights-of-way and other property that would be used by
the applicant to accommodate an additional system.
13. Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:681
14. Information that the City may reasonably request of the applicant
that is relevant to the City's consideration of the application.
15. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized
representative certifying the truth, accuracy, and completeness of
the information in the application, acknowledging the
enforceability of application commitments upon acceptance
through the granting of a franchise, and certifying that the
application is consistent with all Federal, State, and local laws.
16. Applicants for renewals may refer to prior applications as long as
they submit such updated information as required to make the
application current.
E. Application For Modification Of A Franchise.
1. An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall
include, at minimum, the following information:
a. The specific modification requested;
b. The justification for the requested modification, including the
impact of the requested modification on subscribers and
others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the
modification is approved or disapproved, demonstrated
through, among other things, submission of financial pro
formas covering the period of time in which the modification
would be in effect if approved, including a statement of
projected gross revenues and income;
c. A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to
Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §545, and, if so, a
demonstration that the requested modification meets the
standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. §545;
d. Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary
for the City to make an informed determination on the
application for modification; and
e. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth, accuracy, and completeness of the
information in the application, acknowledging the
enforceability of application commitments upon acceptance
through the granting of the modification, and certifying that
the application is consistent with all Federal, State, and local
laws.
2. If the request for modification is subject to 47 U.S.C. §545, the
Board of Aldermen will conduct its review and make its decision in
conformity with that Statute. If the request for modification is not
subject to 47 U.S.C. §545, the Board of Aldermen will conduct its
review and make its decision by ordinance enacted no less than
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:682
thirty (30) days after the application is filed, subsequent to
preparation of a modified written franchise agreement by the City
and signature thereof by the applicant.
3. An extension of a franchise term by less than four (4) years shall
constitute a modification. An extension of a franchise term by four
(4) years or more shall be processed through formal or informal
renewal procedures.
F. Franchise Transfers.
1. City approval required. No franchise transfer shall occur without
prior written application to and written approval of the Board of
Aldermen by ordinance enacted after a public hearing, and only
then upon such terms and conditions as the Board of Aldermen
reasonably deems necessary and proper. Approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Any purported franchise transfer made
without such prior approval shall be void and shall be cause for the
City to revoke the franchise agreement. A grant of a franchise
involves personal credit, trust, and confidence in the franchisee,
and franchise transfer without the prior written approval of the
Board of Aldermen shall be considered to impair the City's
assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a
franchise transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary
approval of any subsequent franchise transfer.
2. Application.
a. The franchisee shall promptly notify the City Clerk in writing of
any proposed franchise transfer. If any franchise transfer
should take place without prior notice to the City, franchisee
will promptly notify the City Clerk in writing that such a
franchise transfer has occurred.
b. At least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to the
contemplated effective date of a franchise transfer, the
franchisee shall submit to the City Clerk an application for
approval of the franchise transfer. Such an application shall
provide information on the proposed transaction, including
details on the legal, financial, technical, and other
qualifications of the transferee, any waivers required from the
City under applicable law, and on the potential impact of the
franchise transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a
minimum, the following information must be included in the
application:
(1) All information and forms required under Federal law;
(2) All information described in Sections 635.040(D)(1 — 5),
(9), (11), (13 — 15) of this Chapter, regarding the
transferee instead of the applicant, and regarding the
franchise transfer rather than initial or renewal franchise;
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:683
(3) A description of any business relationships or transactions
of any kind, past, present, or anticipated, between the
franchisee, or its owners or affiliates, and the transferee,
or its owners of affiliates, other than the proposed
transaction;
(4) Any contracts, financing documents, or other documents
that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents,
schedules, exhibits or the like referred to therein;
(5) A description of the sources and amounts of the funds to
be used in the proposed transaction, indicating how the
debt-equity ratio of the system will change in the course of
the transaction; what entities will be liable for repayment
of any debt incurred; what interest, payment schedule, and
other terms or conditions will apply to any debit financing;
any debt coverages or financial ratios any potential
transferees will be required to maintain over the franchise
term if the proposed transaction is approved; what
financial resources would be available to the system under
the control of the proposed transferee;
(6) Any other information necessary to provide a complete and
accurate understanding of the financial position of the
system before and after the proposed franchise transfer
including, but not limited to, projected income statements
and cash flow statements, including capital investments,
for at least five (5) years after the proposed franchise
transfer, assuming the franchise transfer is approved,
stating specifically what assumptions are being made with
respect to any rebuild or upgrade of the system;
(7) A statement that the franchisee is in compliance with its
franchise obligations over the term of the franchise, or
specific descriptions of any non-compliance of which the
franchisee or any potential transferee is aware;
c. For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
franchise transfer, the Board of Aldermen and its agents may
inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee and
such other matters as the Board of Aldermen may deem
necessary to determine whether the franchise transfer is in the
public interest and should be approved or denied. The
franchisee and any prospective transferees shall assist the
Board of Aldermen in any such inquiry, and if they fail to
reasonably cooperate, the request for approval of franchise
transfer may be denied. Proprietary information shall be
protected from disclosure to competitors to the extent
permitted by law.
3. Determination by City.
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.040
AO:684
a. In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny or
grant subject to conditions an application for approval of a
franchise transfer, the Board of Aldermen shall consider the
legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to
operate the system; whether any required waivers under
applicable law are in the best interests of the public; whether
the franchisee is in compliance with its franchise agreement
and this Chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's
commitment to cure such non-compliance; and whether
operation by the transferee on approval of the franchise
transfer would adversely affect the City's interest under this
Chapter, the franchise agreement, other applicable law, or the
public interest, or make it less likely that the future cablerelated
needs and interests of the community would be
satisfied.
b. The City shall make its determination in accordance with any
time limits imposed by Federal law, including under 47 U.S.C.
§537(e).
c. Any purported franchise transfer made without the Board of
Aldermen's prior written approval shall be void, and shall make
a franchise subject to revocation at the Board of Aldermen's
sole discretion, and make any other remedies available to the
City under the franchise or other applicable law. Acceptance of
filing of an application for approval of a franchise transfer later
than one hundred twenty (120) days before the purported
effective date of the franchise transfer shall not validate the
transaction or excuse the late filing, and in such an instance
the City shall retain the right to make its decision regarding
such a franchise transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days
unless action is required sooner by law.
4. Transferee's agreement. No application for approval of a franchise
transfer shall be granted unless and until the proposed transferee
submits an agreement in writing that it will abide by and accept all
terms of this Chapter and the franchise agreement, and that it will
assume the obligations and liabilities, known and unknown, of the
previous franchisee under this Chapter and the franchise
agreement for all purposes, including renewal, unless the Board of
Aldermen approves a modification of the franchise agreement
pursuant to Section 635.040(E) in conjunction with its approval of
the franchise transfer, in which case the purposed transferee's
agreement shall refer to the franchise agreement as so modified.
5. Approval does not constitute waiver. Approval by the Board of
Aldermen of a franchise transfer does not constitute a waiver or
release of any of the rights of the City under this Chapter or a
franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of
the franchise transfer; however, upon approval of a franchise
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.040
AO:685
Section 635.050. Construction Provisions. [R.O. 2006 §660.050;
Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
transfer, the former franchisee shall be released from prospective
liability under the franchise.
G. Filing Fees And Deposits. To be acceptable for filing, an application
under this Section 635.040 shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the
following amounts to cover the City's internal administrative costs
incidental to the franchising process.
1. For an initial franchise $1,000.00
2. For renewal of a franchise under 47 U.S.C. §546(a) — (g) $1,000.00
3. For renewal of a franchise under 47 U.S.C. §546(h) $500.00
4. For modification of a franchise agreement $500.00
5. For approval of a franchise transfer $500.00
H. Public Proceedings. An applicant shall be notified of any public
proceedings held in connection with the evaluation of its application
and shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereat. Notice of all
public proceedings of the City shall be published and posted in
accordance with its usual practices.
I. Intergovernmental Cooperation. By resolution of the Board of
Aldermen, any part or all of the process established by this Section
635.040 may be conducted in concert with other political subdivisions
served or to be served by the applicant.
A. System Construction Schedule. Every franchise agreement shall specify
the construction schedule that will apply to any required construction,
upgrade, or rebuild of the cable system. Failure on the part of a
franchisee to commence and diligently pursue such requirements and
complete the matters as set forth in its franchise agreement or to
comply with the system design and construction plan submitted to the
City, including by providing the equipment specified (or its equivalent)
and by following generally accepted installation practices (except
insofar as those plans or practices, if carried out, would result in
construction of a system which could not meet requirements of Federal,
State or local law; and except for such minor modifications as are
typical in the industry), shall be grounds for revocation of its franchise
under and pursuant to the terms of Section 635.120(E); provided
however, that the Board of Aldermen in its discretion may extend the
time for the completion of construction and installation for additional
periods by resolution in the event a franchisee, acting in good faith,
experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control and
requests such an extension in writing. A franchisee's failure to comply
with provisions of the construction plan approved by the Board of
Section
635.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:686
Aldermen shall also be grounds for imposition of penalties pursuant to
Section 635.120(H).
B. Construction Procedures.
1. A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain the cable system
subject to the subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of
the City who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in compliance
with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations
affecting the system.
2. The system, and all parts thereof, shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the City.
3. No construction, reconstruction or relocation of the system or any
part thereof within the public rights-of-way shall be commenced
until written permits have been obtained from the proper City
Officials. In any permit so issued, such officials may impose such
conditions and regulations as a condition of the granting of the
permit as are reasonably necessary for the purpose of protecting
any structures or facilities in the public rights-of-way and for the
proper restoration of such public rights-of-way and structures and
facilities, and for the protection of the public and the continuity of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
4. The Board of Aldermen may by resolution or ordinance, from time
to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the
construction, operation and maintenance of the system as are
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and franchises issued
pursuant to this Chapter.
C. Construction Standards.
1. The construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of a cable
system shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical
Safety Code, the National Electric Code, National Cable Television
Association Standards of Good Engineering Practices; Obstruction
Marking and Lighting, Federal Aviation Administration;
Construction, Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structures, Federal
Communications Commission Rules Part 17; AT&T Manual of
Construction Procedures (Blue Book); franchisee's Construction
Procedures Manual; other Federal, State or local laws and
regulations that may apply to the operation, construction,
maintenance, or repair of a cable system including, without
limitation, local zoning and construction codes, and laws and
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the
most stringent code or standard shall apply (except insofar as that
code or standard, if followed, would result in a system that could
not meet requirements of Federal, State or local law). The City may
adopt additional reasonable standards as required to ensure that
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.050
AO:687
work continues to be performed in an orderly and workmanlike
manner, or to reflect changes in standards which may occur over a
franchise term.
2. All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment, and
structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum
interference with the rights and convenience of property owners,
including the City.
3. All electronic equipment shall be of good and durable quality.
4. Without limiting the foregoing, antennae and their supporting
structures (towers) shall be designed in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code and Electronics Industry Association
RS-22A Specifications, as amended, and shall be painted, lighted,
erected, and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
applicable Federal, State or local laws, codes, and regulations, all
as hereafter may be amended or adopted.
5. Without limiting the foregoing, all of a franchisee's plant and
equipment including, but not limited to, the antennae site, headend
and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures,
poles, wires, cable, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures, and
apparatuses shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and
operated in accordance with good engineering practices,
performed by experienced and properly trained maintenance and
construction personnel so as not to endanger any person or
property or to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the public
rights-of-way or legal rights of any property owner including the
City or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
6. All safety practices required by law shall be used during
construction, maintenance, and repair of a cable system. A
franchisee shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices to prevent failures and accidents that are
likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
7. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where
they will interfere with any cable, gas, electric, telephone, water,
sewer, or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner
the various utilities serving the residents and businesses in the City
of their use of any public rights-of-way.
8. Any and all public rights-of-way, public property or private
property, disturbed or damage during the construction, repair,
replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction
of a system shall be repaired or replaced by the franchisee within a
reasonable time specified by the City.
Section
635.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:688
9. A franchisee shall, by a reasonable time specified by the City,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove
discrete portions of its property when required by the City by
reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public right-of-way
construction; public right-of-way maintenance or repair (including
resurfacing or widening); change of public right-of-way grade;
construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of governmentowned
communications system, public work or improvement or any
government-owned utility; public right-of-way vacation; or for any
other purpose where the convenience of the City would be
reasonably served thereby; provided however, that the franchisee
may abandon any property in place if approved by the City in
writing, and provided further that the franchisee shall not be
required to make permanent changes in its facilities to
accommodate the installation of another cable system, nor should it
be required to make temporary changes solely to disrupt its
business or otherwise provide an unfair advantage to a competitor.
No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of a
franchisee and a franchisee shall not be entitled to any
compensation therefor. No location of any pole or wire-holding
structure of a franchisee shall be a vested interest.
10. If any action under the preceding paragraph is reasonably required
to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the
facilities of another person that is authorized to use the public
rights-of-way, a franchisee shall, after thirty (30) days' advance
written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes
requested. The franchisee shall be reimbursed by such other
person for costs reasonably incurred in taking such action. The
Board of Aldermen may resolve disputes as to responsibility for
costs associated with the removal, relaying or relocation of
facilities as among entities authorized to install facilities in the
public rights-of-way if the parties are unable to do so themselves,
and if the matter is not governed by a valid contract between the
parties.
11. In the event of an emergency, or where a cable system creates or is
contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety or property,
the City may remove, relay or relocate the pertinent parts of that
cable system without prior notice. No charge shall be made by
franchisee against the City for restoration and repair.
12. A franchisee shall, on the request of the City or any person holding
a permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings or oversized vehicles. The expense
of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be
paid by the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall have
the authority to require such payment in advance, except in the
case where the request is made by the City on its own behalf, in
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.050
AO:689
which case no such payment shall be required. The franchisee
shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice
to arrange for such temporary wire changes unless the Board of
Aldermen has declared an emergency.
13. A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang a
public right-of-way of the City so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
franchisee, at its own expense subject to the supervision and
direction of the City. Trimming of trees on private property shall
require written permission of the property owner. All cut materials
shall be properly disposed.
14. A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing
underground conduits or overhead utility facilities whenever
feasible and may not erect poles in public rights-of-way without the
express written permission of the Board of Aldermen, which
permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. Copies of
agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with
the City Clerk as required by a franchise agreement or upon City
request.
15. Trunk, feeder and drop cable may be constructed overhead where
poles exist and electric, cable television or telephone lines are
overhead, but where no overhead lines exist all trunk, feeder and
drop cable shall be constructed underground. Whenever and
wherever all electric lines and telephone lines are moved from
overhead to underground placement, all cable system cables shall
be similarly moved and the cost of movement of its cable shall be
solely the obligation of the franchisee. In cases of new construction
or property development where utilities are to be placed
underground, on request of franchisee the developer or property
owner shall give a franchisee reasonable notice of the particular
date on which open trenching will be available to franchisee for
installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be
provided at the franchisee's expense. The franchisee shall also
provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching
and easements required to bring facilities within the development
shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
the franchisee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults,
and laterals within five (5) working days of the date the trenches
are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or
property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five
(5) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the
franchisee.
16. The City shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge
upon any poles or within any conduit owned by a franchisee any
wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the
cable system operations of the franchisee.
Section
635.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:690
17. Prior to construction or rebuild of a cable system, a franchisee shall
first submit to the Board of Aldermen for approval a concise
description of the cable system proposed to be erected or installed,
including engineering drawings, if required by the Board of
Aldermen, together with a map and plans indicating the proposed
location of all such facilities, and obtain written approval therefor
from the Board of Aldermen, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
18. Any contractor or subcontractor used for work or construction,
installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of system equipment
must be properly licensed under laws of the State and all applicable
local ordinances, and each contractor or subcontractor shall have
the same obligations with respect to its work as a franchisee would
have under the franchise agreement and applicable laws if the
work were performed by the franchisee. The franchisee must
ensure that contractors, subcontractors and all employees who will
perform work for it are trained and experienced. The franchisee
shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of contractors and
subcontractors is performed consistent with the franchise and
applicable law, shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of
contractors or subcontractors, shall be responsible for promptly
correcting acts or omissions by any contractor or subcontractor,
and shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the
work is properly performed.
19. Upon failure of a franchisee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of this Chapter to be
done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City, the City may, at its option, after thirty (30)
days notice to franchisee, cause such work to be done and the
franchisee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized
amounts reported by the City to franchisee within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such itemized report.
20. The franchisee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts except after
written permission has been given by the City which permission
shall not unreasonably be withheld.
21. The franchisee shall install in conduit all cable passing under any
major roadway.
D. Area Served. A franchisee shall build and maintain its system so that
within a reasonable period of time, as established by the franchise, it is
able to provide service to all households desiring service located within
the franchise area without any construction charges (other than
standard connection charges and drop charges as indicated in Section
635.050(E)(2). A franchise must build and maintain its system so that it
can extend service to households desiring service located outside the
franchise area in accordance with Section 635.050(E)(1 — 4).
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.050
AO:691
Connections to commercial customers shall be governed by Section
635.050(E)(5).
E. Line Extension Requirements.
1. a. For areas within the City limits but outside the franchise area,
including areas annexed after the effective date of its
franchise, a franchise shall upon request of the Board of
Aldermen extend its trunk and distribution system to serve
households desiring service without any construction charge
(other than standard connection charges and drop charges as
indicated in Section 635.050(E)(2), unless the franchisee
demonstrates to the Board of Aldermen' satisfaction evidenced
by written decision that circumstances justify a specific
charge, where: the new subscriber requesting service is
located within five hundred (500) feet from the termination of
the cable system, or the number of potential subscribers to be
passed by such extension is equal to or greater than six (6)
potential households per quarter mile measured from any point
on the system.
b. In the event that the requirements set forth in the foregoing
Subsection (E)(1)(a) are not met, the franchisee shall on
request of the Board of Aldermen extend its cable system
based upon the following cost-sharing formula. The franchisee
shall contribute an amount equal to the construction costs per
mile multiplied by the length of the extension in miles,
multiplied by a fraction where the numerator equals the
number of potential households per quarter mile at the time of
the request and the denominator equals six (6). Households
requesting service as of the completion of construction can be
required to bear the remainder of the total construction costs
on a pro rata basis.
The "construction costs" are defined as the actual turnkey cost
to construct the entire extension including lines, materials,
electronics, pole make-ready charges, and labor, but not the
cost of drops except as provided below. If the franchisee
proposes to require a household requesting extension to make
a contribution in aid of extension, it must:
(1) Notify the Board of Aldermen in advance;
(2) Send the Board of Aldermen a copy of the invoice showing
the amount actually charged each household requesting
extension; and
(3) Within thirty (30) days of completion of the extension,
furnish proof of the total cost of the extension and make
any appropriate refunds if the total cost is less than the
amounts charged in advance of construction. At the end of
each calendar year, the franchisee must calculate the
Section
635.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:692
amount any contributing person would have paid based on
the number of persons served at that time and pay back
the difference between the amount actually collected from
that person and the amount which would then be owed.
The franchisee shall report such calculations and refunds
to the City Clerk by the end of January of the following
year.
2. Installation of drops. Except as Federal rate regulations may
otherwise require, the franchisee shall not assess any additional
cost for service drops of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less unless
the franchise demonstrates to the Board of Aldermen's satisfaction,
evidenced by written decision, that circumstances justify a specific
charge. Where a drop exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in
length, a franchisee may charge the subscriber for the difference
between franchisee's actual costs associated with installing a one
hundred fifty (150) foot drop, and the franchisee's actual cost of
installing the longer drop, provided that drop length shall be the
shorter of:
a. The actual length of installed drop; or
b. The shortest practicable distance to the point where the
franchisee would be required to extend its distribution system.
3. Location of drops. Except as Federal rate regulations may
otherwise require, in any area where a franchisee would be entitled
to install a drop above ground, the franchisee will provide the
subscriber the option to have the drop installed underground, but
may charge the subscriber the difference between the actual cost
of the above-ground installation and the actual cost of the
underground installation.
4. Time for extension. A franchisee must extend service to any person
who requests it:
a. Within seven (7) days of the request within the franchise area
or where service can be provided by activating or installing a
drop within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the existing
distribution system;
b. Within thirty (30) days of the request for service outside the
franchise area where an extension of one-half (½) mile or less
(but more than one hundred fifty (150) feet) is required; or
c. Within six (6) months for service outside the franchise area
where an extension of one-half (½) mile or more is required.
5. Because existing conditions can vary dramatically, franchisee may
in its discretion require commercial customers to pay all
reasonable costs of connection (including time and materials) in
excess of the average cost of connection for residential services.
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.050
AO:693
F. System Tests And Inspections.
1. Tests. A franchisee shall perform the following tests to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of the franchise and other
performance standards established by Federal law. All tests shall
be conducted in accordance with Federal rules and in accordance
with the most recent edition of NCTA's "Recommended Practices
for Measurements on Cable Television Systems", or if no recent
edition exists, such other appropriate manual as the parties may
designate.
a. Preconstruction quality control on cable and equipment. A
franchisee shall perform preconstruction quality tests on
system components. In case of passive components, this will
include testing a significant sample of devices to verify
compliance with manufacturer's specifications.
(1) All trunk and distribution cable shall be sweep-tested on
the reels to verify compliance with manufacturer's
specifications for frequency response and loss.
(2) All trunk and distribution amplifiers shall be bench-tested
to verify compliance with manufacturer's specifications.
(3) No component shall be used in the system which fails to
meet manufacturer's specifications. A franchisee shall
maintain in the metropolitan St. Louis area records of all
preconstruction tests, which the City may inspect during
normal business hours on reasonable notice.
b. Acceptance tests. A franchisee shall perform acceptance tests
prior to subscriber connection. The tests shall demonstrate
that the system components are operating as expected. The
test result shall be submitted to the City Clerk for review by
the City. The franchisee shall have the obligation, without
further notice from City, to take corrective action if any system
components are not operating as expected. Unless the City
determines test results are not adequate to demonstrate
system compliance with the standards described above and
objects within three (3) working days of receipt of the test
results, the portion of the system covered by the tests will be
deemed approved for subscriber connection.
c. Continuing tests.
(1) The franchisee shall select locations at the extremities of
the system to install equipment to establish sufficient
permanent test points in accordance with Federal law and
sound engineering practices. The franchisee shall perform
proof of performance tests at these locations at least once
every six (6) months through the life of the franchise
except as Federal law and otherwise limits its obligation,
Section
635.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:694
and at other times and points where complaints indicate
tests are warranted. The tests shall demonstrate system
compliance with technical specifications established
pursuant to franchise or other applicable law. If the City
requests to witness the tests, it shall be notified in writing
delivered to the City Clerk at least forty-eight (48) hours in
advance of any testing.
(2) A written report of all tests results shall be filed with the
City Clerk within thirty (30) days of each test. If the
location fails to meet performance specifications, the
franchisee, without requirement of additional notice or
request from City, shall take corrective action, retest the
location and advise the City of the action taken and results
achieved by writing filed with the City Clerk. The City shall
have the option of witnessing such follow-up tests and
shall be notified in writing delivered to the City Clerk at
least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of any such followup
testing.
(3) At any time after commencement of service to subscribers
the City may require additional tests, full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a
specific subscriber's terminal. Request for such additional
tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or
other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
significant non-compliance, and such tests will be limited
to the particular matter in controversy. The City may
conduct such tests independently on three (3) days
advance notice to franchisee. The City will endeavor to so
arrange its requests for such special tests so as to
minimize hardship or inconvenience to the franchisee and
the subscriber(s).
d. All reports of test results shall include executive summaries.
e. Test procedures used in verification of the performance
criteria set forth herein, if not as set forth in Section 76.609,
Subpart K of the FCC Rules and Regulations, shall be in
accordance with good engineering practice and shall be fully
described in an attachment to the annual certificate filed with
the City.
f. To the extent that the report of measurements as required
above may be combined with any reports of measurements
required by the FCC or other regulatory agencies, the City
shall accept such combined reports, provided that all
standards and measurements herein or hereafter established
by the City are satisfied.
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.050
AO:695
2. Inspections. The City may conduct inspections of the system,
including to assess compliance with the construction and
installation practices manuals and design plans. The franchisee
shall be notified in writing of any violations found during the course
of inspections. The franchisee must bring violations into
compliance within thirty (30) days of the date notice of violation is
given, and must submit a report to the City Clerk describing the
steps taken to bring itself into compliance. Inspection does not
relieve the franchisee of its obligation to build in compliance with
all provisions of the franchise.
G. User Of Public Property.
1. Should the grades or boundaries of the public rights-of-way which
the franchisee is authorized to use and occupy be changed at any
time during the term of the franchise granted, the franchisee shall,
if necessary, at its own cost and expense, relocate or change its
system so as to conform with the new grades or boundaries.
2. Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or drainage
system or to any City, State or other public structures or facilities in
the public rights-of-way required on account of the construction of
the system in the public rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost
and expense of the franchisee. During any work of constructing,
operating or maintaining of the system, the franchisee shall also, at
its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures
and facilities belonging to the City and any other person. All work
performed by the franchisee pursuant to this Section shall be done
in such reasonable manner prescribed by the City or other officials
having jurisdiction thereover.
H. Interference With Public Projects. Nothing in this Chapter shall be in
preference or hindrance to the right of the City and any board,
authority, commission or public service corporation to perform or carry
on any public works or public improvements of any description.
I. Publicizing Proposed Construction Work. Unless not possible due to
emergency circumstances, franchisee shall publicize proposed
construction work at least ten (10) days prior to commencement of that
work by causing written notice of such construction work to be
delivered to the City Clerk. In addition, unless not possible due to
emergency circumstances, before entering onto any person's property,
a franchisee shall contact the property owner or occupant at least one
(1) day in advance. If a franchisee must enter a private building, it must
have permission of the owner of occupant.
J. System Maintenance.
1. Interruptions to be minimized. A franchisee shall schedule
maintenance so that activities likely to result in an interruption of
service are performed during periods of minimum subscriber use of
the system.
Section
635.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.050
AO:696
Section 635.060. System Facilities, Equipment and Services. [R.O.
2006 §660.060; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
2. Maintenance practices. In addition to its other obligations, a
franchisee shall:
a. Use replacement components of good and durable quality, with
characteristics better or equal to replaced equipment; and
b. Follow the more stringent of maintenance standards specified
in the franchise agreement, cable televisions industry
maintenance standards or franchisee's maintenance
standards.
K. Continuity Of Service.
1. It shall be the right of all persons in a franchisee's franchise area to
receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their
financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied, and
subject or reasonable construction standards and schedules, and
subject to availability of legal access to the location.
2. A franchisee shall make every reasonable effort to provide all
subscribers with continuous uninterrupted service. At the City's
request, a franchisee shall operate its system for a temporary
period under a revocable permit granted expressly by ordinance or
tacitly following the termination of its franchise or franchise
transfer as necessary to maintain service to subscribers, and shall
cooperate with the City to assure an orderly transition from it to
another franchisee or system operator (the "Transition Period").
The Transition Period shall be no longer than the reasonable period
required for another franchisee to commence service, and shall not
be longer than two (2) years. During the Transition Period, the
franchisee shall continue to be obligated to comply with the terms
and conditions of its franchise agreement and applicable laws and
regulations, and will thereupon continue to receive operating
revenues during such transition period.
A. Compliance With Franchise Agreement. In addition to satisfying such
requirements as may be established through the application process
and incorporated in its franchise agreement including, but not limited
to, those pertaining to public, educational and governmental access
facilities, every franchisee shall comply with the conditions set forth in
this Section 635.060, except as prohibited by Federal law.
B. Full Service To Municipal Buildings. A franchisee shall, on request of
the City, install at no charge, at least one (1) service outlet at all City
buildings and all primary and secondary education public and private
schools within the franchise area, and shall install and charge only its
reasonable costs for any additional service outlets requested for such
locations, so long as such additional installations will not interfere with
Section
635.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.060
AO:697
the quality and operation of the franchisee's system or signal thereon,
and the quality and manner of installation of such additional outlets
shall have been approved by the franchisee (which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld) and shall comply with all City, State and
Federal laws and regulations. The franchisee shall provide basic cable
service and expanded basic cable service to all outlets in such buildings
free of charge. A franchise may specify other requirements regarding
the availability of facilities for municipal use.
C. Cable Channels For Commercial Use, Local Commercial Television
Signals And Non-Commercial Educational Television. A franchisee shall
designate channel capacity for commercial and non-commercial use by
persons unaffiliated with the franchisee as required by Federal law,
consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility to all
persons and the City to the extent they have a legitimate use for such
capacity.
D. Technical Standards.
1. Any cable system within the City shall meet or exceed the technical
standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§76.601 et seq., and any other
applicable Federal technical standards, including any such
reasonable standards as hereafter may be amended or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen in a manner consistent with Federal law.
2. A franchisee shall use equipment generally used in high-quality,
reliable, modern systems of similar design including, but not
limited to, back-up power supplies at the fiber nodes and head-ends
capable of providing power to the system for a minimum of two (2)
hours in the event of an electrical outage, plus adequate portable
generators to cover longer outages. The obligation to provide
backup power supplies requires the franchisee to install equipment
that will:
a. Cut in automatically on failure of commercial utility AC power,
b. Revert automatically to commercial power when it is restored,
and
c. Prevent the standby power source from powering a "dead"
utility line. In addition, the design and construction of a system
shall include modulators, antennae, amplifiers, and other
electronics that permit and are capable of passing through the
signal received at the headend with minimal alteration or
deterioration.
E. Interconnection.
1. A franchisee shall design its system so that it may be
interconnected with any or all other systems or similar
communications systems in the area. Interconnection of systems
Section
635.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.060
AO:698
may be made by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite
or other appropriate methods.
2. Upon receiving the directive of the Board of Aldermen to
interconnect, the franchisee shall immediately initiate negotiations
with the other affected system or systems so that costs may be
shared proportionately for both construction and operation of the
interconnection link.
3. The Board of Aldermen may in writing grant reasonable extensions
of time to interconnect or rescind its request to interconnect upon
its own initiative or upon petition by the franchisee to the Board of
Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen shall rescind the request if it
finds that the franchisee has negotiated in good faith and the cost
of interconnection would cause an unreasonable increase in
subscriber rates.
4. No interconnection shall take place without prior written approval
of the Board of Aldermen. A franchisee seeking approval for
interconnection shall demonstrate that all signals to be
interconnected will comply with FCC technical standards for all
classes of signals and will result in no more than a low level of
distortion.
5. The franchisee shall cooperate with any interconnection
corporation, regional interconnection authority or State or Federal
regulatory agency which may be established for the purpose of
regulating, facilitating, financing or otherwise providing for the
interconnection of communications systems beyond the boundaries
of the City.
F. Integration Of Advancements In Technology. A franchise agreement
may require a franchisee to periodically upgrade its cable system to
integrate advancements in technology as may be necessary to meet the
needs and interests of the community in light of the costs thereof, and/
or to submit periodic report on cable technology and competition to the
City Clerk.
G. System Design Review Process. In addition to any requirements
included in a franchise agreement, at least sixty (60) days prior to the
date construction of any rebuild is scheduled to commence, the
franchisee shall provide the City Clerk with notice that a detailed
system design and construction plan is available for review by the City
at a specific office of the franchisee located in the metropolitan St.
Louis area, which shall include at least the following elements:
1. Design type, trunk and feeder design, and number and location of
hubs or nodes.
2. Distribution system-cable, fiber, and equipment to be used.
3. Plans for standby power.
Section
635.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.060
AO:699
Section 635.070. Operation and Reporting Provisions. [R.O. 2006
§660.070; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1,
8-19-1996]
4. Longest amplifier cascade in system (number of amplifiers, number
of miles, type of cable/fiber).
5. Design maps and tree trunk maps for the system.
The system design will be shown on maps of industry standard
scale using standard symbols, and shall depict all electronic and
physical features of the cable plant. The City may review the
plan and, within thirty (30) days of the date the plan is made
available for City review, submit comments to the franchisee.
Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the comments, the
franchisee shall notify the City Clerk that a revised plan is
available for review by the City at a specific office located in the
metropolitan St. Louis area, either incorporating the comments
or explaining why the comments were not included. The City's
review does not excuse any non-performance under a franchise
agreement, this Chapter or other applicable law.
H. Emergency Alter System. A franchisee shall comply with 47 U.S.C.
§544(g) and all regulations issued pursuant thereto.
A. Open Books And Records.
1. Subject to the provisions herein, the City shall have the right to
inspect and copy at any time during normal business hours at an
office of the franchisee located in the metropolitan St. Louis area,
all books, receipts, maps, plans, financial statements, contracts,
service complaint logs, performance test results, records of
requests for service, computer records, codes, programs, and disks
or other storage media and other like material which are
reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this
Chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law, except such
records as are privileged or protected from disclosure under
applicable law. The franchisee is responsible for collecting the
information and producing it at the location specified above, and by
accepting its franchise it affirms that it can and will do so. The
franchisee will make suitable copying equipment available to the
City and will bear the cost of such copying, which cost is not a
franchise fee and falls within one (1) or more of the exceptions of
47 U.S.C. §542(g)(2).
2. A franchisee shall maintain sufficient financial records governing
its operations in the franchise area to document accurate payment
of franchise fees.
Section
635.060
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.070
AO:700
3. All such information received by the City shall remain confidential
insofar as permitted by the Missouri Open Meetings Law and other
applicable State and Federal law.
4. The franchisee shall maintain a file of records open to public
inspection in accordance with applicable FCC rules and
regulations.
B. Communication With Regulatory Agencies. A franchisee shall file with
the City Clerk copies of all reports required by and certifications issued
by the FCC including, but not limited to, any proof of performance tests
and results, Equal Employment Opportunity reports, and also all
petitions, applications, and communications of all types regarding the
cable system, or a group of cable systems of which the franchisee's
cable system is a part, submitted or received by the franchisee, an
affiliate, or any other person on behalf of the franchisee, either to or
from the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other
Federal or State Regulatory Commission or agency having jurisdiction
over any matter affecting operation of the franchisee's system. This
material shall be submitted to the City Clerk at the time it is filed or
within thirty (30) days of the date it is received. Public access to such
reports received by the City Clerk shall not be denied.
C. Reports.
1. No later than ninety (90) days after the end of its fiscal year, a
franchisee shall file a written report with the City Clerk, which shall
include:
a. A summary of the previous year's activities in development of
the cable system including, but not limited to, descriptions of
services begun or dropped, the number of subscribers gained
or lost for each category of service, the number of pay units
sold, the amount collected annually from other users of the
system and the character and extent of the services rendered
to such users;
b. A summary of written and other record service calls,
identifying both the number and nature of the calls received
and an explanation of the causes and dispositions of such calls,
including response time;
c. An annual financial report from the previous year.
d. A report showing the number of outages and service
degradations for the prior year, and identifying separately each
planned outage, the time it occurred, its duration, and the
estimated area and number of subscribers affected; each
unplanned outage or service degradation, the time it occurred,
its estimated duration and the estimated area and the number
of subscribers affected; and the total hours of outages and
Section
635.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.070
AO:701
service degradations as a percentage of total hours of cable
system operation.
e. An ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time
during the preceding year did control or benefit from an
interest in the franchise of ten percent (10%) or more.
f. A list of key employees of the franchisee.
g. A summary report on the system's technical tests and
measurements.
h. Such other information as the Board of Aldermen may
reasonably direct.
i. To the extent there has been no change since the preceding
annual report, that fact may be noted in lieu of an additional
report.
2. Opinion survey report. The franchisee shall submit to the City Clerk
the results of any opinion survey conducted, within thirty (30) days
of completion of the survey.
3. Special reports. franchisees shall deliver the following special
reports to the City Clerk:
a. The franchisee shall submit quarterly construction reports for
any construction that may be specified in the franchise. The
franchisee must submit updated as-built system design maps
within thirty (30) days of the completion of system construction
in any geographic area. The maps shall be developed on the
basis of post-construction inspection by the franchisee and
construction personnel to assess compliance with system
design. Any departures from design must be indicated on the
as-built maps, to assist the City in assessing compliance with
obligations under franchise.
b. Copies of any notice of deficiency, forfeiture or other document
issued by any State or Federal agency instituting any
investigation or civil or criminal proceeding regarding the
cable system, the franchisee or any affiliate of the franchisee,
to the extent the same may affect or bear on operations in the
City. This material shall be submitted to the City Clerk at the
time it is filed or within thirty (30) days of the date it is
received.
c. Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or
any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the
franchisee or by any person that owns or controls the
franchisee directly or indirectly. This material shall be
submitted to the City Clerk at the time it is filed or within thirty
(30) days of the date it is received.
Section
635.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.070
AO:702
d. Technical tests required by the City as specified in this Chapter
and the franchise agreement shall be submitted to the City
Clerk within thirty (30) days after completion of such tests.
e. Franchisee shall keep on file with the City Clerk its current
schedule of charges.
4. General reports. Each franchisee shall prepare and furnish to the
City Clerk, at the times and in the form prescribed by the Board of
Aldermen, such reports with respect to its operation, affairs,
transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or
appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or
duties of the City in connection with this Chapter.
D. Records Required.
1. A franchisee shall at all times maintain at an office within the
metropolitan St. Louis area:
a. Records of all written or recorded complaints received. The
term "complaints" as used herein and throughout this Chapter
refers to complaints about any aspect of the cable system or
franchisee's operations, including, without limitation,
complaints about employee courtesy.
b. A full and complete set of plans, records, and "as built" maps
showing the exact location of all system equipment installed or
in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
c. Records of outages, indicating date, duration, area, and the
estimated number of subscribers affected, type of outage, and
cause.
d. Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating
the date and time of the service call, the date of
acknowledgement and date and time service was scheduled (if
it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided,
and (if different) the date and time the problem was solved.
e. Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service
extension, indicating date of request, date of
acknowledgement, and the date and time service was
extended.
f. A public file showing its plan and timetable for any
construction regarding the cable system.
g. All rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted for
conduct of franchisee's business.
2. The Board of Aldermen may require retention of additional
information, records, and documents from time to time, as may be
reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of
Section
635.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.070
AO:703
Section 635.080. Consumer Protection and Customer Service
Provisions. [R.O. 2006 §660.080; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord.
No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
the rights, functions or duties of the City in connection with this
Chapter.
E. Performance Evaluation.
1. A franchise may require specific performance review sessions. The
Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion, hold additional
performance evaluation sessions, but not more frequently than
once every three (3) years except as otherwise agreed to by
franchisee. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public,
and announced in a newspaper of general circulation. franchisee
shall be notified by mail.
2. Topics that may be discussed at any evaluation session may
include, but are not limited to, system performance and
construction, franchisee compliance with this Chapter and a
franchise agreement, customer service and complaint response,
subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered,
service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted
services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings,
and line extensions.
3. During the review and evaluation by the City, a franchisee shall
fully cooperate with the City and shall promptly provide such
information and documents as the City may need to reasonably
perform its review.
F. Voluminous Materials. If any books, records, maps or plans, or other
requested documents are too voluminous, or for security reasons
cannot be moved, then a franchisee may request that the inspection
take place at some other location outside the metropolitan St. Louis
area, provided that the franchisee must pay all reasonable travel
expenses incurred by the City in inspecting those documents or having
those documents inspected by its designee. Any payments made by the
franchisee hereunder are not a franchise fee and fall within one (1) or
more of the exceptions in 47 U.S.C. §542(g)(2).
G. Retention Of Records — Relation To Privacy Rights. Each franchisee
shall take all steps required, if any, to ensure that it is able to provide
the City all information which must be provided or may be reasonably
requested under this Chapter or a franchise agreement, including by
providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Nothing in this
Section shall be read to require a franchisee to violate 47 U.S.C. §551.
A. Telephone And Office Authority.
1. Each franchisee shall maintain an office at a convenient location to
subscribers, not necessarily within the franchise area, that shall be
Section
635.070
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.080
AO:704
open during normal business hours to allow subscribers to request
service, pay bills, and conduct other business. Each franchisee
shall perform service calls, installations, and disconnects at least
during normal business hours, provided that a franchisee shall
respond to outages twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a
week. Outage reports should be addressed within twenty-four (24)
hours. Each franchisee shall establish a publicly listed local tollfree
telephone number. The phone must be answered by customer
service representatives at least during normal business hours for
the purpose of receiving requests for service, inquiries, and
complaints from subscribers; after those hours a franchisee shall
arrange for the phone to be answered so that customers can
register complaints and report service problems on a twenty-four
(24) hour per day, seven (7) day per week basis, and so that the
franchisee can respond to service outages as required herein.
2. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answering time shall
not exceed thirty (30) seconds or four (4) rings, and the time to
transfer the call to a customer service representative (including
hold time) shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) seconds. Under
normal operating conditions a customer will receive a busy signal
less than three percent (3%) of the time. These standards shall be
met ninety percent (90%) of the time, measured quarterly. When
the business office is closed, an answering machine or service
capable of receiving and recording service complaints and
inquiries shall be employed. The after-hours answering service
shall comply with the same telephone answer time standard set
forth in this Section. Upon request by the City, franchisee shall
supply information demonstrating that it is meeting the standards
set forth herein.
3. A franchisee must hire sufficient staff so that it can adequately
respond to customer inquiries, complaints, and requests for service
in its office, over the phone, and at the subscriber's residence.
B. Scheduling Work.
1. All appointments for service, installation or disconnection shall be
specified by date. Each franchisee shall specify a specific time at
which the work shall be done, or offer a choice of time blocks,
which shall not exceed four (4) hours in length, unless the
subscriber agrees to a longer period of time. franchisee may also,
upon request, offer service installation calls outside normal
business hours, for the express convenience of the customer. If at
any time an installer or technician believes it impossible to make a
scheduled appointment time, an attempt to contact the customer
will be made prior to the time of appointment and the appointment
rescheduled at a time convenient to the customer.
2. Subscribers who have experienced two (2) missed appointments
due to the fault of a franchisee shall receive installation free of
Section
635.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.080
AO:705
charge, if the appointment was for installation. If an installation
was to have been provided free of charge, or for other
appointments, the subscriber shall receive a fifty percent (50%)
discount on one (1) month of Basic cable service tier or its
equivalent.
3. With regard to mobility-limited customers, upon subscriber
request, each franchisee shall arrange for pick-up and/or
replacement of converters or other franchisee equipment at the
subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as the
provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).
4. Under normal operating conditions, requests for service, repair,
and maintenance must be acknowledged by a trained customer
service representative within twenty-four (24) hours, or prior to the
end of the next business day, whichever is earlier. A franchisee shall
respond to all other inquiries (including billing inquiries) within
five (5) business days of the inquiry or complaint.
5. Under normal operating conditions, installations made within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the existing distribution system shall be
completed within seven (7) business days after the order is placed.
Repairs and maintenance for service interruptions and other
customer location repairs must be completed within twenty-four
(24) hours, or if it is not possible to be complete such work within
twenty-four (24) hours, then work must have commenced within
such time period and be diligently continued thereafter until
completed. Work on all other requests for service on franchisee's
facilities must be begun by the next business day after notification
of the problem, and must be completed within three (3) days from
the date of the initial request, except installation requests,
provided that a franchisee shall complete the work in the shortest
time possible where, for reasons beyond the franchisee's control,
the work could not be completed in those time periods even with
the exercise of all due diligence; the failure of a franchisee to hire
sufficient staff or to properly train its staff shall not justify a
franchisee's failure to comply with this provision. Except as Federal
law permits, no charge shall be made to the subscriber for this
service, unless required due to damage caused by a subscriber.
6. franchisee shall not cancel a service or installation appointment
with a customer after the close of business on the business day
preceding the appointment.
7. The standards of Subparagraphs (4) and (5) of this Subsection shall
be met at least ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a
quarterly basis.
C. Notice To Subscribers.
Section
635.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.080
AO:706
1. A franchisee shall provide in writing to each subscriber at the time
cable service is installed, and at least annually thereafter, the
following information:
a. Products and services offered;
b. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
c. Installation and service maintenance policies;
d. Instructions on how to use the cable service;
e. Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
f. Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable
office; and
g. Refund and credit procedures.
2. Upon request, copies of the materials specified in the preceding
Subsection shall be provided to the City. franchisee shall provide all
subscribers and the City at least thirty (30) days' notice of any
significant changes in the information required to be provided by
this Section. Such notice shall be in writing and by announcement
on the system. Franchisee may provide notice of service and rate
changes to subscribers using any reasonable written means at its
sole discretion. Franchisee need not provide prior notice of any
rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or
any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by
any Federal agency, State, or franchising authority on the
transaction between the franchisee and the subscriber.
3. All franchisee promotional materials, announcements, and
advertising of residential cable service to subscribers and the
general public, where price information is listed in any manner,
shall clearly and accurately disclose price terms. In the case of payper-
view or pay-per-event programming, all promotional materials
must clearly and accurately disclose price terms and in the case of
telephone orders, a franchisee shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that the customer service representatives clearly and
accurately disclose price terms to potential customers in advance
of taking the order.
4. Each franchisee shall maintain a public file containing all notices
provided to subscribers under these customer service standards, as
well as all written promotional offers made to subscribers.
D. Interruptions Of Service. A franchisee may intentionally interrupt
service on the cable system only for good cause and for the shortest
time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after a
minimum of forty-eight (48) hours' prior notice to subscribers and the
Section
635.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.080
AO:707
City of the anticipated service interruption; provided however, that
planned maintenance that occurs between the hours of 12:00 Midnight
and 6:00 A.M. shall not require such notice to subscribers, so long as
notice to the City is given no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to
such an anticipated service interruption.
E. Billing.
1. A franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or
service change shall be prorated as appropriate and shall reflect
any security deposit.
2. A franchisee's billing statement must be clear, concise and
understandable, must itemize each category of service and
equipment provided to the subscriber and must state clearly the
charge therefor.
3. A franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due
date not earlier than the fifteenth (15th) day of the month (or
equivalent period) in which the service being billed is rendered.
Any balance not received within fifteen (15) days after the due date
may be assessed a reasonable processing charge based on costs
and/or a late fee. Late fees shall not exceed point seventy-five
percent (0.75%) per month.
4. A franchisee must notify the subscriber that he/she can remit
payment in person at the franchisee's office(s) and inform the
subscriber of the address of the office(s).
5. Subscribers shall not be charged a processing fee or late fee or be
otherwise penalized for any failure by a franchisee, including
failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to
properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made.
6. On request, the account of any subscriber shall be credited a prorated
share of the monthly charge for the service if said subscriber
is without service or if service is substantially impaired for any
reason for a period exceeding four (4) hours during any twenty-four
(24) hour period, except where it can be documented that a
subscriber seeks a refund for an outage or impairment which that
subscriber caused, or in the case of a planned outage occurring
between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 6:00 A.M. of which the
City received the required prior notice.
7. franchisee shall respond to all written billing complaints from
subscribers within thirty (30) days.
8. Refund checks to subscribers shall be issued no later than:
a. The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the
refund request; or
Section
635.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.080
AO:708
b. The date of return of all equipment to franchisee, if service has
been terminated.
9. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the subscriber's
next billing cycle after the determination that the credit is
warranted.
F. Disconnection/Downgrades.
1. A subscriber may terminate service at any time.
2. A franchisee shall promptly disconnect or downgrade any
subscriber who so requests by giving at least one (1) day notice and
reasonably cooperating with the franchisee regarding the removal
of the franchisee's equipment from the subscriber's location. No
charge may be imposed for any voluntary disconnection, and
downgrade charges must comply with the requirements of Federal
law. No charge may be imposed by any franchisee for any cable
service delivered after the requested date of disconnection.
3. A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect a
franchisee's equipment and return it to the nearest business office.
4. Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be
refunded on disconnected accounts after the equipment has been
recovered by the franchisee. The refund process shall take a
maximum of thirty (30) days, from the date disconnection was
requested to the date the customer receives the refund.
5. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber or other fee or
charge, a franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service
outlet; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until after
thirty (30) days from the due date. If the subscriber pays all
amounts due, including late charges, before the date scheduled for
disconnection, the franchisee shall not disconnect service. After
disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all fees or
charges due, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if
any, and any reasonable security deposit, the franchisee shall
promptly reinstate service on request.
6. A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if the
subscriber is damaging or destroying the franchisee's cable system
or equipment. After disconnection, the franchisee shall restore
service after the subscriber provides adequate assurance that it
has ceased the practices that led to disconnection, and paid all
proper fees and charges, including any reconnect fees and amounts
owned the franchisee for damage to its cable system or equipment
and any reasonable security deposit.
7. A franchisee may also disconnect a subscriber that causes signal
leakage in excess of Federal limits. I may do so without notice,
provided that the franchisee shall immediately notify the
Section
635.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.080
AO:709
subscriber of the problem and, once the problem is corrected,
reconnect the subscriber.
8. Except as Federal law may otherwise provide, a franchisee may
remove its property from a subscriber's premises within sixty (60)
days of the termination of service, voluntarily or involuntarily. If a
franchisee fails to remove its property in that period, the property
shall be deemed abandoned.
G. Changes In Service.
1. Before a franchisee unilaterally alters the service it provides to a
class of subscribers, it must provide the City and each affected
subscriber thirty (30) days' written notice by any reasonable means
at its sole discretion, explain the substance and full effect of the
alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the thirty
(30) day period following notice to opt to receive any combination
of services offered by franchisee. Except as Federal law otherwise
provides, subscribers may not be required to pay any charge (other
than the regular service fee), including an upgrade or downgrade
charge, in order to receive the services selected. No charge may be
made for any service or product that the subscriber has not
affirmatively indicated it wishes to receive. Payment of the regular
monthly bill does not in and of itself constitute such an affirmative
indication.
2. If a franchisee plans to provide a premium channel without charge
to subscribers who do not subscribe to such premium channel, the
franchisee shall, not later than thirty (30) days before such
premium channel is provided without charge, notify all subscribers
in writing by any reasonable means at its sole discretion of its plans
including the time period involved, notify all subscribers they have
a right to request that the premium channel be blocked, and block
the premium channel upon the request of a subscriber. For
purposes of this Section, the phrase "premium channel" shall mean
any pay service offered on a per channel or per program basis
which offers movies rated by the Motion Picture Association of
America as X, NC-17 or R.
H. Deposits. A franchisee may require a reasonable, non-discriminatory
deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Deposits shall be placed
in an interest-bearing account, and the franchisee shall return the
deposit upon return of the equipment, plus interest earned to the date
repayment is made to the subscriber, less any deduction for damages to
the equipment or unpaid charges.
I. Subscriber Control. A franchisee shall comply with all applicable laws
regarding subscriber ability to block audio and/or video signals.
Section
635.080
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.090
AO:710
Section 635.090. Rate Regulation. [R.O. 2006 §660.090; Ord. No.
1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
The City reserves the right to regulate service and equipment rates to
the maximum degree permitted by applicable State and Federal law. Each
franchisee shall comply with all such regulation provisions that the City
may adopt, and all Federal laws regarding rates. Failure to comply shall
constitute a material violation of a franchise.
Section 635.100. Franchise Fee. [R.O. 2006 §660.100; Ord. No. 1889
§2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
A. Finding. The City finds that public rights-of-way of the City to be used
by a franchisee or any other person for the provision of cable service
over a cable system are valuable public property acquired and
maintained by the City at great expense to taxpayers. The City further
finds that the grant of a franchisee to use public rights-of-ways is a
valuable property right without which a franchisee would be required
to invest substantial capital.
B. Franchise Fee. Pursuant to Section 67.2689, RSMo., and as partial
compensation for use of the City's public rights-of-way, each user or
other person providing cable services or video services within the City
shall, to the extent permitted by law, starting on July 1, 2018, pay to the
City a fee of zero percent (0%) of the gross revenues from such user or
other person providing cable services or video services within the
geographic area of the City. The City reserves the right to increase the
franchise fee up to the maximum amount allowed by applicable law
after sixty (60) days' notice to the users or other persons providing
cable services or video services within the City in accordance with
applicable law. [Ord. No. 3787 § 1, 3-22-2018]
C. Not A Tax Or In Lieu Of Any Other Tax Or Fee.
1. The franchise fee is not a tax, license or fee subject to any
requirement of voter approval, but rather is a rental charge for
special and individualized use of public property.
2. The franchise fee is in addition to all other fees and all taxes and
payments that a franchisee or other person may be required to pay
under any Federal, State or local law, including any applicable
property and amusement taxes, except to the extent that such fees,
taxes or assessments are a franchise fee under 47 U.S.C. §542.
D. Payments.
1. The franchise fees and any other costs or penalties assessed by the
City against a franchisee or any other person shall be paid
quarterly to the City and shall commence as of the effective date of
a franchise. The City shall be furnished at the time of each payment
with a statement certified by the franchisee's or other person's
respective chief financial officer or an independent certified public
Section
635.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.100
AO:711
accountant reflecting the total amount of gross revenues for the
payment period. Payments shall be made to the City no longer than
thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar quarter.
2. In the event any franchise fee or other payment is not made on or
before the date specified herein, the franchisee and any other
person shall pay interest charges computed from such due date, at
an annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the
City' primary depository bank during the period such unpaid
amount is owned, plus two percent (2%) of the amount due to
defray the City's additional expenses by reason of the delinquency.
E. No Accord Or Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the City
shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any
claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as
franchise fees under this Chapter or for the performance of any other
obligation of a franchisee or other person.
F. Audit.
1. The City shall have the right to inspect all reasonably necessary
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under this Chapter. The franchisee shall
be responsible for providing the records to the City at an office
located within the metropolitan St. Louis area. Such records shall
be maintained for at least five (5) years. The City's audit expenses
shall be borne by the franchisee if the franchise fees paid during
the audit period are less than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the
amount owed according to the audit. Any additional amounts due to
the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days
following written notice to the franchisee by the City of the
underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit
report. If recomputation results in additional revenue to be paid to
the City, such amount shall be subject to interest as specified in
Subsection (D)(2). All costs incurred by a franchisee hereunder are
not franchise fees, and fall within one (1) or more of the exceptions
set forth in 47 U.S.C. §542(g)(2) and shall not be passed on to the
subscribers in any form.
2. A franchisee shall maintain its fiscal and financial records and have
all relevant fiscal and financial records maintained by others on its
behalf in such a manner as to enable the City to determine the cost
of assets of the franchisee which are used in providing services
within the City and to determine gross revenues.
3. A franchisee shall report on a quarterly basis to the City Clerk the
name and address of each and every person providing
communications services over the cable system for which charges
are assessed to subscribers but not received by the franchisee.
Section
635.100
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.110
AO:712
Section 635.110. Insurance — Surety — Indemnification. [R.O. 2006
§660.110; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
A. Insurance Required. A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance
of a franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the
entire length of the franchise period, at least the following liability
insurance coverage insuring the City and the franchisee: Worker's
Compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all
requirements of Missouri law and comprehensive general liability
insurance with respect to the construction, operation, and
maintenance, of the cable system, and the conduct of the franchisee's
business in the City, in the minimum amounts of:
1. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting
from any one (1) accident;
2. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for personal bodily injury or
death resulting from any one (1) accident; and
3. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
These insurance requirements shall not be construed to limit
the liability of a franchisee for damages under any franchise
issued hereunder.
B. Qualifications Of Sureties. All insurance policies shall be with sureties
qualified to do business in the State of Missouri, with an B+7 or better
rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty
Edition, and in a form approved by the City.
C. Policies Available For Review. All insurance policies shall be available
for review by the City, and a franchisee shall keep on file with the City
certificates of insurance.
D. Additional Insureds — Prior Notice Of Policy Cancellation. All general
liability insurance policies shall name the City, its Officers, Boards,
Board Members, Commissions, Commissioners, agents, and employees
as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or
reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days' prior
written notice thereof has been given to the City Clerk. A franchisee
shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of
proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance reasonably
satisfactory to the Board of Aldermen which complies with this Chapter.
E. Failure Constitutes Material Violation. Failure to comply with the
insurance requirements set forth in this Section shall constitute a
material violation of a franchise.
F. Indemnification.
1. A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the City, its Officials, Boards, Board
Members, Commissions, Commissioners, agents, and employees,
Section
635.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.110
AO:713
Section 635.120. Performance Guarantees and Remedies. [R.O.
2006 §660.120; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings,
and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the
construction, maintenance, or operation of its cable system;
copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure
consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees or
programs to be delivered by the cable system; the conduct of the
franchisee's business in the City; or in any way arising out of the
granting of a franchise or a franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of
a franchise granted hereunder, regardless of whether the act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this
Chapter or a franchise agreement.
2. Specifically, but not by way of limitation on the scope of Subsection
(1) above, a franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, and in their capacity
as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, from and
against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments
for damages or otherwise subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act,
47 U.S.C. §558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the
installation, construction, operation, or maintenance of its system
including, but not limited to, any claim against the franchisee for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, or the
violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name,
service mark, or patent, or of any other similar right of any person.
This indemnity does not apply to programming carried on any
channel set aside for public, educational or government use, or
channels leased pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §532, unless the franchisee
was in any respect engaged in determining the editorial content of
the program, or prescreened the programming for the purported
purpose of banning or regulating indecent or obscene
programming.
3. The indemnity provision includes, but is not limited to, the City's
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such
claim, suit, or proceeding prior to franchisee assuming such
defense. The City shall notify a franchisee of claims and suits as
soon as practicable, but failure to give such notice shall not relieve
a franchisee of its obligations hereunder. Once a franchisee
assumes such defense, the City may at its option continue to
participate in the defense at its own expense.
4. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Chapter, the City shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in
relation to any amounts attributable to the City's own negligence,
willful misconduct, intentional or criminal acts, including in the
performance of its obligations under this Chapter or a franchise
agreement.
Section
635.110
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.120
AO:714
A. Security Fund.
1. Prior to a franchise becoming effective and on each anniversary
date thereafter during the franchise term including the date of
termination, the franchisee shall post with the City Clerk sufficient
funds to serve as a cash security deposit to be used as a security
fund to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of and
compliance with all provisions of this Chapter, the franchise
agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all
orders, permits, and directions of the City, and the payment by the
franchisee of any claims, liens, fees or taxes due the City which
arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of
the system. The amount of the security fund on deposit shall be
equal to three percent (3%) of the franchisee's projected annual
gross revenues for the upcoming year, or in the instance of the final
deposit, three percent (3%) of the actual gross revenues for the
preceding year.
2. In lieu of a cash security fund, a franchisee may file and maintain
with the City Clerk an irrevocable letter of credit with a surety
acceptable to the City in the amount specified in the preceding
paragraph to serve the same purposes as set forth therein. Said
letter of credit shall remain in effect for the full term of the
franchise plus an additional six (6) months thereafter, or longer if
there is any outstanding obligation or default on the part of the
franchisee, as determined by the Board of Aldermen. The
franchisee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under
the terms of the letter of credit for the franchisee's failure to ensure
its faithful performance of and compliance with all provisions of
this Chapter, the franchise agreement, and other applicable law,
and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of the City,
and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees or
taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system. The letter of credit shall
provide for the thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the City of
any intention on the part of the franchisee to cancel, fail to renew
or otherwise materially alter its terms. Neither the filing of a letter
of credit with the City, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by
the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse unfaithful
performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee
under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full
amount of the letter of credit or otherwise.
3. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are
in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this
Chapter or authorized by other law or a franchise agreement, and
no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such
security fund or letter of credit will affect any other right the City
may have.
Section
635.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.120
AO:715
4. The following procedures shall apply to drawing on the security
fund and letter of credit:
a. If the franchisee fails to make timely payment to the City of any
amount due as a result of a franchise, fails to make timely
payment to the City of any amounts due under a franchise
agreement or applicable law, fails to make timely payment to
the City of any taxes due, or fails to compensate the City within
ten (10) days of written notification that such compensation is
due for any damages, costs or expenses the City suffers or
incurs by reason of any act or omission of the franchisee in
connection with its franchise agreement or the enforcement of
its franchise agreement, the City may withdraw the amount
thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund
or from funds available under the letter of credit.
b. Within three (3) days of a withdrawal from the security fund or
under the letter of credit, the City shall mail, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notification of the amount,
date, and purpose of such withdrawal to the franchisee.
c. If at the time of a withdrawal from the security fund and under
the letter of credit by the City, the amounts available are
insufficient to provide the total payment towards which the
withdrawal is directed, the balance of such payment shall
continue as the obligation of the franchisee to the City until it
is paid.
d. No later than thirty (30) days after mailing of notification to the
franchisee by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
withdrawal under the security fund or letter of credit, the
franchisee shall deliver to the City for deposit in the security
fund an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn or shall
restore the letter of credit. Failure to make timely delivery of
such amount to the City or to restore the letter of credit shall
constitute a material violation of the franchise.
e. Upon the termination of the franchise under conditions other
than those stipulating forfeiture of the security fund, the
balance then remaining in the Security Fund shall be
withdrawn by the City and paid to the franchisee within six (6)
months of such termination, provided that there is then no
outstanding obligation or default on the part of the franchisee.
f. In addition to or in lieu of a security fund or letter or credit, a
franchise may require such guarantees as the City deems to be
in the public interest.
B. Performance Bond.
1. Prior to any cable system construction, upgrade or other such work
in the public rights-of-way, a franchisee shall establish in the City's
Section
635.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.120
AO:716
favor a performance bond to ensure the franchisee's faithful
performance of the construction, upgrade or other work. The
amount of such performance bond shall be equal to ten percent
(10%) of the total cost of the work unless otherwise specified in the
franchise agreement.
2. In the event a franchisee subject to such a performance bond fails
to complete the cable system construction, upgrade, or other work
in the public rights-of-way in a safe, timely, and competent manner,
after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, there shall be
revocable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the
bond, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result,
including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or
cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee,
or the cost of completing or repairing the system construction,
upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of
the bond. The City may also recover against the bond any amount
recoverable against a security fund where such amount exceeds
that available under a security fund.
3. Upon completion of the system construction, upgrade, or other
such work in the public rights-of-way and payment of all
construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of
the Board of Aldermen, the Board of Aldermen shall eliminate the
bond after a time appropriate to determine whether the work
performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established
considering the nature of the work performed.
4. The performance bond shall be issued by a surety with an B+7 or
better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/
Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the City
Attorney; and shall contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be cancelled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty
(60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent
to cancel or not to renew."
C. Failure Constitutes Material Violation. Failure to maintain a required
security fund, letter of credit, or performance bond shall constitute a
material violation of a franchise.
D. Remedies. In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity,
the City may apply any one (1) or a combination of the following
remedies in the event a franchisee violates this Chapter, its franchise
agreement, other applicable ordinances, or applicable State or Federal
law:
1. Revoke the franchise or shorten the term pursuant to the
procedures specified in this Chapter.
Section
635.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.120
AO:717
2. Impose penalties available under Subsection (H) of this Section and
other applicable State and local laws for violation of City
ordinances.
3. In addition to or instead of any other remedy, seek legal or
equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
4. Apply any remedy provided for in a franchise agreement, including
enforcing provisions, if any.
E. Shortening, Revocation Or Termination Of Franchise.
1. The City shall have the right to shorten the term of a franchise to a
term not less than thirty-one (31) months from the date of the
action shortening the franchise term, or to revoke the franchise, for
a franchisee's substantial and ongoing failure to construct, operate
or maintain the cable system as required by this Chapter or a
franchise agreement; for defrauding or attempting to defraud the
City or subscribers; if the franchisee is declared bankrupt; or for
any other substantial and ongoing material violation of this Chapter
or substantial and ongoing material violation of a franchise
agreement. To invoke the provisions of this Section, the Board of
Aldermen shall give the franchisee written notice of such intent. If
within thirty (30) calendar days following such written notice from
the City to the franchisee, the franchisee has not completed
corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and
expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of the Board of Aldermen,
the Board of Aldermen may give written notice to the franchisee of
its decision to commence a proceeding to consider shortening the
term of or revoking the franchise, stating its reasons; provided that
no opportunity to cure shall be afforded in the event the franchisee
is declared bankrupt. Revocation for bankruptcy shall be governed
by Subparagraph (3) of this Subsection (E).
2. Prior to shortening the term of or revoking a franchise, the Board of
Aldermen shall hold a public hearing, after giving at least fifteen
(15) calendar days' notice by posting and publication, at which time
the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. Following the public hearing, the Board of Aldermen may
determine whether to shorten the franchise term or to revoke the
franchise based on the information presented at the hearing, and
other information of record. If the Board of Aldermen determines to
shorten a franchise term or revoke a franchise, it shall make such
decision by ordinance setting forth the reasons for its decision. The
City may make such decision conditional on a franchisee's failure to
resolve outstanding problems or take appropriate steps to resolve
such problems within a specific period of time. A copy of such
decision shall be provided to the franchisee.
3. Any franchise may, at the option of the Board of Aldermen following
a public hearing, be revoked by ordinance one hundred twenty
Section
635.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.120
AO:718
(120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors
or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the
business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of creditors,
or other action or proceeding, unless within that one hundred
twenty (120) day period:
a. Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been
vacated; or
b. Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this Chapter and the existing franchise
agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a
court of competent jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be
bound by the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
existing franchise agreement.
c. In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of a material
portion of the facilities, equipment, or property of a franchisee
(other than pursuant to a pledge or mortgage with qualified as
an exception to the definition of a "franchise transfer" and after
which the franchise transfer was ultimately approved), the
Board of Aldermen may revoke the franchise, following a
public hearing before the Board of Aldermen, by serving notice
on the franchisee and the successful bidder, in which event the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be
revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after
serving such notice, unless:
(1) The Board of Aldermen has approved the franchise
transfer; and
(2) The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the
City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions
of the franchise agreement and this Chapter.
4. If the Board of Aldermen revokes a franchise, if a franchise expires,
or if for any other reason a franchise abandons, terminates, or fails
to operate or maintain service to its subscribers after notice and
reasonable opportunity to cure of at least thirty (30) days, the
following procedures and rights are effective:
a. The Board of Aldermen may require the former franchisee to
remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's
expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a
reasonable period of time, the Board of Aldermen may have the
removal done at the former franchisee's or surety's expense. In
removing its plant, structures, and equipment, the franchisee
shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be
made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as prevailed prior to the franchisee's removal of its
equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or
Section
635.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.120
AO:719
telephone cable wires or attachments. The City shall inspect
and approve the condition of the public ways and public places;
and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The
liability, indemnity and insurance as provided herein shall
continue in full force and effect during the period of removal
and until full compliance by the franchisee with the terms and
conditions of this paragraph and this Chapter. In the event of
a failure by the franchisee to complete any such work or any
other work required by the City law or ordinance within the
time as may be established and to the reasonable satisfaction
of the City, the City may cause such work to be done and the
franchisee shall reimburse the City the reasonable cost thereof
within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such
costs.
b. At the expiration of the term for which any franchise is granted
(if renewal is either not sought or denied) the City, at its
election, shall have the right to purchase and take over all or
any part of a cable system located within the City upon the
payment to the franchise of a sum equal to the fair market
value of the system or the part taken (based on system value as
a going concern). In the event of revocation, as provided for in
this Chapter, the City at its election, shall have the right to
purchase and take over all or any part of a cable system
located within the City upon payment to franchisee of a sum
equal to an equitable price for the system or the part taken. If
the City elects to purchase only a part of the system, the fair
market value shall include both the fair market value of the
part purchased together with the diminution in value of the
part not purchased. The price for the cable system or the part
taken, shall not include, and the franchisee shall not receive,
anything for the value allocated to the franchise itself unless
such valuation is now or subsequently provided for by the
Cable Act or in the franchise itself. Upon the exercise of the
option by the City and its service of an official notice of such
action upon the franchisee, the franchisee shall immediately
transfer to the City possession and title to all of the purchased
facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable system,
with any existing liens and encumbrances (provided the City
can require application of purchase price to such liens and
encumbrances at closing); and the franchisee shall execute
such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the
City as shall be reasonably necessary for this purpose. Each
contract entered into by franchisee with reference to its
operations under the franchise shall be subject to the exercise
of this option by the City.
c. If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee during the
franchise term, or if the franchisee fails to operate is system in
accordance with this Chapter during any transition period, or
Section
635.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.120
AO:720
the franchisee otherwise terminates the franchise, upon
decision of the Board of Aldermen made after providing the
franchisee reasonable notice of at least thirty (30) days and
an opportunity to be heard, the ownership of all portions of
the cable system in public rights-of-way shall revert to the City
and the City may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the
assets of the system, or the Board of Aldermen, at its option,
may operate the system, designate another entity to operate
the system temporarily until the franchisee restores service
under conditions acceptable to the City or until the franchise
is revoked and a new franchisee is selected by the City is
providing service, seek an injunction requiring the franchisee
to continue operations, and/or seek to recover all damages
sustained as a result of such abandonment or failure to
operate. A franchisee retains all rights to contest such actions
and all rights to compensation provided by law.
A franchisee shall be deemed to have abandoned its system, or
failed to operate its system during any transition period, if:
(1) The franchisee fails to provide cable service in accordance
with its franchise over a substantial portion of the cable
system for ninety-six (96) consecutive hours, unless the
Board of Aldermen authorizes a longer interruption of
service in writing; or
(2) The franchisee, for any period, willfully and without cause
refuses to provide cable service in accordance with its
franchise over a substantial portion of the cable system.
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, where the
City has issued a franchise requiring the completion of
construction, system upgrade, or other specific obligation by a
specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such
construction or upgrade, or to comply with such other specific
obligations as may be required, within such time limits, as same
shall be extended by the Board of Aldermen for good cause shown
by the franchisee, will result in the forfeiture of the franchise upon
decision of the Board of Aldermen made after providing the
franchisee with reasonable notice of at least thirty (30) days and an
opportunity to be heard.
F. Remedies Cumulative. All remedies under this Chapter and the
franchise agreement are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated.
The exercise of one (1) remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor
shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of penalties relieve a
franchisee of its obligations to comply with its franchise. Remedies may
be used alone or in combination as permitted by law; in addition, the
City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity.
Section
635.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.120
AO:721
Section 635.130. Rights of Individuals Protected. [R.O. 2006
§660.130; Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995]
G. Relation To Insurance And Indemnity Requirements. Recovery by the
City of any amounts under insurance, a performance bond, a security
fund or letter of credit, or otherwise does not limit a franchisee's duty to
indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a
franchisee of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed
to the City, or in any respect prevent the City from exercising any other
right or remedy it may have.
H. Penalties. For violation of provisions of this Chapter, subject to judicial
procedures, penalties shall be chargeable to the franchisee as follows:
1. For purportedly transferring the franchise without approval: Five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation for each day
the violation continues;
2. For violation of customer service standards: One hundred dollars
($100.00) per violation for each day the violation continues; and
3. For all other material violations for which actual damages may not
be ascertainable: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each
violation for each day the violation continues.
A. Discriminatory Practices Prohibited.
1. A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, users, programmers, or residents
or businesses in the City on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex or age.
2. A franchisee shall not unreasonably discriminate among similarly
situated persons or take any retaliatory action against a person
because of that person's exercise of any right it may have under
Federal, State or local law, nor may the franchisee require a person
to waive such rights as a condition of providing service.
3. A franchisee shall not deny access to cable service or levy different
rates and charges on any group of potential residential cable
subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area
in which such group resides.
4. A franchisee is prohibited from unreasonably discriminating in its
rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any
subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or
potential subscribers; provided however, that a franchisee may
offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract
or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a
non-discriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers
throughout the City; and a franchisee may offer reasonable
discounts for senior citizens or the economically disadvantaged,
Section
635.120
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.130
AO:722
Section 635.140. Miscellaneous Provisions. [R.O. 2006 §660.140;
Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
discounts or customer specific pricing for bulk rate customers,
and such other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide
under Federal law, if such discounts are applied in a uniform and
consistent manner. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all
applicable Federal, State, and City laws, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to non-discrimination.
B. Equal Employment Opportunity. A franchisee shall not refuse to employ,
discharge from employment, or discriminate against any person in
compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment
because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. A franchisee
shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations
governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from
time to time amended including, but not limited to, 47 U.S.C. §554.
C. Subscriber Privacy. A franchisee shall at all times abide by and protect
the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of Section 631
of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §551. A franchisee shall not condition
subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose
information which, pursuant to Federal or State law, cannot be
disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent.
A. Compliance With Laws. Each franchise shall comply with all Federal
and State laws, as well as City ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted or established during the
entire term of its franchise.
B. Captions. The captions to Sections throughout this Chapter are
intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the Sections and
provisions of this Chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this Chapter.
C. No Recourse Against The City. Without limiting such immunities as the
City or other persons may have under applicable law including, but not
limited to, 47 U.S.C. §555a, a franchisee shall have no recourse
whatsoever against the City or its Officials, members, Boards,
Commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense, liability,
or damage arising out of any action undertaken or not undertaken
pursuant to franchise agreement or any provision or requirement of this
Chapter or because of the enforcement of this Chapter or the City's
exercise of its authority pursuant to this Chapter, a franchise
agreement, or other applicable law, unless such recourse is expressly
authorized by Statute, this Chapter, or other ordinance.
D. Rights And Remedies.
1. The rights and remedies reserved to the City by this Chapter are
cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
Section
635.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.140
AO:723
other rights and remedies which the City may have with respect to
the subject matter of this Chapter.
2. The City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit,
action or proceeding involving any provision of this Chapter.
3. Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is
not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of
determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is
material and substantial.
4. No franchisee shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this Chapter by reason of any failure of the City
to enforce prompt compliance. No shall any inaction by the City be
deemed to waive a provision or render void any provision of this
Chapter.
E. Incorporation By Reference. Any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall by implication include a provision which shall incorporate
by reference this Chapter into such franchise as fully as if copied
therein verbatim.
F. Force Majeure. A franchisee shall not be deemed in default of
provisions of its franchise where performance was hindered by war or
riots, civil disturbances, floods or other natural catastrophes beyond
the franchisee's control, and a franchisee shall not be revoked or a
franchisee penalized for such non-compliance, provided that the
franchisee takes prompt and diligent steps to bring itself back into
compliance with its franchise without unduly endangering the health,
safety, and integrity of the public, public rights-of-way, public property
or private property.
G. Public Emergency. In the event of a public emergency or disaster as
determined by the City acting through such officials as may be available
given the emergency conditions, a franchisee immediately shall make
the cable system, employees, and property, as may be reasonably
necessary, available for use by the City or other civil defense or
governmental agency designated by the City for the term of such
emergency or disaster for emergency purposes. In the event of such
use, a franchisee shall waive any claim that such use by the City
constitutes a use of eminent domain, provided that the City shall return
use of the system, employees, and property to the franchisee promptly
after the emergency or disaster has ended.
H. Connections To System — Use Of Antennae.
1. Subscribers shall have the right to attach devices to a franchisee's
system to allow them to transmit signals or services for which they
have paid to VCR's, receivers, and other terminal equipment.
Subscribers also shall have the right to use their own remote
control devices and converters, inside wire, and other similar
equipment, subject to market availability, and a franchisee shall
Section
635.140
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.140
AO:724
Section 635.150. Definitions of Certain Terms. [R.O. 2006 §660.150;
Ord. No. 1889 §2, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 1982 §1, 8-19-1996]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
ACTIVATED CHANNEL — Those channels engineered at the headend of a
cable system for the provision of services generally available to residential
subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services
actually are provided, including any channel designated for public,
educational or governmental use.
provide information to subscribers which will allow them to adjust
such devices so that they may be used with the franchisee's system.
2. A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a
subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antennae
or disconnect an antenna except as the express direction of the
subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit or discourage a
subscriber from installing an antenna switch, provided that such
equipment and installation are consistent with applicable codes.
3. Regardless of changes in technology and equipment, channels,
facilities, and equipment for public, educational, and governmental
use will remain accessible to subscribers and users.
I. Calculation Of Time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance
or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this
Chapter or any franchise agreement, and a period of time is prescribed
and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the day
of the act, event, or default after which the designated period of time
begins to run and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period
of time, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event
the period runs until the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday. If the period is less than seven (7) days, intermediate
Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation. This Subsection shall not apply in the context of
obligations which continue on a daily basis, such as the obligation to
operate a cable system.
J. Severability. If any term, condition or provision of this Chapter shall, to
any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof
shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the
event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision
which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision shall
thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the
City and shall thereafter be binding on the franchisee and the City.
K. Effective Date. This Chapter shall become effective upon its passage
and approval as provided by law.
Section
635.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.150
AO:725
AFFILIATE — When used in relation to any person, means another person
who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with, such person.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE CHANNEL OR CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is cable
of delivering a television channel (as television channel is defined by the
Federal Communications Commission by regulation).
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such
terms does not include:
Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system, or
1.
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
2.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
a. Video programming, or
b. Other programming service, and
1.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
2.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1)
or more television broadcast stations;
1.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless
such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
2.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Subchapter II of Chapter 5 of Title 47 of the United
States Code, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
(other than for purposes of Section 541(c) of Title 47 of the United
States Code) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers; or
3.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility service.
4.
Section
635.150
FENTON CITY CODE Section
635.150
AO:726
COMMON CARRIER — Any person engaged as a common carrier for hire,
in interstate or foreign communications by wire or radio or in interstate
or foreign radio transmission of energy, except where reference is made to
common carriers not subject to this Chapter; but a person engaged in radio
broadcasting shall not, insofar as such person is so engaged, be deemed a
common carrier.
FEDERAL AGENCY — Any agency of the United States, including the
Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a
renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to Section 546
of Title 47 of the United States Code), issued by a Franchising Authority,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes
the construction or operation of a cable system.
INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICE — A service providing video
programming to subscribers over switched network on an on-demand,
point-to-point basis, but does not include services providing video
programming prescheduled by the programming provider.
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR — A person such
as, but not limited to, a cable operator, multichannel multipoint distribution
service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only
satellite program distributor, who makes available for purchase, by
subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video programming.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally.
PUBLIC EDUCATION OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES —
RADIO COMMUNICATION — The transmission by radio of writing, signs,
signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds, including all instrumentalities,
facilities, apparatus, and services (among other things, the receipt,
forwarding, and delivery of communications) incidental to such
transmission.
SERVICE TIER — A category of cable service or other services provided
by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable
operator.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or control of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
Channel capacity designed for public, educational or governmental use;
and
1.
2. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
Section
635.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.150
AO:727
USABLE ACTIVATED CHANNELS — Activated channels of a cable system,
except those channels whose use of the distribution of broadcast signals
would conflict with technical and safety regulations as determined by the
Federal Communications Commission.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
Chapter 640
AMUSEMENT MACHINES OR DEVICES OR JUKE BOXES
Section 640.010. Unlawful Practices. [R.O. 2006 §670.010; Ord. No.
691 §1, 2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have in its
possession or operation within any business establishment or private club
within the City of Fenton any amusement machine or device or juke box
without first having applied to and obtained from the City of Fenton a
license permit for amusement machines or devices or juke boxes in its
possession or operation, whether said amusement machines or devices or
juke boxes be owned, leased or rented.
Section 640.020. Applications. [R.O. 2006 §670.020; Ord. No. 691
§1, 2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984]
Section 640.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2006 §670.030; Ord. No. 691 §1,
2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984; Ord. No. 1738 §1,
4-12-1994]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
AMUSEMENT MACHINE OR DEVICE — Any apparatus which, upon the
insertion of a coin, token, slug or other insertion device, or which by remote
control, or by the payment of a fee, operates or may be operated as a game,
contest of skill or chance of any kind or description for the amusement
of the operator, whether or not registering a score, and whether or not
activated or manipulated by the operator. The term "amusement device"
shall not include coin-operated vending machines dispensing food, drink or
A. The application for license permit for amusement machines or devices
or juke boxes shall state:
1. The location at which the amusement machines or devices or juke
boxes are to be maintained;
2. The total square feet of building area owned, leased or under the
control of the applicant for license;
3. The total number and type of amusement machines or devices or
juke boxes.
Section
635.150
FENTON CITY CODE Section
640.030
AO:728
merchandise of any kind nor any machine or device prohibited by the laws
of Missouri or of the United States.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A parcel of ground with a minimum area of three
(3) acres dedicated and used for recreational buildings and structures
including, but not limited to, batting cages, miniature golf courses, water
slides, swimming pools, go kart tracks, and/or amusement rides.
JUKE BOX — A machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug or token, plate, disk or key into any slot, crevice or other
opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for
the admission of songs, music or similar amusement.
Section 640.040. Limitations. [R.O. 2006 §670.040; Ord. No. 691 §1,
2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984; Ord. No. 1738 §2,
4-12-1994]
Section 640.050. City Clerk To Issue License. [R.O. 2006 §670.050;
Ord. No. 691 §1, 2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984]
A. Only one (1) amusement machine or device or juke box may be licensed
for each five hundred (500) square feet of building area owned, leased
or under the control of the applicant for license.
B. All amusement machines or devices or juke boxes shall be located in an
area of the premises opened to the general public; except that in a
private club the machines shall be located in an area approved by the
Board of Aldermen.
C. Except as provided below no more than five (5) amusement machines or
devices, or juke boxes may be licensed at any one (1) location.
D. The Board of Aldermen may on special application, after considering all
relevant factors, authorize one (1) additional amusement machine or
device, or juke box for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet
of building area owned, leased or under the control of the applicant for
license.
E. The Board of Aldermen may on special application, after considering all
relevant factors, authorize one (1) amusement machine or device, or
juke box for each one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet of
land dedicated to the use of an "Amusement Park" as defined in this
Chapter. The application shall include a plan of development for the
amusement park. The authorization provided for herein shall be
reviewed annually by the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen
may, with good cause shown, revoke such authorization.
A. Such license shall be issued by the City Clerk unless he/she finds one or
more of the following:
1. Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of facts in the
application.
Section
640.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.050
AO:729
Section 640.060. License Fee. [R.O. 2006 §670.060; Ord. No. 691 §1,
2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984]
The license fee for each such amusement machine or device and for each
juke box for which a license shall be issued shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00)
per year or any fraction thereof.
Section 640.070. Annual License Required. [R.O. 2006 §670.070;
Ord. No. 691 §1, 2-20-1984; Ord. No. 722 §1, 6-18-1984]
All such amusement machines or devices, or juke boxes shall be licensed as
above and said license shall be for one (1) year and shall require renewal
annually. Amusement machines or devices, or juke boxes may be substituted
for one another during the period of the license so long as the total number
of amusement machines or devices, or juke boxes does not increase.
Section 640.080. Penalty. [R.O. 2006 §670.080; Ord. No. 691 §1,
2-20-1984; Ord. No. 2463 §3, 4-15-2002]
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall upon conviction
be punished as set out in Section 100.060 of this Code.
Chapter 645
VIDEO SERVICES PROVIDERS
Section 645.010. Ratification of Existing Franchises. [Ord. No. 2929
§1, 11-19-2007]
2. Failure to comply with the limitations set out in Section 640.040
hereof.
3. Failure to pay the required license fee.
B. Each applicant shall be notified by mail or by hand delivery of the
issuance or non-issuance of a license by the City Clerk.
C. If the City Clerk does not issue a license the reasons for his/her not
doing so shall be in writing and shall accompany the notice of nonissuance.
D. The City Clerk's determination of non-issuance may be appealed under
the provisions of Section 536.150, RSMo.
A. To the extent permitted by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act, the
Board of Aldermen of the City of Fenton hereby ratifies all existing
agreements, franchises and ordinances regulating cable television
operators and other video service providers, including the imposition of
a franchise fee of three percent (3%) imposed on the gross revenues of
all such providers and further declares that such agreements,
franchises and ordinances shall continue in full force and effect until
Section
640.050
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.010
AO:730
Section 645.020. Video Service Regulations. [Ord. No. 2929 §2,
11-19-2007]
expiration as provided therein or until pre-empted by the issuance of
video service authorizations by the Missouri Public Service Commission
or otherwise by law, but only to the extent of said pre-emption.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide video services, as defined
in Section 645.020 hereof, within the City without either an agreement,
franchise or ordinance approved by the City or a video service
authorization issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
FRANCHISE AREA — The total geographic area of the City authorized
to be served by an incumbent cable television operator or incumbent
local exchange carrier or affiliate thereof.
GROSS REVENUES — The total amounts billed to subscribers or
received from advertisers for the provision of video services within the
City, including:
1. Recurring charges for video service,
Event-based charges for video service including, but not limited to,
pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges,
2.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other video service equipment,
Service charges related to the provision of video service including,
but not limited to, activation, installation, repair and maintenance
charges,
4.
Administrative charges related to the provision of video service
including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges, and
5.
A pro rata portion of all revenue derived, less refunds, rebates
or discounts, by a video service provider for advertising over the
video service network to subscribers, where the numerator is the
number of subscribers within the City and the denominator is the
total number of subscribers reached by such advertising; but gross
revenues do not include:
Discounts, refunds and other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of compensation received by a video service provider,
a.
b. Uncollectibles,
c. Late payment fees,
Amounts billed to subscribers to recover taxes, fees or
surcharges imposed on subscribers or video service providers
d.
6.
Section
645.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.020
AO:731
HOUSEHOLD — An apartment, a house, a mobile home or any other
structure or part of a structure intended for residential occupancy as
separate living quarters.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an average annual
household income of less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00)
as determined by the most recent decennial census.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation, trust or government entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who receives video services in the
franchise area.
VIDEO SERVICE — The provision of video programming provided
through wireline facilities, without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology, whether provided as part of
a tier, on demand or a per-channel basis, including cable service as
defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6), but excluding video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.
Section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of
and via a service that enables users to access content, information,
electronic mail or other services offered over the public Internet.
VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION — The right of a video service
provider or an incumbent cable operator that secures permission from
the Missouri Public Service Commission pursuant to Sections 67.2675
to 67.2714, RSMo., to offer video service to subscribers.
VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK — Wireline facilities or any component
thereof that deliver video service without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology or any successor technology.
The term "video service network" shall include cable television systems.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE — The fee imposed under Section
645.020 hereof.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER OR PROVIDER — Any person authorized
to distribute video service through a video service network pursuant to
a video service authorization.
in connection with the provision of video services, including
the video service provider fee authorized herein,
e. Fees or other contributions for PEG or I-Net support, or
Charges for services other than video service that are
aggregated or bundled with amounts billed to subscribers,
provided the video service provider can reasonably identify
such charges on books and records kept in the regular course
of business or by other reasonable means. Except with respect
to the exclusion of the video service provider fee, gross
revenues shall be computed in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
f.
Section
645.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.020
AO:732
B. General Regulations.
1. A video service provider shall provide written notice to the City at
least ten (10) days before commencing video service within the
City. Such notice shall also include:
a. The name, address and legal status of the provider;
b. The name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address
and fax number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point
of contact between the City and the provider so as to make
contact possible at any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week); and
c. A copy of the provider's video service authorization issued by
the Missouri Public Service Commission.
2. A video service provider shall also notify the City, in writing, within
thirty (30) days of:
a. Any changes in the information set forth in or accompanying its
notice of commencement of video service, or
b. Any transfer of ownership or control of the provider's business
assets.
3. A video service provider shall not deny access to service to any
group of potential residential subscribers because of the race or
income of the residents in the area in which the group resides. A
video service provider shall be governed in this respect by Section
67.2707, RSMo. The City may file a complaint in a court of
competent jurisdiction alleging a germane violation of this
Subsection, which complaint shall be acted upon in accordance
with Section 67.2711, RSMo.
4. A video service provider shall comply with all Federal
Communications Commission requirements involving the
distribution and notification of emergency messages over the
emergency alert system applicable to cable operators. Any video
service provider other than an incumbent cable operator serving a
majority of the residents within a political subdivision shall comply
with this Section by December 31, 2007.
5. A video service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards,
board members, commissions, commissioners, agents and
employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings and judgments ("claims") for damages or equitable
relief arising out of:
a. The construction, maintenance, repair or operation of its video
services network,
Section
645.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.020
AO:733
b. Copyright infringements, and
c. Failure to secure consents from the owners, authorized
distributors or licenses or programs to be delivered by the
video service network.
Such indemnification shall include, but is not limited
to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in
defending against any such claim prior to the video
service provider assuming such defense. The City shall
notify the provider of a claim within seven (7) business
days of its actual knowledge of the existence of such
claim. Once the provider assumes the defense of the
claim, the City may at its option continue to participate
in the defense at its own expense. This indemnification
obligation shall not apply to any claim related to the
provision of public, educational or governmental
channels or programming or to emergency interrupt
service announcements.
C. Video Service Provider Fee.
1. Each video service provider shall pay to the City a video service
provider fee in the amount of three percent (3%) of the provider's
gross revenues on or before the last day of the month following the
end of each calendar quarter. The City may adjust the video service
provider fee as permitted in Section 67.2689, RSMo.
2. A video service provider may identify and pass through on a
proportionate basis the video service provider fee as a separate line
item on subscribers' bills.
3. The City, not more than once per calendar year and at its own cost,
may audit the gross revenues of any video service provider as
provided in Section 67.2691, RSMo. A video service provider shall
make available for inspection all records pertaining to gross
revenues at the location where such records are kept in the normal
course of business.
D. Customer Service Regulations.
1. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.
In all cases the term normal business hours must include some
evening hours at least one (1) night per week or some weekend
hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions
which are within the control of the video service provider. Those
conditions which are not within the control of the video service
provider include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
Section
645.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.020
AO:734
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the video service provider include,
but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events,
rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and
maintenance or upgrade of the video system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one
(1) or more video channels.
2. All video service providers shall adopt and abide by the following
minimum customer service requirements.
a. Video service providers shall maintain a local, toll-free or
collect call telephone access line which may be available to
subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a
week.
b. Video service providers shall have trained company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries during normal business hours. After normal business
hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours shall be
responded to, by a trained company representative, on the next
business day.
c. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by
a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
d. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
e. Customer service centers and bill payment locations shall be
open at least during normal business hours and shall be
conveniently located.
f. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
standards shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%)
of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(1) Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. "Standard"
installations are those that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution
system.
Section
645.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.020
AO:735
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator,
the video service provider shall begin working on "service
interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twentyfour
(24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The
video service provider must begin actions to correct other
service problems the next business day after notification of
the service problem.
(3) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations,
service calls and other installation activities will be either
a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block
during normal business hours. The operator may schedule
service calls and other installation activities outside of
normal business hours for the express convenience of the
customer.
(4) A video service provider shall not cancel an appointment
with a customer after the close of business on the business
day prior to the scheduled appointment.
(5) If a video service provider's representative is running late
for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to
keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer must be
contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time convenient for the customer.
g. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
(1) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or
(2) The return of the equipment supplied by the video service
provider if the service is terminated.
h. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
i. Video service providers shall not disclose the name or address
of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists
or for other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the
conduct of the businesses of the video service provider or its
affiliates as required under 47 U.S.C. §551, including all notice
requirements. Video service providers shall provide an address
and telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll
charge to prevent disclosure of the subscriber's name or
address.
3. As required by Section 67.2692, RSMo., this Subsection (D) shall
be enforced only as follows:
Section
645.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.020
AO:736
a. Each video service provider shall implement an informal
process for handling inquiries from the City and customers
concerning billing issues, service issues and other complaints.
If an issue is not resolved through this informal process, the
City may request a confidential non-binding mediation with the
video service provider, with the costs of such mediation to be
shared equally between the City and the video service
provider.
b. In the case of repeated, willful and material violations of the
provisions of this Section by a video service provider, the City
may file a complaint on behalf of a resident harmed by such
violations with Missouri's Administrative Hearing Commission
seeking an order revoking the video service provider's Public
Service Commission authorization. The City or a video service
provider may appeal any determination made by the
Administrative Hearing Commission under this Section to a
court of competent jurisdiction, which shall have the power to
review the decision de novo. The City shall not file a complaint
seeking revocation unless the video service provider has been
given sixty (60) days' notice to cure alleged breaches but has
failed to do so.
E. Public, Educational And Government Access Programming.
1. Each video service provider shall designate the same number of
channels for non-commercial public, educational or governmental
("PEG") use as required of the incumbent cable television
franchisee as of August 28, 2007.
2. Any PEG channel that is not substantially utilized by the City may
be reclaimed and programmed by the video service provider at the
provider's discretion. If the City finds and certifies that a channel
that has been reclaimed by a video service provider will be
substantially utilized, the video service provider shall restore the
reclaimed channel within one hundred twenty (120) days. A PEG
channel shall be considered "substantially utilized" when forty (40)
hours per week are locally programmed on that channel for at least
three (3) consecutive months. In determining whether a PEG
channel is substantially utilized, a program may be counted not
more than four (4) times during a calendar week.
3. The operation of any PEG access channel and the production of any
programming that appears on each such channel shall be the sole
responsibility of the City or its duly appointed agent receiving the
benefit of such channel and the video service provider shall bear
only the responsibility for the transmission of the programming on
each such channel to subscribers. The City must deliver and submit
to the video service provider all transmissions of PEG content and
programming in a manner or form that is capable of being accepted
and transmitted by such video service provider holder over its
Section
645.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.020
AO:737
network without further alteration or change in the content or
transmission signal. Such content and programming must be
compatible with the technology or protocol utilized by the video
service provider to deliver its video services. The video service
provider shall cooperate with the City to allow the City to achieve
such compatibility.
4. The City shall make the programming of any PEG access channel
available to all video service providers in a non-discriminatory
manner. Each video service provider shall be responsible for
providing the connectivity to the City's or its duly appointed agent's
PEG access channel distribution points existing as of August 27,
2007. Where technically necessary and feasible, video service
providers shall use reasonable efforts and shall negotiate in good
faith to interconnect their video service networks on mutually
acceptable rates, terms and conditions for the purpose of
transmitting PEG programming. A video service provider shall have
no obligation to provide such interconnection to a new video
service provider at more than one (1) point per headend, regardless
of the number of political subdivisions served by such headend. The
video service provider requesting interconnection shall be
responsible for any costs associated with such interconnection,
including signal transmission from the origination point to the
point of interconnection. Interconnection may be accomplished by
direct cable microwave link, satellite or other reasonable method of
connection acceptable to the person providing the interconnect.
5. The franchise obligation of an incumbent cable operator to provide
monetary and other support for PEG access facilities existing on
August 27, 2007 shall continue until the date of franchise
expiration (ignoring any termination by notice of issuance of a
video service authorization) or January 1, 2012, whichever is
earlier. Any other video service provider shall have the same
obligation to support PEG access facilities as the incumbent cable
operator, but if there is more than one (1) incumbent, then the
incumbent with the most subscribers as of August 27, 2007. Such
obligation shall be prorated, depending on the nature of the
obligation, as provided in Section 67.2703.8, RSMo. The City shall
notify each video service provider of the amount of such fee on an
annual basis, beginning one (1) year after issuance of the video
service authorization.
6. A video service provider may identify and pass through as a
separate line item on subscribers' bills the value of monetary and
other PEG access support on a proportionate basis.
F. Compliance With Other Regulations. All video service providers shall
comply with the right-of-way use and zoning regulations established in
Sections 645.030 and 645.040 of this Chapter and with all other
applicable laws and regulations.
Section
645.020
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.030
AO:738
Section 645.030. (Reserved)81
Section 645.040. Zoning and Police Power Regulations. [Ord. No.
2929 §4, 11-19-2007]
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
DIRECTOR — The City's Public Works Director or such other person
designated to administer and enforce this Chapter.
FACILITIES — A network or system or any part thereof used for
providing or delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more
lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities,
cabinets, poles, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas,
transmitters, radios, towers, gates, meters, appurtenances or other
equipment.
FACILITIES PERMIT — A permit granted by the City for placement of
facilities on private property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation or other entity or any lawful successor thereto or
transferee thereof
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article of
commerce including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television,
Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems, steam,
electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines,
sanitary or stormwater sewerage or any similar or related service to
one (1) or more persons located within or outside of the City using
facilities located within the City.
B. Facilities Permits.
1. Any person desiring to place facilities on private property must first
apply for and obtain a facilities permit in addition to any other
building permit, license, easement, franchise or authorization
required by law. The Director may design and make available
standard forms for such applications, requiring such information as
allowed by law and as the Director determines in his or her
discretion to be necessary and consistent with the provisions of this
Chapter and to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. Each
application shall at minimum contain the following information,
unless otherwise waived by the Director:
a. The name of the person on whose behalf the facilities are to be
installed and the name, address and telephone number of a
representative whom the City may notify or contact at any time
81.Editor’s Note: Former Section 645.030, Public Rights-of-Way Use Regulations, which
derived from Ord. No. 2929 § 3, 11-19-2007, was repealed 2-23-2017 by § 1 of Ord. No.
3663. See now Chapter 510, Excavations And Public Rights-Of-Way Management.
Section
645.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.040
AO:739
(i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week)
concerning the facilities;
b. A description of the proposed work, including a site plan and
such plans or technical drawings or depictions showing the
nature, dimensions and description of the facilities, their
location and their proximity to other facilities that may be
affected by their installation.
2. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee
approved by the City to cover the cost of processing the
application.
3. Application review and determination.
a. The Director shall promptly review each application and shall
grant or deny the application within thirty-one (31) days.
Unless the application is denied pursuant to Subparagraph (d)
hereof, the Director shall issue a facilities permit upon
determining that the applicant:
(1) Has submitted all necessary information,
(2) Has paid the appropriate fees, and
(3) Is in full compliance with this Chapter and all other City
ordinances. The Director may establish procedures for
bulk processing of applications and periodic payment of
fees to avoid excessive processing and accounting costs.
b. It is the intention of the City that proposed facilities will not
impair public safety, harm property values or significant sight
lines or degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or
neighborhood and that the placement and appearance of
facilities on private property should be minimized and limited
in scope to the extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of
this Section. To accomplish such purposes, the Director may
impose conditions on facilities permits, including alternative
landscaping, designs or locations, provided that such
conditions are reasonable and necessary, shall not result in a
decline of service quality and are competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory.
c. An applicant receiving a facilities permit shall promptly notify
the Director of any material changes in the information
submitted in the application or included in the permit. The
Director may issue a revised facilities permit or require that
the applicant reapply for a facilities permit.
d. The Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be
in the public interest, for the following reasons:
(1) Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
Section
645.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.040
AO:740
(2) Failure to provide required information;
(3) The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this
Chapter or other City ordinances;
(4) For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural
sensitivity as defined by applicable Federal, State or local
law;
(5) For the applicant's refusal to comply with reasonable
conditions required by the Director; and
(6) For any other reason to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within
the exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service
Commission and is imposed on a competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory basis.
4. Permit revocation and ordinance violations.
a. The Director may revoke a facilities permit without fee refund
after notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of
a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit
or this Chapter. Prior to revocation the Director shall provide
written notice to the responsible person identifying any
substantial breach and allowing a reasonable period of time
not longer than thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which
cure period may be immediate if certain activities must be
stopped to protect the public safety. The cure period shall be
extended by the Director on good cause shown. A substantial
breach includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) A material violation of the facilities permit or this Chapter;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the permit or this Chapter or the perpetration or attempt
to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its
residents;
(3) A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit
application;
(4) A failure to complete facilities installation by the date
specified in the permit, unless an extension is obtained or
unless the failure to complete the work is due to reasons
beyond the applicant's control; and
(5) A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure as specified by the Director, work that
does not conform to applicable national safety ordinances,
industry construction standards or the City's pertinent and
applicable ordinances including, but not limited to, this
Section
645.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.040
AO:741
Chapter, provided that City standards are no more
stringent than those of a national safety ordinance.
b. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a facilities permit
shall also be deemed a violation of this Chapter and in lieu of
revocation the Director may initiate prosecution of the
applicant or the facilities owner for such violation.
5. Appeals and alternative dispute resolution.
a. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Director
may appeal in writing to the City Manager within five (5)
business days thereof. The appeal shall assert specific grounds
for review and the City Manager shall render a decision on the
appeal within fifteen (15) business days of its receipt affirming,
reversing or modifying the determination of the Director. The
City Manager may extend this time period for the purpose of
any investigation or hearing deemed necessary. A decision
affirming the Director's determination shall be in writing and
supported by findings establishing the reasonableness of the
decision. Any person aggrieved by the final determination of
the City Manager may file a petition for review pursuant to
Chapter 536, RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the
County of St. Louis. Such petition shall be filed within thirty
(30) days after the City Manager's final determination.
b. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other
remedies, any final decision of the City Manager may be
submitted to mediation or binding arbitration.
(1) In the event of mediation, the City Manager and the
applicant shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of
the mediator shall be borne equally by the parties and
each party shall pay its own costs, disbursements and
attorney fees.
(2) In the event of arbitration, the City Manager and the
applicant shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and
fees of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties.
If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter
shall be resolved by a three (3) person arbitration panel
consisting of one (1) arbitrator selected by the City
Manager, one (1) arbitrator selected by the applicant or
facilities owner and one (1) person selected by the other
two (2) arbitrators, in which case each party shall bear the
expense of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally
bear with the other party the expense of the third (3rd)
arbitrator and of the arbitration. Each party shall also pay
its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
C. Facilities Regulations.
Section
645.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.040
AO:742
1. The following general regulations apply to the placement and
appearance of facilities:
a. Facilities shall be placed underground, except when other
similar facilities exist above ground or when conditions are
such that underground construction is impossible, impractical
or economically unfeasible, as determined by the City, and
when in the City's judgment the above ground construction has
minimal aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is
proposed. Facilities shall not be located so as to interfere or be
likely to interfere with any public facilities or use of public
property.
b. Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. Non-residential zoning districts are
preferred to residential zoning districts. Preferred locations in
order of priority in both type districts are:
(1) Thoroughfare landscape easements,
(2) Rear yards, and
(3) Street side yards on a corner lot behind the front yard
setback. Placements within side yards not bordered by a
street or within front yards are discouraged.
c. Facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright,
reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered
neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the
facilities. Sightproof screening, landscape or otherwise, may
be required for facilities taller than three (3) feet in height or
covering in excess of four (4) square feet in size. Such
screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the facility.
A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Director prior
to installation of any facility requiring landscape screening.
The person responsible for the facilities shall be responsible
for the installation, repair or replacement of screening
materials. Alternative concealment may be approved by the
Director to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
d. Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a safe manner
and so as to not emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical Safety
Code and all other applicable Federal, State or local laws and
regulations.
e. No person shall place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities,
Section
645.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.040
AO:743
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City
as necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair,
maintenance or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise
required to be affixed by applicable law or regulation.
f. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for
facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the
reasonable requirements of the applicant, the Director shall
cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but the City shall not be required to incur
any financial cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant.
2. Any person installing, repairing, maintaining, removing or
operating facilities, and the person on whose behalf the work is
being done, shall protect from damage any and all existing
structures and property belonging to the City and any other person.
Any and all rights-of-way, public property or private property
disturbed or damaged during the work shall be repaired or
replaced and the responsible person shall immediately notify the
owner of the fact of the damaged property. Such repair or
replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time specified
by the Director and to the Director's satisfaction.
3. The applicant shall provide written notice to all property owners
within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to any installation, replacement or expansion
of its facilities. Notice shall include a reasonably detailed
description of work to be done, the location of work and the time
and duration of the work.
4. At the City's direction, a person owning or controlling facilities
shall protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove facilities, at
its own cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the
construction, improvement, expansion, relocation or maintenance
of streets or other public works or to protect the ROW or the public
health, safety or welfare.
5. If a person installs facilities without having complied with the
requirements of this Chapter or abandons the facilities, said person
shall remove the facilities and if the person fails to remove the
facilities within a reasonable period of time, the City may, to the
extent permitted by law, have the removal done at the person's
expense.
6. Facilities shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and
standards as established as part of the City Code including, but not
limited to, building codes, zoning requirements and rights-of-way
management regulations in addition to the regulations provided
herein.
Section
645.040
FENTON CITY CODE Section
645.050
AO:744
Section 645.050. Violations. [Ord. No. 2929 §5, 11-19-2007]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine
and imprisonment and each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Section
645.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
645.050
AO:745