Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1-1. How Code Designated and Cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following Chapters and Sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lexington,
Missouri," and may be so cited.
SECTION 1-1.1. Code Adoption. [Ord. No. 90-8 §§ 1-2, 12-11-1990]
SECTION 1-1.2. Exceptions to Repeal. [Ord. No. 90-8 § 3,
12-11-1990]
A. The Code of ordinances, consisting of Titles I through VII, each
inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lexington"; which shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the City passed on or before April 20, 1990, to
the extent provided in Section 1-1.1 hereof.
B. All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and
after December 11, 1990.
A. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted
on final passage on or before April 20, 1990, and not included in such
Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are
hereby repealed from and after December 11, 1990, except those which
may be specifically excepted by separate ordinance, and except the
following which are hereby continued in full force and effect, unless
specifically repealed by separate ordinance:
1. Ordinances promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or notes of the
City or any other evidence of the City's indebtedness, or
authorizing any contract or obligation assumed by the City;
2. Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;
3. Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries and
compensation, and providing for expenses;
4. Ordinances granting franchises or rights to any person, firm or
corporation;
5. Ordinances relating to the dedication, opening closing, naming,
establishment of grades, improvement, altering, paving, widening
or vacating of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public places;
6. Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public
improvements;
1:1
SECTION 1-2. Rules of Construction.1
In the Construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the City Council:
CITY; CORPORATION — Whenever the words "the City," "this City," "the
corporation" or "this corporation" are used they shall be construed as if the
words "of Lexington, Missouri" followed them.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — Whenever a notice is required to be given or
an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be
had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be
counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to
be had shall be counted.
CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS — Whenever the words
"corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "City limits" are used they shall
mean the legal boundary of the City of Lexington.
COUNCIL — Shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of
Lexington.
COUNCILMAN — Any person elected to that office and shall include those
persons who hold other offices and who are ex officio.
COUNTY — The words "the County" or "this County" shall mean the County
of Lafayette in the State of Missouri.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department of the City to do some act or make certain
inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act
or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or Section
designate otherwise.
GENDER — A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as
to males.
7. Ordinances respecting the conveyances or acceptance of real
property or easements in real property;
8. Ordinances dedicating, accepting, or vacating any plat or
subdivision in the City or any part thereof, or providing regulations
for the same;
9. Ordinances annexing property to the City;
B. The repeal provided for in this Section shall not be construed to revive
any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance which is repealed by this Section.
1. State Law Reference — Definitions, rules of construction, etc., RSMo. § 1.020 et seq.
SECTION 1-1.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 1-2
1:2
INTERPRETATION — In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon
the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to
be controlling.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
KEEPER AND PROPRIETOR — Shall mean and include persons, firms,
associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by
themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.
MAYOR — Shall mean the Mayor of the City of Lexington.
MISDEMEANOR — Shall be construed to mean any violation, failure,
neglect or refusal to comply with the provisions, regulations or
requirements of this Code or any other ordinance of the City.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month.
NAME OF OFFICER — Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be
construed as though the words "of the City of Lexington" were added.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which,
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OR, AND — "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to
individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property except real
property, as herein described.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
SECTION 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1-2
1:3
PREMISES — Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or
places.
PROPERTY — Shall include real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open
space adjacent thereto.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RESIDENCE — Shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person
as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the
intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at
another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.
SEAL — Shall mean the City or Corporate Seal.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION — The "signature" or "subscription" of a
person shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE — The words "the State" shall be construed to mean the State of
Missouri.
STREET — Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the City.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or
who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or
with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WEEK — Shall be construed to mean seven (7) days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING — The term "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year.
SECTION 1-3. Catchlines of Sections.
The catchlines of the several Sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such Sections, or as any part of
the Section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such Sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
SECTION 1-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 1-4
1:4
SECTION 1-4. Effect of Repeal of Ordinances.2
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before
or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
SECTION 1-5. Severability of Parts of Code.
The Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and Sections
of this Code.
SECTION 1-6. Amendments to Code.3 [Ord. No. 90-8 § 4,
12-11-1990]
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances, which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered
in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for
inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed Chapters, Sections and
Subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages
affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed
or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code
of ordinances by the City Council.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the Section of this Code
in substantially the following language: "That Section __________ of the Code
of Ordinances of the City of Lexington, Missouri, is hereby amended to read
as follows: __________ (Set out new provisions in full)..."
When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which
the governing body desires to incorporate into the Code, a Section in
substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance:
"Section __________. It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby
ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made
a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lexington, Missouri, and
2. Cross Reference — Ordinances generally, §§ 2-15 — 2-26.
3. Cross Reference — Ordinances generally, §§ 2-15 — 2-26.
SECTION 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1-6
1:5
the Sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such
intention."
All Sections, Articles, Chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be
repealed should be specifically repealed by Section number or Chapter
number, as the case may be.
Any and all additions and amendments to such Code when passed in such
form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part
thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference
to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Lexington", shall be understood
and intended to include such additions and amendments.
SECTION 1-7. Altering Code. [Ord. No. 90-8 § 8, 12-11-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages
or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lexington to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be punished
as provided in Section 1-8 of this Chapter.
SECTION 1-7.1. Official Copy. [Ord. No. 90-8 § 7, 12-11-1990]
A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk,
preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the City Clerk may
consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or
someone authorized by said officer, to insert in their designated places all
amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention
of the City Council to make the same part of such Code when the same have
been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all
provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the City Council.
This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine
the same.
SECTION 1-8. General Penalty; Continuing Violations. [Ord. No.
90-8 § 5, 12-11-1990]
A. Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the City, or in any rule,
regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the
City under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for
the violation thereof, upon conviction of a violation of any such
provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, rule, regulation, notice
or order, the violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail
not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment;
provided, that in any case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by
a Statute of the State, the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be
SECTION 1-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 1-8
1:6
SECTION 1-8.1. Penalty as to Amendments. [Ord. No. 90-8 § 6,
12-11-1990]
In case of the amendment by the City Council of any Section of such Code
for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in
Section 1-8, of this Code shall apply to the Section as amended; or in case
such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty other than the
aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another Section in the same
Chapter, the penalty so provided in such other Section shall be held to relate
to the Section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed
therein.
SECTION 1-9. Prosecution Where Different Penalties Exist for Same
Offense.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be
created by different clauses or Sections of the ordinances of the City, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than
one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
SECTION 1-10. Lexington Reward Fund. [Ord. No. 88-17 §§ 1-3,
8-23-1988]
imposed for such offense, except that imprisonments may be in the City
prison or workhouse instead of the County Jail.
B. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or any such
rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof,
or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of
another person to do said act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this
Code, an attempt to do the act is likewise prohibited.
A. There is hereby created and established a special financial account to
be named and commonly known as the "Lexington Reward Fund"; that
said account is to be funded solely and exclusively by voluntary
contributions from persons, firms and other entities other than the City
of Lexington, and shall not in any way be funded by the City of
Lexington or result in any cost or expense to the City of Lexington;
B. Withdrawals of monies from said account shall be authorized and
effectuated only by ordinance after the receipt by the Mayor and City
Council of a properly executed requisition, or other appropriate form of
written request for payment, executed by the City Marshall and City
Attorney that particularly describes the following;
1. Identity of person, firm or entity to be paid;
2. Total amount to be paid; and
SECTION 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1-10
1:7
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
3. The case caption or title of the criminal or quasi-criminal
proceeding that has been successfully concluded at the trial level
with or through the use of the information provided;
C. The monies contributed and accumulated within the Fund thereafter
shall be utilized or disbursed for no reason or purpose whatsoever other
than to provide a financial reward to any person, firm or entity that
provides verifiable, truthful, factual information to the Lexington City
Police that in fact results in successful prosecution and conviction
entered in a criminal or quasi-criminal originally filed in a Division of
the Circuit Court of Lafayette County.
SECTION 1-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 1-10
1:8
ARTICLE I
In General4
SECTION 2-1. City Hall Established — Use. [Ord. No. 92-10 §§ 1-2,
6-8-1992; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1, 4-10-2007]
That certain building located at 919 Franklin Avenue is hereby designated
as the City Hall, and said building is to be used for such purposes deemed
necessary by the City Council to carry out the functions of the City. Other
buildings may be utilized as designated by the City Council.
SECTION 2-2. City Seal Described — Custody — Use. [Rev. Ord. No.
76, §§ 1 — 3, 10-21-1912; Ord. No. 76-14 §§ 1, 2, 6-1-1976]
SECTION 2-3. Bench Mark Established.5 [Rev. Ord. No. 30, § 4,
10-21-1912]
The permanent bench mark for the grade evaluations of the City is a point
on the top of the stone foundation of the City Hall in block 37 in first
addition to the City of Lexington, Missouri, said point being at the outer
corner of the brick wall at the north side of the main or west entrance of
said City Hall, said permanent bench mark being one hundred eighty-seven
and seventy-five one-hundredths (187.75) feet above the low water mark
in the Missouri River, which is the datum for all street, alley and avenue
grades in the City.
A. The common Seal of the City shall be circular in shape, two (2) inches in
diameter, the center of which shall be engraved with the Lafayette
County Court House, Pony Express Rider, hemp bales, covered wagon,
and riverboat with a river scene and in a circle around said center there
shall be inscribed the words, "Seal of the City of Lexington, Missouri,"
and the date 1822 with a Confederate Flag to the left of said date and
an American Flag to the right of said date.
B. The City Clerk shall be the keeper of the common Seal of the City and
shall in all cases required by the ordinances of the City or the laws of
the State affix the Seal, accompanied by his attestation and signature.
C. All deeds and conveyances of land by the City, requiring authentication,
except the published ordinances, all bonds issued by the City, all acts of
the Mayor of the City, and all other matters which by other ordinance
for the laws of the State are required to be under the Seal of the City,
shall have the Seal affixed to them by the City Clerk and shall be
attested and certified to by the City Clerk.
4. Cross References — The Park Board, §19-13 Et Seq.; The Planning Commission, § 20-1 Et
Seq. State Law References — Cities Of The Third Class Generally, RSMo. § 77.010 Et Seq.;
Provisions Relative To All Cities, RSMo. § 71.010 Et Seq.
5. Cross Reference — Streets and sidewalks, generally, § 23-1 et seq.
SECTION 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-4
1:9
SECTION 2-4. Smoking Prohibited. [Ord. No. 89-17 §§ 1-3,
2-8-1990; Ord. No. 92-12 § 1, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 99-41 § 1,
11-9-1999]
SECTION 2-5. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 91-7 §§ 1 — 6,
8-13-1991; Ord. No. 93-13 §§ 1 — 5, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 94-22 §§ 1
— 5, 8-23-1994; Ord. No. 95-20 §§ 1 — 5, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 97-16
§§ 1 — 5, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 99-32 §§ 1 — 5, 8-10-1999; Ord. No.
2001-39 §§ 1 — 5, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 2002-28§§ 1 — 5, 8-13-2002;
Ord. No. 2004-25 §§ 1 — 5, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 2006-34 §§ 1 — 5,
8-10-2006; Ord. No. 2007-30 §§ 1 — 5, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 2009-30
§§ 1 — 5, 8-11-2009; Ord. No. 2011-32 §§ 1 — 5, 8-9-2011; Ord. No.
2013-27 §§1 — 5, 8-13-2013; Ord. No. 2015-18 §§1 — 5, 7-14-2015;
Ord. No. 2017-24 §§ 1 — 5, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-27, 8-28-2018]
A. No person shall engage in the act of smoking cigarettes, cigars, pipes,
or otherwise engage in any activity whatsoever that produces an
incendiary flame or smoke of any kind or character within the confines
of all City owned buildings in Lexington, Missouri.
B. Any person violating this Section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to all penal sanctions provided
therefor under the general punishment provisions within the revised
ordinances of the City of Lexington, Missouri.
A. Declaration of Policy. The proper operation of municipal government
requires that public officials and employed officials be independent,
impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and
policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure;
that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have
confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these
goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain
officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters
affecting the City.
B. Conflicts of Interest. The Mayor or any member of the City Council who
has a substantial personal or private interest, as defined by State law, in
any bill shall disclose on the record of the City Council the nature of his
interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on any matters relating
to this interest.
C. Disclosure Reports. Each elected official, the Chief Administrative
Officer, the Chief Purchasing Officer and the general counsel (if
employed full-time) shall disclose the following information by May 1 if
any such transactions were engaged in during the previous calendar
year:
1. For such person, and all person within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
SECTION 2-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-5
1:10
political subdivision, other than compensation received as an
employer or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political
subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the
political subdivision; and
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest had with the political subdivision, other than
payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or
transaction involving payment for providing utility service to the
political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration
to the political subdivision.
3. The Chief Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer
also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the
following information:
a. The name and address of each of the employers of such person
from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more was received during the year covered by the statement;
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he
owned; the name, address and the general nature of the
business conducted of each general partnership and joint
venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and
address of each partner or coparticipant for each partnership
or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by
the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State;
the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent or more of
any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units;
and the name of a publicly traded corporation or limited
partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or
automated quotation system in which the person owned two
percent or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited
partnership units or other equity interests;
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
D. Filing of Reports. The reports, in the attached format, shall be filed with
the City Clerk and with the Secretary of State prior to January 1, 1993,
and thereafter with the Ethics Commission. The reports shall be
available for public inspection and copying during normal business
hours.
E. When Filed. The financial interest statements shall be filed at the
following times, but no person is required to file more than one (1)
financial interest statement in any calendar year:
SECTION 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-5
1:11
SECTION 2-6. Open Meetings and Records Law (Sunshine Law).
[Ord. No. 2009-13 §§ 1 — 13, 3-24-2009]
1. Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within
thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment;
2. Every other person required to file a financial interest statement
shall file the immediately preceding December 31; provided that
any member of the City Council may supplement the financial
interest statement to report additional interests acquired after
December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the
financial interest statement.
A. Custodian Of Records Designated. The City Clerk is hereby designated
as the "custodian of records" for the City of Lexington. Such
designation does not mean that the City Clerk will necessarily have all
the records in his or her possession, but simply is an indication to which
requests for copies of records and information regarding the City
Government shall be directed. Requests for records made to persons
other than the City Clerk shall not be considered to be requests that are
made pursuant to the Missouri Sunshine Law, Chapter 610 of the State
Statutes. Nonetheless, any official or employee of the City who receives
a request is directed to inform the City Clerk of the request in a timely
fashion, so that a response may be made to the request.
B. How Records Are Requested. All requests for records, notices or
information shall be in writing, and shall be accompanied by a deposit
of the estimated cost of reproducing the requested information. Oral
requests, if received by the City Clerk, shall be immediately recorded in
written form to document the same. Any request received by the City
Clerk shall be initialed by the Clerk, with the date and time of receipt
noted.
C. Response Desired To Be Noted On Request. The requesting party shall
indicate on the request the manner in which a response is desired. In
absence of instructions to the contrary, it will be assumed that the
requesting party wants to receive a response in the same form as the
original request. (Example, if someone stops by City Hall and requests
copies of documents, it will be assumed that the requesting party will
stop by City Hall later to pick up the documents. But if someone mails a
request to the City Hall, it will be assumed that a mailed response is
desired.)
D. Response Within Three (3) Business Days. The custodian of records
shall respond to the request within three (3) business days of its
receipt. A "business day" is a day when the City Hall is open for the
conduct of City business during its normal business hours. While it is
desirable that the entire transaction be completed within three (3)
business days, there may be circumstances where clarification or
explanation of the request is necessary, or where it may be necessary to
SECTION 2-5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-6
1:12
provide only part of the requested information while searches are made
to find copies of other documents requested.
E. Documentation Of Response. The custodian of records shall document
the response provided either by:
1. Making an extra copy of the response and attaching it to the
original request,
2. Noting on the request what documents were provided, or
3. Keeping a copy of any letter or note requesting additional
information in order to process the request.
F. Request For Searches. A request for copies of "all documents" or "every
document" of a particular sort involves a request to search through
every record of the City in order for the City to certify that it has
provided "all" or "every" document. Such searches are expensive.
Similarly, a request for records compiled in a format differing from the
format in which the records are customarily retained is a request for a
search and compilation and can be expensive. As a general rule, the
custodian of records is not expected to engage in extensive searches or
compilations. Any search request that will require more than fifteen
(15) minutes of the custodian's time will be refused without a
substantial advance deposit for the estimated time required to search
for the records.
G. Fees For Retrieval And Copies. Fees for search, retrieval,
accompanying and returning to their proper storage all City documents
shall be:
1. For a search of 15 minutes or
less
no retrieval fee
2. For a search, retrieval,
accompanying and return of
documents requiring more
than 15 minutes
$4.00 for each period of 15
minutes or less, including the first
15 minute period.
3. Fees for copies of documents
shall be:
a. For copies that can be
made on the City's copy
machine or other
equipment available at the
City Hall
$.10 per side of a page
b. For copies that must be
made elsewhere
the actual charges imposed for
making the copies (including any
taxes imposed) as well as the fee
provided above for search,
retrieval, accompanying and
returning to proper storage.
SECTION 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-6
1:13
H. Inspection Of Records. To reduce the cost to both the requesting party
and the City, the custodian of records may permit a physical inspection
of the records by the requesting party to help specify what documents
are needed. The custodian may impose such security as is deemed
appropriate to guarantee that no record is removed from the City files.
I. Waiver Of Fees. The custodian of records is empowered to waive the
collection of any of the fees totaling less than one dollar ($1.00)
provided in Subsection (G) above to any citizen of the City requesting
documents from the City or to any representative of news media that
routinely sends a reporter to cover meetings of the City Council. No
person or organization shall receive more than three (3) such waivers in
any twelve (12) month period.
J. Closed Records And Votes. All records of the City which are permitted
to be closed records by reason of the Sunshine Law or by any other
Statute of Missouri or by any Statute or regulation of the United States
Government shall be maintained as closed records. No such closed
record shall be released to any person who is not a part of the City
Government, except that the City's auditor may see such records as are
reasonably necessary to prepare an audit report as requested by the
City and the City's Attorney may see such records as are reasonably
necessary to represent the City. Requests that closed records be opened
to public inspection will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the
City's Councilmen.
K. Subpoenas For Closed Records. No subpoena for a closed record shall
be honored. All such subpoenas shall be referred to the City Attorney
for a response and for a motion to quash the subpoena. The only
exception to this requirement that will be recognized is a subpoena
from a grand jury.
L. Public Notice Board. The custodian of records shall establish a fixed
place where all public notices and agenda will be posted. This notice
board should be in a place that is accessible to members of the public at
times when the City Hall is open and (if possible) should be lighted and
available for public inspection even at times when the City Hall is
closed. A window or glass door at the entrance to the City Hall may be
used as the notice board, provided such notices are placed in such a
fashion that they can be read by persons on the outside of the City Hall.
M. Penalty For Disclosure Of Closed Records. Any person employed or
working for the City, or who has been entrusted with a record that is
marked to indicate that it is "confidential" or a "closed record", or who
has been invited to participate in a closed meeting who nonetheless
discloses any closed record or any information about the contents of
any closed meeting to any person shall be guilty of an offense under the
ordinances of the City and, upon conviction therefore, may be punished
as provided by law. Any such person who is employed or working for the
City may also be subject to the termination of their employment as a
result of such disclosure. Any such person who is an elected official may
SECTION 2-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-6
1:14
SECTION 2-7. through SECTION 2-14. (Reserved)
also be subject to impeachment from their office as a result of such
disclosure.
SECTION 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-7
1:15

ARTICLE II
Ordinances6
SECTION 2-15. Enacting Clause. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The enacting clause of ordinances of the City shall be as follows: "Be it
ordained by the City Council of the City of Lexington, as follows."
SECTION 2-16. Passage Generally. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 2,
10-21-1912]
No ordinance shall be passed except by bill, and no bill shall become an
ordinance unless on its final passage a majority of the members elected
to the City Council shall vote therefor and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be
entered on the journal.
SECTION 2-17. Number of Readings Required — Amendments.
[RSMo. § 77.080]
All bills proposing to become ordinances shall be presented in writing and
enacted as follows:
SECTION 2-18. Title of Bills to Indicate Purpose. [Rev. Ord. No. 6,
§ 20, 10-21-1912]
The title of every bill proposing to become an ordinance shall indicate the
purposes or objects sought to be accomplished thereby.
SECTION 2-19. Bill to Become Ordinance when Signed by Presiding
Officer. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 3, 10-21-1912]
No bill shall become an ordinance until it has been signed by the officer
presiding at the meeting of the City Council at which the same was passed.
When so signed it shall be delivered when returned to the Council with
the approval of the Mayor endorsed thereon, such bill shall become an
ordinance.
1. Bills shall be read in full two (2) times prior to passage, or bills shall be
read by title two (2) times prior to passage, both of which may occur at
a single meeting.
2. Bills which are read by title only shall have been made available for
public inspection prior to their presentation to the Council.
3. Amendments may be offered at any time before the final reading.
4. After the second reading in full or by title, the question shall be: "Shall
the Bill pass?"
6. Cross References — Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances, § 1-4; Amendments To This Code Of
Ordinances, § 1-6; Ordinance Committee Established, § 2-249. State Law
Reference — Style Of Ordinances And How Enacted, RSMo. § 77.080.
SECTION 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-20
1:17
SECTION 2-20. Failure of Mayor to Sign Bill — Veto Power —
Overriding Veto. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, §§ 4,5, 10-21-1912]
SECTION 2-21. Duty of Mayor to Act on Bill. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 13,
10-21-1912]
Every bill presented to the Mayor for his approval shall be returned by
him to the City Council, with his approval endorsed thereon, or with his
objections thereto, in writing, on or before the next regular meeting of the
Council.
SECTION 2-22. Revival. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 7, 10-21-1912]
A. Whenever the Mayor shall refuse to sign any bill, and shall return the
same to the City Council with his objections thereto, such bill, so
returned, shall stand reconsidered, and the Council shall cause the
objections of the Mayor to be entered at large upon the journal and
shall proceed at its convenience to consider the question pending,
which shall be in this form: "Shall the bill pass, the objections of the
Mayor thereto notwithstanding?" The votes on this question shall be
taken by "ayes and nays," and the names of the Councilmen voting shall
be entered upon the journal. If two-thirds (2/3) of all the members
elected to the Council shall vote in the affirmative, the President of the
Council shall certify that fact on the roll, and the bill thus certified shall
be deposited with the City Clerk and shall become an ordinance in the
same manner and with like effect as if it had received the approval of
the Mayor.
B. Should the Mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance and return
the same with his objections in writing, at the next regular meeting of
the City Council the same shall become a law without his signature.
Said ordinance shall be authenticated and having become a law, by
having endorsed thereon or attached thereto a certificate form as
follows:
This ordinance having been delivered to the Mayor for his approval on
the __________ of __________ and not having been returned by him to the
City Council at its next regular meeting after it was delivered to him for
his approval, the same become a law on the __________ day of __________.
Mayor Pro Tempore
A. No ordinance shall be revived or reordained by mere reference to the
title thereof, but the same shall be set forth at length as if it were an
original ordinance.
B. When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision is
itself repealed, it shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision.
SECTION 2-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-23
1:18
SECTION 2-23. Reconsideration of Defeated Bill. [Rev. Ord. No. 6,
§ 22, 10-21-1912]
When a bill is put upon its final passage, and failing to pass, a motion is
made to reconsider the vote by which it was defeated, the vote upon such
motion to reconsider shall be immediately taken, and the subject finally
disposed of before the City Council proceeds to other business.
SECTION 2-24. Effective Date. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 8, 10-21-1912]
Every ordinance passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor
shall take effect and be in force immediately after such approval, unless it
is otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances passed over the Mayor's veto,
or otherwise becoming laws without his approval, shall take effect and be in
force from and after the proper certificate of the Mayor Pro Tempore of the
Council shall have been made and signed as provided in Section 2-20.
SECTION 2-25. Filing — Publication. [Rev. Ord. No. 53, § 9,
10-21-1912]
The original rolls of ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and when the Council shall
order the publication of an ordinance, due proof of such publication, by the
affidavit of the printer or publisher, shall be procured by the City Clerk and
attached thereto, or written and attested upon the face of the record of such
ordinances.
SECTION 2-26. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 92-15, 6-8-1992]
SECTION 2-27. through SECTION 2-37. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-27
1:19

ARTICLE III
Elections7
SECTION 2-38. General Elections to Comply with State Law.8 [Rev.
Ord. No. 19, § 3, 10-21-1912]
General elections of the City shall be held and controlled in all things by
the provisions of the general State election laws, applicable to Cities of the
Third Class.
SECTION 2-39. Wards Established, Described.9 [Ord. No. 72-4, §§ 1
— 5, 3-7-1972; Ord. No. 2001-50 §§ 1 — 2, 8-27-2001]
The City shall be divided into the following four (4) wards:
First Ward. All of that part of the City lying west of the centerline of
Missouri Highway 13 from the southern City limits line on Route O to a line
extended northerly to the intersection of Missouri Highway 13 and South
Street, then eastward on the centerline of South Street to the intersection of
South Street and 20th Street, then northward on the centerline side of 20th
Street to the intersection of 20th Street and Main Street, then westward on
the centerline of Main Street to the intersection of Main Street and Missouri
Highway 13, then northerly to a line extended north to the City limits line is
hereby declared to be the First Ward.
Second Ward. All of that part of the City lying north of the center line of
Main Street from the intersection of Missouri Highway 13 and Main Street
easterly to the east City limits of the City and lying east of a line extended
northerly from the intersection of Missouri Highway 13 and Main Street to
the north City limits line is hereby declared to be the Second Ward.
Third Ward. All of that part of the City lying south of the centerline of
Main Street from the intersection of 20th Street and Main Street and
extending eastward to the east City limits line on Missouri Highway 24, then
southward to the centerline of the Missouri Pacific Railroad, then westward
on the centerline of the Missouri Pacific Railroad to the intersection of
Missouri Pacific Railroad and Missouri Highway 13, then northward on the
centerline of Missouri Highway 13 to the intersection of Missouri Highway
13 and South Street, then eastward on the centerline of South Street to
the intersection of South Street and 20th Street, then northward on the
centerline of 20th Street to the intersection of 20th Street and Main Street
is hereby declared to be the Third Ward.
Fourth Ward. All of that part of the City lying south of the Missouri Pacific
Railroad right-of-way from a point where said right-of-way intersects the
center line of the right-of-way of Missouri Highway 13 and extending
7. State Law Reference — Elections In Cities Of The Third Class Generally, RSMo § 77.040 Et
Seq.
8. State Law References — Conduct of elections generally, RSMo. Ch. 115.
9. State Law Reference — Division of city into wards, RSMo § 77.030.
SECTION 2-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-39
1:21
eastwardly to the City limits line and lying east of the center line of Missouri
Highway 13 from a point where said center line intersects said center line of
Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way and extending in a southerly direction
along said center line of Missouri Highway 13 to the south City limits is
hereby declared to be the Fourth Ward.
SECTION 2-40. When Statement of Candidacy is To Be Filed —
Form of Statement. [Ord. of 9-15-1970, §§ 1,3; Ord. No. 2014-27 § I,
11-25-2014]
SECTION 2-41. Filing Fee for Candidates. [Ord. of 9-15-1970, § 2]
Any person filing a statement of candidacy with the City Clerk shall pay to
the City Clerk a filing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which
amount shall be retained by the City and shall become a part of its General
Revenue Fund.
SECTION 2-41.1. Payment of Taxes by Candidates. [Ord. No.
2014-27 § II, 11-25-2014]
No person shall be a candidate for municipal office unless such person
complies with the provisions of Section 115.342, RSMo., regarding payment
A. Any person desiring to become a candidate for Mayor, Councilman or
any other elective office of the City shall, not less than nine (9) weeks
nor more than thirteen (13) weeks prior to the municipal general
election, file with the City Clerk a statement of his candidacy.
B. The statement of candidacy provided for in Subsection (A) shall be in
substantially the following form:
State of Missouri )
) SS
County of Lafayette )
I, __________ herewith state and declare that I reside at __________, City
of Lexington, County of Lafayette, State of Missouri; and reside within
Ward No. _____ as said ward is established; that I am a qualified voter
therein and within the City of Lexington; that I am a candidate for
the office of __________ to be voted upon at the next municipal general
election to be held on the _____ of _____, 20__, and I hereby state
that I am qualified to hold the office for which I desire to become a
candidate; and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the
official ballot as a candidate for such office.
Signed ______________________________
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this ___________ day of
_____________________, 20__.
Commission expires: ______________________
Notary
SECTION 2-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-41.1
1:22
of any State income taxes, personal property taxes, municipal taxes, or real
property taxes on the place of residence, as stated on the declaration of
candidacy, or that he/she is not a past or present corporate officer of any fee
office that owes any taxes to the State, other than those taxes which may be
in dispute. No person shall qualify as a candidate for elective public office in
the State of Missouri who has been convicted of or found guilty of or plead
to a felony or misdemeanor under the Federal laws of the United States of
America as stated in Section 115.348, RSMo.
SECTION 2-42. When General Elections are to be Held — Officers
Elected — Terms — Vacancies. [Rev. Ord. No. 19, § 2, 10-21-1912;
Ord. of 2-7-1938, § 1; Ord. No. 78-15-A §§ 3-4, 12-5-1978; Ord. No.
92-20 § 1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 93-07 § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 93-27
§§ 1-4, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 93-06, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 93-37
§ 2-42, 2-22-1994]
SECTION 2-43. Polling Places to be Established Prior to Election.
[Rev. Ord. No. 19, § 1, 10-21-1912; Ord. No. 2014-27 § I,
11-25-2014]
In all elections for City purposes, there shall be one (1) polling place, and
the location of the polling place shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution by
the City Council not less than ten (10) days prior to the election.
SECTION 2-44. Notice of Election. [Ord. No. 78-1, §§ 1,2, 2-7-1978]
The Mayor, or Acting Mayor, shall by notice and proclamation give at least
ten (10) days notice of the time, places and purpose of holding an election,
and shall deliver same to the County Clerk of Lafayette County, Missouri, or
his deputy for publication.
SECTION 2-45. Opening and Closing Hours of Polls. [Rev. Ord. No.
19, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The judges of the election shall open the polls at 6:00 A.M. on the day of the
election and keep them open until 7:00 P.M.
A. On the first Tuesday in April of each year there shall be held a general
election by the qualified voters of the City of Lexington for the election
of a Councilman from each ward of the City, who shall hold his office for
the term of two (2) years and until his successor is elected and
qualified.
B. On the first Tuesday of April of the year 1938 and every four (4) years
thereafter, on the same day, there shall be held an election for the
election of the Mayor who shall hold office for a term of four (4) years
and until the Mayor's successor is elected and qualified.
C. In case it shall become necessary to fill a vacancy in any elective office
at a regular election the Mayor shall so state in his proclamation, giving
notice of the election.
SECTION 2-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-46
1:23
SECTION 2-46. through SECTION 2-47. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-48. Election Results — Issuance of Certificates of
Election — When Terms of Office Begin. [Rev. Ord. No. 19, § 7,
10-21-1912; Ord. No. 2014-27 § I, 11-25-2014]
The Council shall determine the result of the election, and in case of
election of officers determine who has been elected to the various offices,
and shall instruct the Mayor and City Clerk to issue certificates of election,
attested by the City Seal, and deliver the same to the parties entitled
thereto. All officers so elected shall be qualified and take charge of their
respective offices at the first meeting of the Council after their election.
SECTION 2-49. Applicability of Article to Special Elections. [Rev.
Ord. No. 19, § 9, 10-21-1912]
All of the provisions of this Article in regard to general elections shall so far
as applicable, govern in the case of special elections.
SECTION 2-50. through SECTION 2-59. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-46 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-50
1:24
ARTICLE IV
City Officers And Employees10
DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 2-60. Employment. [Ord. No. 96-28 § I, 11-26-1996]
SECTION 2-61. Compensation. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, 10-21-1912; Ord.
No. 88-22 §§ 1-3, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. 93-19 § 1, 9-28-1993]
A. All non-exempt employees shall not be required to live within the City
limits. However, exempt employees in the police, fire and emergency
medical services departments, because they are subject to emergency
call to active duty at any time, must reside within five (5) miles of the
City limits. While employees of the City of Lexington are not required to
live within the City limits, they are encouraged to do so. This suggestion
is intended to foster a greater interest in and concern for the welfare of
the community on the part of the City employees. At the time of
appointment, promotion, demotion, etc., if all factors are equal, City
residents shall be given favorable preference. [Ord. No. 2015-06 §1,
3-10-2015]
B. The City Administrator, in conjunction with the appropriate department
heads, shall establish appropriate response times for use by Emergency
Medical Services, Fire and Police personnel.
A. The compensation of all officers and employees of the City shall be
established by the City Council. Volunteer firefighters shall be paid a
nominal fee, as established by the City Council, for their services
without losing their status as volunteers.
B. City employees engaged in fire protection, emergency medical services,
and law enforcement activities shall be paid for hours worked in a
twenty-eight (28) consecutive day work period. All other employees
shall be paid for hours worked during a forty (40) hour workweek.
C. When it is necessary for a City employee to work in excess of the
applicable maximum hours standards, each employee shall be entitled
to receive overtime compensation at one and one-half (1 1/2) times
their regular rate of pay for each hour of overtime work. The applicable
maximum hours shall be:
1. For fire protection and emergency medical employees. Two
hundred twelve (212) hours during the twenty-eight (28) day work
period.
2. For law enforcement employees. One hundred seventy-one (171)
hours during the twenty-eight (28) day work period.
10.Cross Reference — Impersonating And Interfering With Officers, § 18-7.
SECTION 2-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-61
1:25
SECTION 2-62. When Oaths and Affirmations May be Issued by City
Officers. [Rev. Ord. No. 55, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor or President of the City Council, Municipal Judge, and City Clerk
are hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations
in the following cases:
SECTION 2-63. Office Hours.
The office hours of the various offices of the City shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 2-64. Holidays. [Ord. No. 73-21, §§ 1-6, 11-6-1973; Ord.
No. 2007-11 § 1, 4-10-2007]
3. For all other employees. Forty (40) hours in a workweek.
D. Employees shall be compensated for "actual hours of work" during a
work period. Holidays, vacations, or any type of leave of absence shall
be considered as non-working time, payable at the regular rate of pay,
and not as overtime compensation.
E. At their option, employees may receive compensatory time off in lieu of
monetary overtime compensation. Compensatory time off in lieu of cash
shall be at the rate of not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) hours of
compensatory time for each hour of overtime work.
F. Employees may be allowed to accumulate hours of compensatory time
as regulated by the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended.
G. Non-covered or exempt employees, as described by the Fair Labor
Standards Act, are excluded from these compensatory time provisions.
1. The Mayor or President of the City Council, to witnesses or other
persons touching any subject under consideration by the Council in
which the interest of the City is involved, or in the conduct of any
condemnation proceeding.
2. The Municipal Judge, to witnesses, jurors or other persons relating to
any trial or other proceedings within the jurisdiction of his court or to
any elective or appointive officer to his official oath.
3. The City Clerk, to any person certifying to any demand or claim against
the City, touching the correctness of the same, or to any witness or juror
in any condemnation proceeding or any elective or appointive officer, to
his official oath, or to any person filing a statement accompanying an
application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages.
4. The City Clerk, to any person giving a list or statement of property for
taxation.
A. All regular employees of the City of Lexington, Missouri, shall receive
normal compensation for the ten (10) legal holidays listed below and
SECTION 2-61 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-64
1:26
SECTION 2-65. Sick Leave. [Ord. No. 73-22, § 1, 11-6-1973]
any other day or part of a day during which the public offices of the
City shall be closed by special proclamation of the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council. Regular part-time employees shall receive
compensation for the number of hours normally scheduled to work.
Legal holidays to be observed are:
New Year's Day
Presidents' Day
Martin Luther King Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
B. It shall be the policy of the City to insure that all regular employees,
observe the same number of holidays each year. The standard shall be
the number of holidays in a particular year, which will be celebrated by
regular employees working Monday through Friday. For this group,
when a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed
as the holiday. When a holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday
shall be observed as the holiday.
C. For the regular employees, whose work week is other than Monday
through Friday, the department head shall designate the work day that
shall be observed.
D. Any employee absent without authorized leave on the day preceding
and/or the day following a holiday shall not receive compensation for
the holiday.
E. Any regular employee in the City service who shall be required to
perform work or render services on a regularly scheduled holiday shall
receive a day off at his regular pay rate, in lieu of the holiday missed.
A. Beginning October 1, 1973, and continuing thereafter, each regularly
appointed full-time City employee shall earn sick leave with full pay at
the rate of three-fourths (3/4) work day for each calendar month of
service. Sick leave shall accrue from the date of employment, but shall
not be taken until the successful completion of the six (6) month
probationary period except with permission of the City Council. Sick
leave may never be taken in advance of earning time. Sick leave may be
accumulated up to thirty (30) days.
SECTION 2-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-65
1:27
SECTION 2-66. Military Leave. [Ord. No. 73-22, § 2, 11-6-1973]
SECTION 2-67. Education Leave. [Ord. No. 73-22, § 3, 11-6-1973]
The City Council may authorize special leaves of absence, with or without
pay, for any period not to exceed six (6) calendar months in any one (1)
calendar year for attendance at a school or university for the purpose of
training in subjects relating to the work of the employee and which will
benefit the employee and the City service. The City Council may authorize
time off duty with pay for education at a school for the purpose of training in
subjects relating to work of employee and which will benefit the City. Such
time off will not exceed eight (8) hours a week and shall not require the
employee's department to have to hire extra help.
B. An employee may be eligible for sick leave for the following reasons:
1. Personal illness or physical incapacity.
2. Quarantine of an employee by a physician.
3. Illness in the immediate family requiring the employee to remain at
home.
C. An employee who is unable to report for work because of the above
reasons shall report the reason for his absence to his supervisor within
four (4) hours from the time he is expected to report for work. Sick
leave with pay in excess of two (2) working days shall be allowed only
after presenting a written statement by a physician certifying that the
employee's condition prevented him or her from appearing for work.
D. An employee terminating from City service shall not be allowed the use
of sick leave in the last two (2) calendar weeks of employment. Unused
sick leave will not be compensated for in any way at the time of
resignation or dismissal of an employee.
A. Employees may receive a leave of absence not to exceed ten (10)
working days annually, for participation in annual training in the
National Guard or Reserve Armed Forces. Requests for such leave must
be accompanied by a copy of official orders requiring such training.
Compensation for this period of military leave shall be limited to the
difference between military pay received and normal City pay. A copy of
the military pay voucher shall be submitted to authorization for
payment to the employees for the period of leave. Such military training
leaves shall not be deducted from annual leave.
B. Any permanent employee who is drafted into the military service shall,
upon termination of his active service, be entitled to return to the City
service at a level equivalent to the position held on his departure. This
leave of absence shall not exceed the period of time necessary to
complete the period of active duty that he has been involuntarily
ordered to perform.
SECTION 2-65 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-68
1:28
SECTION 2-68. Funeral Leave. [Ord. No. 73-22, § 4, 11-6-1973]
An employee may be granted leave, authorized by department heads, as
needed in the event of death of spouse, child, mother, father, sister, brother,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandmother, grandfather or any other close
relative or friend. Such leave shall not be deducted from either sick leave or
vacation leave.
SECTION 2-69. Jury Leave. [Ord. No. 73-22, § 5, 11-6-1973]
An employee may be granted leave with pay when required to be absent
from work for jury duty or as trial witness. Compensation for such leave
shall be limited to the difference between pay received for this service and
normal City pay.
SECTION 2-70. Application of Sections 2-65 — 2-69. [Ord. No.
73-22, §§ 6-8, 11-6-1973]
SECTION 2-70.1. Leaving Employment; Notice Required. [Ord. No.
82-19A, §§ 1,2, 6-7-1982]
SECTION 2-70.2. Vacations Generally. [Res. of 9-7-1965, §§ A-C]
A. It is further understood the provisions of Section 2-65 through 2-69,
shall apply only to duly appointed full-time City employees and the
benefits hereunder are not available to any temporary, day-to-day, or
part-time employee of said City.
B. It is further understood sick leave payments hereunder shall only be
made for the regular working days of said employee and no employee
shall be entitled to any payment hereunder because of sickness, or
other physical disability, during any Sunday or other holiday.
C. It is further understood that no City employee whatever shall be
entitled to any sick leave benefit of any character whatsoever, except in
Sections 2-65 through 2-69 provided for. And, other than provided for in
Sections 2-65 through 2-69, no City employee shall be entitled to any
pay for any day he fails to perform his normal regular duties.
A. Every employee, agent, servant or official of the City shall give at least
two (2) weeks written notice, in advance, of his desire to end,
terminate, cancel, cease or quit his employment.
B. Any such person violating the mandatory terms of Subsection (A) above
or failing or refusing to comply shall forfeit any claim to any accrued
vacation pay as set out in Ordinances numbered 2-64.1 and 2-92.
A. After an appointed employee of the City has been employed for a
consecutive period of one (1) year, the employee shall be entitled to a
vacation of two (2) weeks with pay.
SECTION 2-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-70.2
1:29
SECTION 2-70.3. Performance of Employees Duties Due to Absence
of Employees While on Vacation or Leave of Absence.11 [Ord. No.
92-30 § 1, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 93-06, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2009-46
§ 1, 11-24-2009]
B. In the second year of employment, the employee must work twenty-six
(26) weeks of the second year before he is entitled to a vacation of two
(2) weeks with pay for said second year.
C. If a salaried employee wishes to take vacation pay in lieu of a vacation,
said employee shall receive such pay in December of the year in which
the employee is entitled to a vacation.
A. Department heads are required to notify and receive approval from the
City Administrator or Mayor of all requested vacations and leaves of
absences for employees at least thirty (30) days prior to scheduling
such time off for employee.
B. The duties of the following employees when such employees are absent
due to vacation or leave of absence, shall be carried out in the following
manner:
1. In the City Clerk's office, the duties shall be performed by the other
employees in the office of the City Clerk.
2. In the City Collector's office, the duties shall be performed by the
other employees in the office of the City Collector/City Clerk.
3. In the Police Department, the work load shall be arranged and
delegated to the other officers within the department.
4. In the Wastewater Treatment Department, the duties of the absent
Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent shall be delegated by
the City Administrator or Mayor to another employee within said
department. The work load of absent employees shall be arranged,
delegated and performed by the other employees within said
department.
5. In the Street Department, the duties of the absent Street
Commissioner shall be delegated by the City Administrator or
Mayor to another employee within said department. The work load
of absent employees shall be arranged, delegated, and performed
by the other employees within the department.
6. In the department regulating Animal Control, the duties and
responsibilities of the absent Animal Control Officer shall be
performed by the Police Department.
7. In the Fire Department, the duties of the absent Fire Chief shall be
performed by one of the other full-time Fire Department officers so
11.Editor's Note — As to number 3 of this section, the 2nd sentence was deleted since
passage of ord. no. 93-06 setting up a merit system police department.
SECTION 2-70.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-70.3
1:30
delegated by the City Administrator or Mayor and shall not conflict
with departmental standard operating procedures. For other fulltime
employees, the work load shall be performed by such relief
personnel approved by the City Council.
8. In the Emergency Medical Services Department, the duties of the
absent EMS Director shall be performed by one of the other fulltime
EMS employees so delegated by the City Administrator or
Mayor and shall not conflict with departmental standard operating
procedures. For other full-time employees, the work load shall be
performed by other employees within said department or by any
relief personnel so approved by the City Council.
9. In the City Administrator's office all such duties and responsibilities
shall be performed by the Mayor.
10. In the office of the Planning and Zoning, the duties of the absent
Zoning Administrator shall be performed by a qualified person so
designated by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
11. In the City Treasurer's office, the duties shall be performed by the
other employees in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-70.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-70.3
1:31

DIVISION 2
Suspension and Removal from Office
SECTION 2-71. Power of Mayor to Suspend Officers — Grounds.
[Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor is hereby empowered to suspend from office any elective officer
of the City for any of the following causes:
SECTION 2-72. Order of Suspension — Statement of Charges. [Rev.
Ord. No. 49, § 2, 10-21-1912]
Suspension of an officer of the City shall be effected by an order filed by
the Mayor in the office of the City Clerk, accompanied by a statement of
the charges upon which the suspension is founded, a copy of which shall be
forthwith made by the City Clerk and delivered to the Chief of Police, who
shall forthwith deliver the same to the suspended officer.
SECTION 2-73. Performance of Official Duties During Suspension.
[Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 2, 10-21-1912]
If any City Officer shall, during suspension from office, attempt to perform
any official duty he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 2-74. Laying Charges Before City Council — Investigation.
[Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Whenever any officer of the City shall have been suspended the Mayor, or
any member of the City Council, may lay the charges before the Council at
its first meeting thereafter, and the Council shall, without unnecessary delay
proceed to investigate such charges upon a date to be fixed by the Council.
SECTION 2-75. Charges may be Brought by any Member of City
Council. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 4, 10-21-1912]
Any member of the City Council may likewise prefer charges against the
Mayor or any other officer of the City, a statement of which charges shall be
filed by the member of the Council making the same, in the office of the City
Clerk, and a copy thereof shall be made by the City Clerk and served by the
Chief of Police upon the officer charged as provided in this Division and said
charges shall be laid before the Council by the City Clerk at its next meeting
and shall be proceeded with as provided in Section 2-74.
1. Willful violation of any official obligations.
2. Any culpable official negligence or dereliction of duty.
3. Any conduct inconsistent with his official character and duty.
4. Official incompetency.
SECTION 2-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-76
1:33
SECTION 2-76. Notice of Hearing — Service. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 5,
10-21-1912]
Before proceeding with the hearing on the suspension of an officer of the
City, the City Council shall first cause a notice to be prepared by the City
Clerk and served by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police, upon the
accused, at least five (5) days before the time fixed for the hearing, notifying
him to appear and answer such charges, and specifying the time and place
of the hearing. The notice may be served in the same manner as an ordinary
summons in a civil action as provided by the laws of the State; however,
if, for any reason such notice cannot be served within the City, it may be
served by posting three (3) copies thereof in as many public places in said
City.
SECTION 2-77. Power of City Council to Compel Attendance of
Witnesses and Production of Papers — Oaths of Witnesses May Be
Administered. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 10, 10-21-1912]
The City Council shall have the power to compel the attendance of
witnesses, and the production of papers relating to any subject under
consideration, in which the interest of the City is involved, and shall have
a right to issue an attachment, and call on the proper officer of the City
or the Sheriff or any constable in the County to execute such process.
The President of the Council shall have the power to administer oaths to
witnesses in all proceedings before the Council under this Division.
SECTION 2-78. Witness Subpoenas. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 9,
10-21-1912]
Subpoenas for witnesses to testify on any trial may be issued by the Mayor,
or any person acting as such, and shall be served and returned by any
proper officer of the City, or of the County, in the same manner as if issued
by the Municipal Judge.
SECTION 2-79. Depositions of Witnesses. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 11,
10-21-1912]
Depositions of witnesses beyond the jurisdiction of the City Council, or
prevented by sickness or other sufficient cause from attendance, may be
read on the trial and investigation, if taken in conformity to the laws of this
State. The notice of the taking thereof, when taken on behalf of the accused,
shall be served on the City Attorney.
SECTION 2-80. Right of Accused to be Heard; Representation by
Counsel. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 12, 10-21-1912]
Upon any hearing held pursuant to this Division, the accused shall be
entitled to be heard by himself and have his counsel in his defense, and the
City Attorney, or person acting as such, shall attend the trial and prosecute
on behalf of the City.
SECTION 2-76 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-81
1:34
SECTION 2-81. Decision of City Council on Hearing; Removal of
Accused From Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 7, 10-21-1912]
As soon as all the evidence has been taken and the case submitted, the
City Council shall vote upon the charges and specifications. If the council
by a majority vote of all the members elected find the accused guilty of
the charges, he may by resolution be removed from office. If the council
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members adopt such a resolution, the
office shall thereupon be declared vacant; however, if the charges preferred
be that the accused is or has been directly or indirectly interested in any
contract under the City or in any work done by the City, or any of its
institutions, the accused shall be dismissed from office, and his office shall
become vacant if the City Council by a majority of all the members find the
accused guilty.
SECTION 2-82. President Pro Tem of City Council to Preside Over
Charges Brought Against Mayor. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 7, 10-21-1912]
During the hearing on charges against the Mayor under this Division, the
President Pro Tem of the City Council shall preside.
SECTION 2-83. Conduct of Hearing. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 6,
10-21-1912]
At the time set for the hearing held pursuant to this Division, the City
Council shall meet and proceed according to such rules as it may adopt, to
hear the evidence against and in favor of the accused, and may adjourn from
time to time, if necessary, until all the evidence is heard.
SECTION 2-84. Proceedings of City Council to be Entered on
Journal. [Rev. Ord. No. 49, § 8, 10-21-1912]
The proceedings of the City Council in all such cases heard pursuant to this
Division shall be entered at large upon the journal of the proceedings of the
Council.
SECTION 2-85. Employees at Will.
All appointive employees of the City are declared to be at will employees
and may be terminated by the City Council at its discretion.
SECTION 2-86. through SECTION 2-90. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-86
1:35

DIVISION 3
(Repealed)
[Repealed by Ord. No. 93-18, 12-28-1993]
SECTION 2-91. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 93-17, 9-28-1993]
SECTION 2-92. through SECTION 2-99. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-92
1:37

DIVISION 4
The Mayor12
SECTION 2-100. Qualifications. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 2, 10-21-1912]
No person shall be elected to the office of Mayor who is not at least thirty
(30) years of age, a citizen of the United States, a qualified voter of the
City and a resident thereof for two (2) years next preceding his election;
nor shall any person be elected to said office who shall at the time of his
election be in arrears for any tax lien, any City fees, forfeiture or defalcation
in office.
SECTION 2-101. Oath of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Mayor shall take and
subscribe an oath or affirmation before the City Clerk or the Municipal
Judge, that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by
law; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the
State; the provisions of all the laws of this State affecting Cities of the Third
Class and the ordinances of the City; and faithfully demean himself in office,
which official oath or affirmation shall be filed with the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-102. President of City Council; Not to Have Voting
Power. [RSMo. 77.250]
The Mayor shall preside over the City Council, but shall not have the power
to vote, unless there is a tie vote in which case the Mayor shall cast the
deciding vote. If the Mayor fails to vote, the measure shall fail.
SECTION 2-103. Superintending Control of Officers and Affairs of
City. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 4, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall have the superintending control of all the officers and
affairs of the City.
SECTION 2-104. Duty to Enforce Laws and Ordinances. [Rev. Ord.
No. 16, § 7, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall be active and vigilant in enforcing all laws and ordinances
of the City.
SECTION 2-105. Duty to Sign Commissions and Warrants. [Rev.
Ord. No. 16, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall sign the commissions and appointments of all the elected
and appointed officers of the City.
12.Cross References — Veto power of mayor, § 2-20; Duty of mayor to act on bills, § 2-21;
Election of mayor, § 2-42; When mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, § 2-62;
Power of mayor to suspend city officers, § 2-71.
SECTION 2-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-106
1:39
SECTION 2-106. Duty to Approve Official Bonds; Examine Security
on Bonds; Removal of Officer From Office for Insufficient Bond.
[Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 12, 10-21-1912]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to carefully examine the official bonds of all
officers submitted to him for approval, and when satisfied that the security
in any bond is sufficient, and that the bond is properly and legally executed,
he shall endorse his approval thereon in writing. He shall from time to time
inquire into and examine the securities on any bond, and if he has reason to
believe that the securities on the bond of any officer have become impaired,
he shall notify such officer to give additional security without delay; and
thereupon if such officer shall neglect or refuse to give such additional
security for the period of ten (10) days after such notice shall have been
served upon him, in writing, he may, with the advice of the City Council,
remove such officer from his office.
SECTION 2-107. Duty to Sign Licenses and Warrants and See that
They are Properly Sealed and Recorded. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 5,
10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall sign all licenses issued by the City and warrants drawn
upon the City Treasury for money and cause the City Clerk to attest the
same and affix thereto the Seal of the City and to keep a proper record
thereof in books to be provided for that purpose.
SECTION 2-108. Power to Remit Fines and Forfeitures and Grant
Reprieves and Pardons. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 6, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures and to grant
reprieves and pardons for offenses arising under the ordinances of the City;
however, this Section shall not be so construed as to authorize the Mayor
to remit any costs, which may have been accrued to the City or any officer
thereby by reason of any prosecution under the laws and ordinances of the
City.
SECTION 2-109. Power to Call Upon Male Inhabitants of City
During Disturbances.13 [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 6, 10-21-1912]
Whenever the Police Force of the City shall be insufficient for the
suppression of any mob, insurrection, affray or other disturbance of the
peace, the Mayor shall have the power to call on every male inhabitant
of the City over eighteen (18) years of age and under fifty (50) years of
age to aid in the suppression of such mob, insurrection, affray or other
disturbance, and to enforce the laws and ordinances of the City.
13.Cross Reference — Civil defense generally, § 8-1 et seq.
SECTION 2-106 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-110
1:40
SECTION 2-110. Power to Issue Orders to Marshal and Policemen
of City. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 8, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall have the authority to give such reasonable and lawful
orders to the Marshal and Policemen of this City as in his judgement the
public good may require, and it shall be the duty of the Marshal and police
to obey such orders.
SECTION 2-111. Appointment Power. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 8,
10-21-1912]
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the City Council shall have the
power to appoint all non-elected officers of the City.
SECTION 2-112. Manner of Making Appointments. [Rev. Ord. No.
16, § 12, 10-21-1912]
All appointments by the Mayor shall be submitted to the City Council in
writing, and when approved by the Council, the certificate of the City
Clerk on any appointment so made shall be conclusive as to the ratification
thereof by the Council.
SECTION 2-113. Power to Require City Officers to Exhibit Accounts
and Records. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 9, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor is hereby authorized to require, as often as he may deem it
necessary, any officer of the City to exhibit his accounts, records or other
papers.
SECTION 2-114. Reports to City Council. [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 10,
10-21-1912]
On or before July first (1st) of each year the Mayor shall report to the City
Council the actual financial condition of the City, and his estimate of the
necessary appropriations, the amount thereof, required for the current year,
and the estimated receipts from all sources for said year. He shall, from
time to time, communicate to the Council such measures as in his opinion
may tend to the improvement of the finances, the Police, health, security,
ornament, comfort and general prosperity of the City.
SECTION 2-115. Filling Vacancies in Office of Mayor; Temporary
Absence of Mayor.14 [Rev. Ord. No. 16, § 15, 10-21-1912]
When any vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor, by death, resignation,
removal from the City, removal from office, refusal to qualify or otherwise,
the President Pro Tem of the City Council shall, for the time being, perform
the duties of the Mayor until such vacancy is filled. In case of the temporary
absence of the Mayor or disability to perform the duties of his office, the
President Pro Tem of the Council shall perform the duties of the Mayor until
14.State Law Reference — Filling vacancies, RSMo. § 77.240
SECTION 2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-115
1:41
the Mayor shall return or such disability is removed. During the time that
the President Pro Tem of the Council shall act as Mayor, he shall receive the
same compensation that the Mayor would be entitled to. In case of vacancy
other than temporary absence or disability, the person exercising the office
of Mayor shall cause a new election to be held, giving ten (10) days' notice
thereof by proclamation published in some newspaper published in this
City; however, when a vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the general
municipal election, no election shall be called to fill such vacancy.
SECTION 2-116. through SECTION 2-121. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-115 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-116
1:42
DIVISION 5
The City Clerk15
SECTION 2-122. Office Created. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The office of the City Clerk is hereby created.
SECTION 2-123. Appointment. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 2, 10-21-1912]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor with the consent and approval of the
City Council, every two (2) years, at the first regular meeting thereof held
after each general election for the election of City Officers, to appoint some
suitable and competent person to the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-124. Term of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 14 § 3, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall hold his office for two (2) years from the date of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
SECTION 2-125. Qualifications. [Rev. Ord. No. 14 § 3, 10-21-1912]
The person elected to the office of the City Clerk shall be a competent
accountant and a qualified voter of the City.
SECTION 2-126. Oath of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Clerk shall take and
subscribe an oath or affirmation before the Mayor or the Municipal Judge,
that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by law; that
he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State; the
provisions of all laws of this State affecting Cities of the Third Class and the
ordinances of the City; and that he will faithfully demand himself in office.
SECTION 2-127. Bond Required. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Within fifteen (15) days after his appointment, and before entering upon
the discharge of the duties of his office, the City Clerk shall execute to
the City a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with good
and sufficient sureties, conditioned that he will faithfully discharge all the
duties of his office as required by the laws of the State governing Cities of
the Third Class and the ordinances of the City and that he will promptly
pay over all monies coming into his possession that belong to the City, at
the time and in the manner provided by law. Said bond with the Mayor's
approval endorsed thereon, shall be filed in the office of the City Treasurer,
who shall preserve and safely keep the same.
15.Cross References — City clerk to be keeper of the city seal, § 2-2; When the city clerk may
issue oaths and affirmations, § 2-62; Performance of duties in city clerk's office while
employees on vacation, § 2-93. State Law Reference — City clerk generally, RSMo § 77.410.
SECTION 2-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-128
1:43
SECTION 2-128. Duties in Regard to Finances of City. [Rev. Ord. No.
14, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall be the general accountant of the City and the keeper
of all public account books, accounts, vouchers, documents, bonds and
coupons paid or redeemed, and all papers relating to accounts and
contracts of the City, and its revenue, debt and fiscal affairs, not required
by law or ordinance to be placed in some other office or kept by some other
person. He shall keep in a set of books provided for that purpose accurate
accounts between the City and all officers charged with the collection,
custody or disbursement of public money, and shall enter thereupon all
receipts and payments, from what sources derived and on what account
paid. He shall keep a complete record of all branches of the City revenue,
opening an account with every appropriation or fund which by law or
ordinance, is made a separate fund, crediting the same with all monies paid
into the City Treasury on account thereof, and charging said appropriation
or fund with all warrants drawn thereon. He shall keep a register of all
warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer, specifying the number, date, to
whom payable, on what fund or appropriation drawn, and the amount of
each warrant. He shall keep a record of all bonds and obligations of the
City, date of issue, for what purpose issued, rate of interest, time when
principal and interest become due, amount of principal, to whom payable
and the registered number of each bond and coupon. He shall draw all
warrants upon the City Treasurer, and shall express in the body of every
warrant, which he may draw upon the City Treasurer, the particular fund
out of which the same is to be paid.
SECTION 2-129. Duty to Give Information to Mayor and City
Council Relating to Fiscal Affairs and Duties of Office. [Rev. Ord.
No. 14, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall give information in writing to the Mayor and City
Council, whenever required, upon any subject relating to the fiscal affairs
of the City, or touching and duties of his office.
SECTION 2-130. Custody of Public Records.16 [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 5,
10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall have the custody of the public records, the original rolls
of ordinances and resolutions of the City Council, and such other records,
documents and papers of a public nature as may be delivered into his
custody. He shall affix the common Seal of the City to all public instruments
and official acts of the Mayor which by law or ordinance, are required to
be so attested, and countersign the same, and affix the common Seal to and
certify and record, document, copies or papers or ordinances that may be
required for evidence in any court of this State or of the United States by
any individual, or that may be required for the use of any officers of the City,
16.Cross Reference — As to open meetings and records (sunshine law), § 2-6.
SECTION 2-128 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-130
1:44
and shall furnish to the City Attorney, any record or document in his office
necessary to be used in any proceeding in court to which the City is a party.
SECTION 2-131. Duty to Attend City Council Meetings and Keep
Journal of Proceedings. [Rev. Ord. No. 14 § 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and keep a
correct journal of its proceedings.
SECTION 2-132. Duty to Prepare Official Documents and Seal and
Countersign the Same. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall prepare all certificates of elections, commissions,
appointments and other official documents required by ordinance to be
issued or which the Mayor in the discharge of his duty is required to issue,
and shall countersign and affix the common Seal thereto.
SECTION 2-133. Record Keeping Duties. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 5,
10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all certificates of election,
commissions, appointments and documents. He shall record the official
bonds of all City Officers and the bonds of all persons executed to the
City and placed in his custody. He shall record all City ordinances passed
except such as are published in any revision, and he shall neatly label and
file for safekeeping the original rolls of all ordinances and resolutions of
the City Council, and such other vouchers, papers, records and documents
as may be delivered into his custody. He shall properly index all records
of ordinances, resolutions and other documents required by any law or
ordinance to be recorded in his office.
SECTION 2-134. Duty to Prepare Blank Licenses — Issuance of
Licenses; Accounting for License Taxes and Fees. [Rev. Ord. No. 14,
§ 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall prepare blank licenses for all purposes for which
licenses are required to be issued, and when required shall cause the same
to be issued, signing his name and affixing the Seal of the City thereto, and
shall keep an account with the collector for such licenses and the amount of
license tax thereon.
SECTION 2-135. To Carry Out Duties Carefully and Promptly. [Rev.
Ord. No. 14, § 5, 10-21-1912]
The City Clerk shall carefully and promptly execute every official duty
that may be required of him by virtue of State law, this Division or other
ordinances of the City.
SECTION 2-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-136
1:45
SECTION 2-136. Vacancy in Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 11,
10-21-1912]
If, in case of death, resignation, absence from the City, or for any cause,
a vacancy shall occur in the office of the City Clerk, the Mayor with the
consent and approval of the City Council shall fill such vacancy by
appointment, and for that purpose it shall be the duty of the Mayor to
convene the Council in special session.
SECTION 2-137. Deputy City Clerk.
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the City Council may appoint a
Deputy City Clerk, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by
the Council and the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-138. Appointment of Temporary Clerk. [Rev. Ord. No.
14, § 12, 10-21-1912]
Whenever the City Clerk is unable to perform the duties of his office, the
City Council may, by resolution, appoint a temporary Clerk, who shall have
all the powers and perform all the duties of the regular Clerk, and shall
receive the same salary for the time he so acts, but in no event shall both
the regular Clerk and temporary Clerk receive pay at the same time, nor
shall the regular Clerk receive any pay for the time he fails to perform the
duties of his office as herein provided.
SECTION 2-139. Removal of Papers from City Clerk's Office. [Rev.
Ord. No. 6, § 24, 10-21-1912]
No member of the City Council or other person shall take any paper or
document from the City Clerk's office without permission, and all papers
and documents withdrawn therefrom with permission shall be returned by
the person withdrawing the same uninjured and undefaced. All papers and
documents delivered to any committee or officer by the City Clerk, for the
purpose of reporting thereon, shall be returned by the committee or officer
at the time of making the report.
SECTION 2-140. through SECTION 2-144. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-136 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-140
1:46
DIVISION 6
The City Treasurer17
SECTION 2-145. Appointment — Term of Office. [Ord. No. 93-38
§ I(2-146), 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
SECTION 2-146. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-147),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
No person shall be eligible for City Treasurer who is not at least twentyone
(21) years of age, citizen of the United States, a qualified voter of the
City of Lexington and an inhabitant thereof for at least one (1) year next
preceding the appointment. No person shall be appointed to the office of
City Treasurer who shall at the time be in arrears for any unpaid City taxes,
City fees, forfeiture or defalcation in office. The appointee shall have a
comprehensive knowledge of generally accepted accounting principles and
financial management skills.
SECTION 2-147. Oath of Office. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-148),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
Before entering upon the discharge of the City Treasurer's duties, the
appointee shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the City
Clerk or the Municipal Judge, that he possesses all the qualifications
prescribed for that office by law; that he will support the Constitution of the
United States and the States of Missouri; the provision of the laws of the
State affecting Cities of the Third Class and the ordinances of the City, and
faithfully demean himself in office.
SECTION 2-148. Bond Required. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-149),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
Within fifteen (15) days after the appointment and before entering upon the
discharge of the duties of City Treasurer, the appointee shall execute a bond
in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with good and sufficient
sureties and said bond shall be filed and recorded in the office of the City
Clerk.
A. The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of a majority of the members of the City Council in the
form and manner prescribed under Section 77.370, RSMo.
B. The term of office for any individual appointed to fill the aforesaid
position within the City of Lexington shall be two (2) years.
17.Cross References — Endorsement of treasurer required on bills appropriating money,
§ 2-26; § 2-42; Fiscal affairs generally, § 2-273 et seq.
SECTION 2-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-149
1:47
SECTION 2-149. Failure to Give Bond. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-150),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
If any person appointed to the office of City Treasurer shall neglect or
refuse to give bond as required by this Division, and within the time
specified, the City Treasurer's office shall be deemed vacant immediately
upon such neglect or refusal.
SECTION 2-150. Compensation. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-151),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
The City Treasurer of the City of Lexington shall receive as compensation
for services such sum as may be fixed by ordinance.
SECTION 2-151. Duties Generally. [Ord. No. 93-33 § I(2-152),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
SECTION 2-152. Mingling Funds. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-153),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
The City Treasurer is hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly
or indirectly, for his own benefit or that of any other person, any money,
warrants or other obligations of the City in his custody and keeping. Any
violation of this Section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and in addition
thereto shall subject him to removal from office.
A. The City Treasurer shall perform all duties specified in the Code and
such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator. Additionally, the City Treasurer shall:
1. Submit a written statement to the City Council at its first (1st)
regular monthly meeting, said statement shall detail the activity of
the Treasury for the preceding month to include receipts,
disbursements of all accounts and the balance remaining to the
credit of each fund, certificate of deposit balances and the general
balance in the Treasury at the close of the last business day of the
preceding month.
2. Report to the City Council at its first (1st) regular meeting of the
months of October and April each year the amount of receipts and
disbursements of the Treasury during the preceding six (6) months
and said report shall include the balance remaining to the credit of
each fund and the general balance in the Treasury as of said
reporting date, the amount outstanding on all loans and leases, the
balance of the certificate of deposits, the outstanding balance on all
bond issues.
3. Prepare necessary quarterly tax reports for the Federal authorities.
4. Sign all payroll checks and sign checks drawn on all other funds of
the Treasury. Mail checks drawn on all funds of the Treasury.
SECTION 2-149 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-153
1:48
SECTION 2-153. Access to Books of City Clerk and Other Offices —
City Clerk to Have Access to City Treasurer's Books. [Ord. No. 93-38
§ I(2-154), 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
The City Treasurer and City Clerk shall have access to each other's books,
accounts and papers which they respectively contain and as they concern
their duties.
SECTION 2-154. Vacancy in Office. [Ord. No. 93-38 § I(2-155),
2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
Whenever by reason of death, resignation or for other cause, a vacancy shall
occur in the office of the City Treasurer, the Mayor shall appoint a person to
fill said vacancy with the consent and approval of the City Council.
SECTION 2-155. Treasurer's Temporary Absence. [Ord. No. 93-38
§ I(2-156), 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1, 6-10-2003]
In case of temporary absences of the City Treasurer or disability to perform
the duties of his office, the City Clerk shall perform the duties of the
Treasurer until the Treasurer shall return or until said disability is removed.
SECTION 2-156. through SECTION 2-166. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-156
1:49

DIVISION 7
The City Assessor18
SECTION 2-167. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 93-07,
6-22-1993]
SECTION 2-168. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 93-07,
6-22-1993.
SECTION 2-169. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 93-07,
6-22-1993]
SECTION 2-170. through SECTION 2-174. (Reserved)
18.Cross Reference — The office of assessor was removed by ord. no. 93-07 enacted June 22,
1993.
SECTION 2-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-170
1:51

DIVISION 8
The City Collector19
SECTION 2-175. Appointment — Term of Office. [Ord. No. 93-40
§ I(2-176), 2-22-1994]
SECTION 2-176. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-177),
2-22-1994]
No person shall be eligible for City Collector who is not at least twentyone
(21) years of age, a citizen of the United States, a qualified voter of
the City of Lexington and an inhabitant thereof for at least one (1) year
next preceding the appointment. No person shall be appointed to the office
of City Collector who shall at the time be in arrears for any unpaid City
taxes, City fees, forfeiture or defalcation in office. The appointee shall have
a comprehensive knowledge of generally accepted accounting principals
and financial management skills.
SECTION 2-177. Oath of Office. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-178),
2-22-1994]
Before entering upon the discharge of the City Collector's duties, the
appointee shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the City
Clerk or the Municipal Judge, that he possesses all the qualifications
prescribed for that office by law; that he will support the Constitution of
the United States and the State of Missouri; the provisions of all laws of
this State affecting Cities of the Third Class, the ordinances of the City; and
faithfully demean himself in office.
SECTION 2-178. Bond Required. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-179),
2-22-1994]
Within fifteen (15) days after the appointment and before entering upon
the discharge of the duties of City Collector, the appointee shall execute to
the City of Lexington, a bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), with good and sufficient sureties, and said bond shall be
approved by the Mayor and filed and recorded in the office of the City
Clerk. Said bond shall be conditioned that the City Collector will faithfully
and punctually pay over all City revenue at the time, and in the manner,
provided by the laws and ordinances governing the City Collector.
A. The City Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of a majority of the members of the City Council in the
form and manner prescribed under Section 77.370, RSMo.
B. The term of office for any and all individuals appointed to fill the
aforesaid position within the City of Lexington shall be two (2) years.
19.Cross Reference — Performance of duties in city collector's office while employees on
vacation, § 2-93; Fiscal affairs generally, § 2-273 et seq.
SECTION 2-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-179
1:53
SECTION 2-179. Failure to Give Bond. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-180),
2-22-1994]
If any person appointed to the office of City Collector shall neglect or refuse
to give bond as required by this Division, and within the time specified,
the City Collector's office shall be deemed vacant immediately upon such
neglect or refusal.
SECTION 2-180. Compensation. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-181),
2-22-1994]
The City Collector shall receive as compensation for services, such sum as
may from time to time be fixed by ordinance.
SECTION 2-181. Duties Generally. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-182),
2-22-1994]
The City Collector shall perform all the duties specified in the Code and
such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City Administrator.
Additionally, the City Collector shall:
1. Verify collections, receive, prepare and make a daily deposit to
Treasurer's bank account.
2. Promptly pay over to the Treasurer, weekly, or as deemed necessary by
Treasurer, all monies collected by him or received by him from all
sources which may be levied by law or ordinance to be collected.
3. Have primary responsibility to serve customers at cashier window.
4. Maintain records of deposits to Treasurer's bank account.
5. Maintain records of, but not limited to real estate tax, personal property
tax, merchants tax, cigarette tax, occupation license, intangible tax,
excess fees, railroad and utilities tax, ad valorem tax, franchise tax,
sewer use charge, utility use or service charges, ambulance billings and
collections and any other accounts which may be specifically allowed by
ordinance.
6. Maintain files of collection reports and deposit slips. He shall submit a
written report to the City Clerk by the third (3rd) business day of each
and every month, reflecting all collections made during the preceding
calendar month. This report shall be submitted for approval to the City
Council at the first (1st) regularly scheduled meeting of the month.
7. Review the property tax bills prepared by the County and handle
transmittals of all City tax bills furnished by the City Clerk in
accordance with the City Tax rates established by the City Council each
year.
8. Prepare and mail delinquent property tax notices semi-annually.
SECTION 2-179 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-181
1:54
SECTION 2-182. Surrender of Delinquent Lists, Etc., Upon
Departure of Office. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-183), 2-22-1994]
Upon final departure of office, the City Collector shall return to the City
Clerk, all delinquent lists and a list of all judgments and decrees rendered
on tax bills upon which suit has been brought and which remain unpaid, and
the amount thereof, to the end that final settlement may be made and such
list may be delivered to the successor, and so on until the whole such list
shall have been collected or otherwise disposed of.
SECTION 2-183. Conduct of Office. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-184),
2-22-1994]
The City Collector shall devote full time and attention to the duties and
responsibilities of said office, performing such services during normal
working hours for each week day, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays, subject to exceptions resulting from illness and incapacity,
and to such other exceptions as may be approved by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
SECTION 2-184. Vacancy in Office. [Ord. No. 93-40 § I(2-185),
2-22-1994]
Whenever by reason of death, resignation or for other cause, a vacancy shall
occur in the office of the City Collector, the Mayor shall appoint a person to
fill such vacancy with the consent and approval of the Council.
SECTION 2-185. through SECTION 2-192. (Reserved)
9. Review and submit a list of delinquent real estate property tax accounts
for filing with the County no later than August first (1st).
10. At least ten (10) days before the first (1st) meeting of the City Council in
April of each year, post a copy of the personal delinquent list, at the
building occupied as City Hall, and also publish a legal notice in the
local newspaper.
11. Develop plans and processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness of
the office of Collector.
12. Perform those duties prescribed in Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code of
Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 2-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-185
1:55

DIVISION 9
The City Attorney20
SECTION 2-193. Appointment — Term of Office. [Ord. No. 92-20
§§ 2-3, 7-13-1992]
SECTION 2-194. Qualifications. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 2, 10-21-1912;
Ord. No. 92-20 § 4, 7-13-1992]
The City Attorney shall be a person licensed to practice law in Missouri and
shall represent the City of Lexington in all matters of general litigation and
counsel as provided under Section 2-196, et seq.
SECTION 2-195. Oath of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Before entering upon the discharge of his duties, the City Attorney shall
take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the City Clerk or the
Municipal Judge, that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his
office by law; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and
of the State; the provisions of all laws of the State affecting Cities of the
Third Class and the ordinances of the City; and faithfully demean himself in
office, which official oath or affirmation shall be filed with the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-196. Attendance at City Council Meetings. [Rev. Ord.
No. 2, § 4, 10-21-1912; Ord. No. 2001-30 § 1, 6-12-2001]
At the discretion of the Mayor or the President of the Council, the City
Attorney shall attend City Council meetings.
SECTION 2-197. General Duties. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 4, 10-21-1912]
The City Attorney shall represent the City in all matters of law, investigate
all claims against the City, draw all contracts relating to the business of the
City, and see that the bonds of all City Officers are in legal form and properly
executed.
SECTION 2-198. Duties in Regard to Litigation. [Ord. No. 4-84, § 2,
4-10-1984; Ord. No. 92-20 § 4, 7-13-1992]
A. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of a majority of the members of the City Council in the form
and manner prescribed under Section 77.370, RSMo. The City Attorney
may also be appointed to act as the City Prosecutor with duties as
provided in Section 2-198.
B. The term of office for any and all individuals appointed to fill the
aforesaid position within the City of Lexington shall be two (2) years.
20.Editors note — Ord. No. 92-20 converted the elective office of city attorney to an appointed
office as set out below.
SECTION 2-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-198
1:57
SECTION 2-199. Duty to Render Opinion to City Officers. [Ord. No.
4-84, § 3, 4-10-1984]
The City Attorney shall give his opinion to any officer(s) of the City
respecting their duties or respecting questions of law in which the City is
interested; and such opinion shall be in writing when so demanded, either
by the City Council or by such City official with the approval of the City
Council.
SECTION 2-200. Duties in Regard to Condemnation of Private
Property for Public Use. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 6, 10-21-1912]
In all proceedings for the condemnation of private property for public use,
it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to exercise a supervision over the
same, prepare all legal papers connected therewith, and see that all notices,
returns of service thereon, verdicts of juries and all other proceedings are in
proper form, and in accordance with the laws of the State governing Cities
of the Third Class and the ordinance of the City.
SECTION 2-201. Report on Pending Suits. [Ord. No. 4-84, § 4,
4-10-1984]
The City Attorney shall report to the City Council the condition of any and
all suits or matters pending in litigation in any court, at each meeting of the
Council while said suit or litigation is so pending.
A. The City Attorney when acting as City Prosecutor shall participate and
represent the City in the prosecution of any municipal ordinance
violations under the municipal codes of the City of Lexington, and to
that end, he shall attend the Municipal Division of the Circuit Court of
Lafayette County, Missouri, on a regular basis monthly, or as set by the
Judge of said Court, and shall prosecute all complaints, suits or
proceedings that may be brought by the City therein or in which the
City is interested.
B. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend, as the case may require, all
civil suits in which the City is interested.
C. The City Attorney shall attend to and prosecute on behalf of the City all
suits instituted for the collection of delinquent taxes and all suits or
proceedings brought to enforce payment of any other tax, license fee or
revenue whatsoever due the City.
D. In all cases, except as may be otherwise ordered by the Mayor and City
Council, the City Attorney shall prosecute appeals in suits in which the
City is concerned.
SECTION 2-198 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-202
1:58
SECTION 2-202. When City Attorney is Unable to Represent City in
any Specific Matter. [Ord. No. 4-84, § 5, 4-10-1984]
If the City Attorney shall be interested in, or a party to, any suit or
proceeding against the City, or shall have been employed as counsel in any
case against the City, in which it shall be his duty to prosecute or defend,
or shall have any conflict of interest as set out in the disciplinary rules and
ethical consideration of the Missouri Bar Association, or as determined by
the Missouri Bar Advisory Committee, he shall inform the Mayor and City
Council thereof, who shall appoint some competent attorney, as special City
Attorney, to represent the City in such suit or proceeding.
Such special City Attorney shall meet the same qualifications as the duly
elected or appointed City Attorney and his commission shall specify the
matter upon which he is appointed and the duration of his commission.
SECTION 2-203. Temporary Absence or Disability. [Ord. No. 4-84,
§ 6, 4-10-1984]
In case of sickness, absence from the City, or other temporary inability of
the City Attorney to discharge the duties of his office he may, with the
approbation of the Mayor, appoint some competent attorney to act in his
stead during such sickness, absence from the City, or other inability of the
City Attorney.
If such appointment is not made as aforesaid, then it shall be the duty of
the Judge of the Municipal Division of the Circuit Court to appoint some
competent attorney to represent the City in all cases before such Municipal
Division, pending such temporary inability of the City Attorney to perform
the duties of his office and the person so appointed shall possess the
same power and receive the same fees as the proper officer would if he
were present. Such person shall meet the regular qualification of the City
Attorney and his commission shall specify the matters and duration of his
commission.
SECTION 2-204. Employment of Additional Counsel. [Ord. No. 4-84,
§ 7, 4-10-1984]
Upon the recommendation of the City Attorney, or whenever in the
judgment of the City Council the same may be necessary, the City Council
may, by resolution employ additional counsel to assist the City Attorney in
the prosecution or defense of any suit or action at law or in equity, brought
by or against the City; and the counsel so employed shall be entitled to
receive a reasonable fee for his or their services; however, nothing in his
Section shall be so construed as to authorize the employment of additional
counsel in prosecutions begun before the Municipal Judge.
SECTION 2-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-205
1:59
SECTION 2-205. Vacancy in Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 11,
10-21-1912; Ord. No. 92-20 § 1, 7-13-1992]
Whenever, from any cause, the office of City Attorney shall become vacant,
the Mayor, or the person exercising the office of Mayor, shall appoint a
person to fill the vacancy with the approval and consent of a majority of the
Council.
SECTION 2-206. Persons not Employed by City not to Receive Legal
Fees. [Rev. Ord. No. 2, § 12, 10-21-1912]
No person, not engaged by the City, shall receive any fee or other
compensation from the City for any legal services rendered by him in any
suit to which the City is a party.
SECTION 2-207. Compensation and Reimbursement. [Ord. No.
4-84, § 8, 4-10-1984]
The City Attorney shall be compensated in the amount, method and manner
as set and established by the City Council. Further, said attorney shall be
reimbursed for any out of pocket expenses in the performance of his duties.
SECTION 2-208. Assistant City Attorney or Prosecutor. [Ord. No.
88-5, 4-12-1988; Ord. No. 92-20 § 4, 7-13-1992]
The Assistant City Attorney or Assistant City Prosecutor of the City shall be
appointed in the same manner as the City Attorney as set out in Section
2-193. The qualifications for said office shall be the same as set out in
Section 2-194. The compensation for said office shall be the same as set out
in Section 2-207.
SECTION 2-205 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-208
1:60
DIVISION 10
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer
SECTION 2-209. Duties. [Ord. No. 2012-37 § 1, 12-11-2012]
The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to
enforce or assist in the enforcement of, and issue citations for violations of,
Chapter 6, 13, 18, 20, 23, 24, 26, 28 and 29 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Lexington.
SECTION 2-210. through SECTION 2-221. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-210
1:61

DIVISION 11
The City Engineer
SECTION 2-222. Office Created. [Rev. Ord. No. 11, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The office of City Engineer is hereby created.
SECTION 2-223. When Engineer is to be Appointed. [Rev. Ord. No.
11, § 2, 10-21-1912]
Whenever the Mayor and City Council shall undertake the construction of
any building, bridge, sewer, culvert or the opening, widening, grading or
other improvement of any street or thoroughfare, or the laying off and
improvement of any park, public square or cemetery, or other improvement
requiring the services of a Civil Engineer, the Mayor, by and with the
consent and approval of the Council, is hereby authorized to appoint some
suitable and competent person to the office City Engineer.
SECTION 2-224. Qualifications — Term — Oath — Compensation.
[Rev. Ord. No. 11, § 3, 10-21-1912]
The person appointed to the office of City Engineer shall possess a thorough
and practical knowledge of surveying and civil engineering. He shall, in
addition to the oath prescribed for City Officers, take an oath that he is not
and will not be, during his continuance in office, be directly or indirectly
interested in any contract with the City for any public work or material
furnished. He shall hold his office at the pleasure of the Mayor and City
Council and shall receive such compensation for his services rendered in
pursuance of an ordinance or resolution authorizing his employment as the
Mayor and Council deem just and reasonable.
SECTION 2-225. Bond Required. [Rev. Ord. No. 11, § 4, 10-21-1912]
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Engineer shall execute
to the City a bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with good
and sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful performance of all the
duties required or which may be required of him by the ordinances of this
City, or by any resolution of the City Council. Said bond shall be approved
by the Mayor and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-226. General Duties. [Rev. Ord. No. 11 § 5, 10-21-1912]
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to make all such surveys, plats,
drawings, plans, specifications and estimates that may, from time to time,
be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. He shall
have a superintending control of the construction of any building, bridge
or culvert, and or the opening, widening, grading or other improvement of
any street, alley or thoroughfare. He shall make all such surveys as are
necessary for the laying off or improvement of any public park, square or
cemetery. He shall prepare plans, specifications and estimates of the costs
of all public or district sewers ordered by the City Council to be built,
SECTION 2-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-226
1:63
and shall have control of their construction. He shall establish the grade
of any street, alley or thoroughfare whenever required. He shall keep a
complete and correct record of all his surveys and official acts, in proper
books kept for that purpose, and when vacating his office, such records,
together with all field notes, profiles, drawings and other data relating to
surveys of the City or public work, and all disbursements and other property
in his possession and which belong to the City, shall be turned over to his
successor in office or to the Mayor, if his successor shall not have been
appointed and qualified.
SECTION 2-227. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-226 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-227
1:64
DIVISION 12
The City Administrator21
SECTION 2-228. Establishment of Office. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1,
9-24-1997]
There is hereby created the office of City Administrator for the City of
Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 2-229. City Administrator — Appointment. [Ord. No.
97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997; Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1, 4-28-2009]
The Administrative Support Team Group shall review applicants for the City
Administrator position and recommend to the Mayor and City Council three
(3) qualified applicants, in rank order, for final selection.
SECTION 2-230. Qualifications for Office. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1,
9-24-1997; Ord. No. 2009-14 § 2, 4-28-2009]
The person appointed to the office of City Administrator shall be a U.S.
citizen, at least twenty-one (21) years of age. The City Administrator shall
be a graduate of an accredited university or college with emphasis in public/
municipal administration, community/urban planning, public relations,
finance, written and spoken communications or possess equal qualifications
and experience.
SECTION 2-231. Bond. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997; Ord. No.
2009-14 § 3, 4-28-2009]
The City Administrator, before entering upon the duties of the office, must
be bonded in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00);
and such bond shall insure the City of Lexington for the faithful and honest
performance of the duties for the City of Lexington and for rendering a full
and proper account to the City of Lexington for funds and property which
come into the possession or control of the City Administrator. The cost of
such bond shall be paid by the City of Lexington.
SECTION 2-232. Duties. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997; Ord. No.
2009-14 §§ 4-17, 4-28-2009]
The duties of the City Administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
1. Administrative office. The City Administrator shall be the Chief
Administrative Assistant to the Mayor, and as such shall be the
administrative officer of the City government. Except as otherwise
specified by ordinance or by the State of Missouri, the City
Administrator shall coordinate and generally supervise the operations,
21.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 97-27 § 1, adopted September 24, 1997 amended Ch. 2 Division
12 by setting out the provisions set out herein thereby superseding former Ch. 2 Division
12 which derived from Ord. no. 84-0-1926 §§ 1 — 4, 12-4-1984.
SECTION 2-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-232
1:65
administration and management of government business and
employees of the City, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Mayor and City Council.
2. Set administrative policies. The City Administrator shall prescribe and
promulgate, with the assistance of the City Attorney, reasonable rules
and regulations as he/she shall deem necessary or expedient for the
conduct of the City's functions and business.
3. Recordkeeping. The City Administrator shall insure full and accurate
records of all actions taken, shall safely and properly keep all records
and papers entrusted to the City Administrator, all records shall be and
remain the property of the City and be open to inspection by the Mayor
and City Council at all times.
4. City property. The City Administrator shall arrange and effectuate the
purchase, acquisition, sale, lease or transfer of real and personal
property as directed by the Mayor and City Council in resolutions and/
or ordinances duly passed according to law. Supervise the maintenance
of all real and personal property of the City and records pertaining
thereto. Shall maintain accurate inventories on the supplies, property,
equipment and real and personal property of the City.
5. Personnel system. The City Administrator shall function as personnel
officer of the City, present the Mayor and Council a position
classification system and wage scale plan for all departments and
implement the plan upon adoption. Conduct employment and/or
discharge interviews/conferences; and inform the Mayor and Council
on the hiring, disciplinary, suspension or firing of any City employee.
The City Administrator is vested with discretionary authority in the
application, interpretation and consideration of personnel matters.
6. Coordinate departments. The City Administrator will have the authority
to assign the employees of the City to any department where they are
needed for the most effective discharge of the functions of City
Government after consulting with department heads.
7. Investigate and report. Upon written request of the Mayor or a majority
of Council members, investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs and
operations of the departments of City Government as reasonably
necessary to report on the affairs and overall operations of the
department. The City Administrator shall report in writing to the Mayor
and Council within sixty (60) days his/her findings on these matters.
8. Purchasing agent. The City Administrator shall function as purchasing
agent for the City. Supervise all purchases according to procedures
established by the Mayor and City Council, prepare bid specifications
for services and goods, and then present a summary of the bids to the
City Council for approval. The City Administrator is authorized to
approve purchases up to two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
SECTION 2-232 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-232
1:66
9. Budget. The City Administrator will perform as Budget Officer for the
City by preparing a five (5) year budget plan reflecting the resources
and requirements of the City. Provides the Mayor and City Council
documentation, analysis and supporting schedules for approval.
10. Financial reports. The City Administrator will furnish the Mayor and
City Council a monthly report to reflect a summary of income and
expenditures to date and a chart depicting actual income and
expenditures. A quarterly report will be presented to depict anticipated
income and expenditures.
11. Annual reports. The City Administrator will present to the Mayor and
City Council an annual report reflecting financial status summary of
accomplishments, lists of grants, unmet needs, anticipated changes/
updates to the five (5) year plan and status of the City Government.
12. City Council agenda. The City Administrator will prepare a written
agenda for each Council meeting at least four (4) days prior to the
regularly scheduled Council meeting. Ensure the location is published
in the local newspaper, the Internet and any other means two (2) weeks
prior to the meeting date.
13. Council meetings. The City Administrator shall attend all regularly
scheduled Council meetings and Council committee meetings.
14. Boards and committees. The City Administrator shall cooperate in
working with the City boards and committees and assist in coordinating
the activities of the various committees and boards.
15. State and Federal-aid programs. The City Administrator will coordinate
with the Federal and State Governments in procuring financial and
community improvement programs for participation by the City.
Cooperate with civic organizations to further community support,
economic development and industrial growth.
16. Professional conferences. The City Administrator may, as authorized by
the Mayor and City Council, participate in professional conferences,
programs and/or training pertinent to business of the City.
17. Policy formulation. The City Administrator shall recommend to the
Mayor and Council any appropriate measures to improve the health,
safety or welfare of the City.
18. Press releases. The City Administrator shall inform the public of the
purposes and activities of City Government through available news
media monthly.
19. Miscellaneous. The City Administrator shall perform any and all other
duties as prescribed by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-233
1:67
SECTION 2-233. Compensation. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997;
Ord. No. 2009-14 § 18, 4-28-2009]
The City Administrator shall be a salaried exempt employee who shall
receive compensation as may be determined from time to time by the Mayor
and City Council. Such compensation shall be payable biweekly. The City
Administrator will receive the same fringe benefits as all other employees
as established by ordinance, the personnel policy manual or as approved by
City Council.
SECTION 2-234. Suspension. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997]
The City Administrator may be suspended for cause with full pay and
benefits at any time by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the
whole City Council. The City Administrator may appeal said suspension,
in writing, stating the reason for the appeal. The appeal must be within
ten (10) calendar days of the effective date of the suspension and must be
delivered to the City Clerk. The City Council shall review the appeal and the
records of the action at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting
after receipt of the appeal. The decision of the City Council concerning
suspension shall be final. The City Administrator shall be notified in writing
of the decision.
SECTION 2-235. Dismissal. [Ord. No. 97-27 § 1, 9-24-1997; Ord. No.
2009-14 § 19, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2013-21 § 1, 6-25-2013]
The City Administrator may be terminated at any time without cause upon a
three-fourths vote of the full City Council elected to serve, independently of
the Mayor's approval or disapproval. The City Administrator may appeal a
dismissal, in writing, to the City Council within ten (10) days of the effective
date of dismissal. The appeal shall be delivered to the City Clerk who
shall deliver the appeal to the City Council on or before the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council shall review said appeal
and the records of the action. The City Administrator shall be notified in
writing of the decision of the City Council, and said decision concerning
dismissal shall be final. The City Administrator shall receive his/her salary
for two (2) calendar months unless contractually stated otherwise plus all
other benefits due to the City Administrator pursuant to personnel policies
enumerated in the City Code, following the final dismissal date; provided,
however, that if the City Administrator shall be terminated for acts of
dishonesty or acts of moral turpitude, such salary shall not be allowed.
SECTION 2-236. Interference With City Administrator. [Ord. No.
2009-14 § 20, 4-28-2009]
The Mayor or City Council member will not interfere with the conduct of any
department or duties of employees subordinate to the City Administrator.
SECTION 2-237. through SECTION 2-238. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-233 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-237
1:68
ARTICLE V
The City Council22
DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 2-239. Manner of Representation. [Ord. No. 72-4, § 6,
3-7-1972]
Each of the wards of the City shall be entitled to two (2) representatives in
the City Council.
SECTION 2-240. Qualifications. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 2, 10-21-1912;
Ord. No. 72-4, § 6, 3-7-1972; RSMo. 77.060]
No person shall be eligible to the office of Councilman who is not twentyone
(21) years of age, a citizen of the United States, a qualified voter and an
inhabitant of the City for one (1) year, and a resident of the ward from which
he is elected six (6) months preceding his election, nor shall any person
be elected a Councilman who is in arrears for any tax lien, any City fees,
forfeiture or defalcation in office.
SECTION 2-241. Terms of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 2, 10-21-1912]
Members of the City Council shall hold their office for two (2) years ensuing
their election.
SECTION 2-242. Oath of Office. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Before entering upon the duties of their office, each Councilman shall take
and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the City Clerk or the Municipal
Judge, that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by
law; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the
State; the provisions of all laws of the State affecting Cities of the Third
Class and the ordinances of the City; and faithfully demean himself in office.
SECTION 2-243. Manner of Tendering Resignations. [Rev. Ord. No.
6, § 12, 10-21-1912]
Resignations of Councilmen shall be in writing and addressed to the
President of the City Council.
SECTION 2-244. Council to Publish Statement of Financial
Condition of City — Contents. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 6, 10-21-1912]
The City Council shall, whenever required by law, publish a full and detailed
statement of the condition of the City Treasury. Said statement shall show
the balance in the Treasury at the beginning of each period, the receipts and
22.Cross References — Election Of Councilmen, § 2-42; Mayor To Be President Of City
Council, § 2-102.
SECTION 2-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-244
1:69
disbursements during said period, and the balance in the Treasury on the
day such statement is made, and if shall, in like manner, show the condition
of each fund and the condition of bonded indebtedness of the City. Such
statement shall be published in some newspaper of the City.
SECTION 2-245. Power to Compel Attendance of Witnesses,
Production of Papers. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 7, 10-21-1912]
The City Council may compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of papers relating to any subject under consideration in which
the interest of the City is involved, and to that end may authorize subpoenas
to be issued by the City Clerk and require the City Marshal of Police or any
Policemen to serve the same. The Presiding Officer of the Council is hereby
authorized to administer oath or affirmation to such witnesses.
SECTION 2-246. City Marshal to be Ex Officio Sergeant-At-Arms of
City Council — Duties. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 14, 10-21-1912]
The City Marshal shall be ex officio sergeant-at-arms of the City Council
and shall attend its meetings and execute all of its orders. He shall keep
the Council Chamber in order, and provide lights, fuel and other necessary
articles therefor at the City's expense.
SECTION 2-247. Powers of Mayor Over City Council. [Rev. Ord. No.
6, § 17, 10-21-1912]
At the hour designated for City Council meeting the Mayor shall call the
Council to order and after roll call, if a quorum is present, he shall cause
the minutes of the last preceding meeting to be read for correction and
approval. He shall preserve order and decorum and decide all questions of
order, subject to an appeal to the Council. He shall appoint all committees,
the appointment or election of which is not otherwise provided by
ordinance. He shall have the right to name any member to perform the
duties of the President, but such substitution shall not extend beyond
adjournment.
SECTION 2-248. Powers of Council Relative to Quarantine,
Condemnation — Police Power Outside City.23
The City Council may make regulations and pass ordinances for the
prevention of the introduction of contagious diseases into the City, and for
the abatement of the same, and may make quarantine laws and enforce
the same within five (5) miles of the City. The Council may purchase or
condemn and hold for the City, within or without the City limits, within ten
(10) miles therefrom, all necessary lands for hospital purposes, waterworks,
sewer carriage and outfall, and erect, establish and regulate hospitals,
workhouses, poorhouses, and provide for the government and support of
the same, and make regulations to secure the general health of the City, and
23.State Law References — For similar provisions, see RSMo § 77.530.
SECTION 2-244 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-248
1:70
to prevent and remove nuisances; provided however, that the condemnation
of any property outside of the City limits shall be regulated in all respects as
the condemnation of property for railroad purposes is regulated by law; and
provided further, that the Police jurisdiction of the City shall extend over
such lands and property to the same extent as over public cemeteries, as
provided by the State law.
SECTION 2-249. Appointment of Standing Committees —
Committees Enumerated — Duties. [Ord. No. 92-13, 6-8-1992; Ord.
No. 95-11 § 1, 6-27-1995]
SECTION 2-250. through SECTION 2-255. (Reserved)
A. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to appoint the members of the
following standing committees of the City Council:
1. Administration. Ways and means, claims, budget, supplies, rules
and regulations relating to personal matters.
2. Municipal Services. Sewer, street and alley, airport, auditorium, all
public buildings, fire, Police, ambulance, health services and trash.
B. All rules and regulations and City ordinances shall be drafted by the
committee implementing the task.
C. The duties of the standing committees of the City Council shall be
established by the Mayor.
SECTION 2-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-250
1:71

DIVISION 2
Meetings24
SECTION 2-256. Time of Regular Meetings. [Ord. No. 92-25 § 1,
12-8-1992; Ord. No. 98-16 § 1, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 2005-42 § 1,
11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2006-23 § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2008-21 § 1,
5-27-2008]
The Lexington City Council shall meet in regular session on the second
(2nd) and fourth (4th) Tuesdays of each month, commencing at 7:00 P.M.
SECTION 2-257. Special Meetings. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 5,
10-21-1912]
The Mayor, or person acting as Mayor, or any three (3) members of the City
Council, shall have the power, and are hereby authorized to call a special
meeting of the Council, by serving a notice in writing on each member of
the Council and the Mayor, or person acting as Mayor, by delivering to each
of them a copy of such notice, or by leaving such copy at his usual place of
abode with some inhabitant thereof over the age of fifteen (15) years. Such
notice shall state the object of the special meeting and the time for holding
the same, and such notice shall be written out at length and copied upon the
journal of the Council proceedings. No business other than that specified in
the written notice shall be transacted at the special meeting.
SECTION 2-258. Members Disqualified to Vote on Matters in Which
They are Interested. [Rev. Ord. No. 6, § 9, 10-21-1912]
No member of the City Council shall be permitted to vote for or against any
ordinance appropriating money or the allowance of any account or claim, or
for the award or approval of any contract in which such member is directly
or indirectly interested; and any ordinance, resolution or motion having
passed by the vote of such interested member shall be deemed illegal and
of no effect.
SECTION 2-259. Duty to Attend Meetings.
No member of the City Council shall absent himself from any regular
meeting thereof, nor from any adjourned or special meeting after due notice
thereon, unless he has leave, or is sick and unable to attend, or is otherwise
prevented by circumstances beyond his control.
SECTION 2-260. Quorum; Exceptions to Required Quorum. [Rev.
Ord. No. 6, § 15, 10-21-1912]
A majority of the members elected to the City Council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but any two (2) members including the Mayor, may
24.Cross References — Duty of city clerk to attend council meetings and keep journal,
§ 2-131; Duty of city attorney to attend council meetings, § 2-196; Open meetings and
records (sunshine law), § 2-6.
SECTION 2-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-260
1:73
have a roll call of the Council, send for and compel the attendance of absent
members and make an order for their censure.
SECTION 2-261. Order of Business at Regular Meetings.
The City Council shall prescribe by resolution its own rules or procedure for
conducting its business at its regular meetings.
SECTION 2-262. through SECTION 2-272. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-260 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-262
1:74
ARTICLE VI
Fiscal Affairs25
DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 2-273. Fiscal Year. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 7, 10-21-1912]
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on the April 1 and terminate on
the last day of March in each year, and the books, accounts and reports of
officers of the City shall be made to conform thereto.
SECTION 2-274. Mayor to Make Annual Appropriations Report to
City Council. [Rev. Ord. No. 1, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The Mayor shall make written report to the City Council, on or before July
1 of each year, which report shall contain his estimate of the necessary
appropriations to meet all the requirements of the current year, and the
estimated receipts from licenses, taxes and other sources, and which shall
also show the actual financial condition of the City.
SECTION 2-275. Manner of Making Payments. [Rev. Ord. No. 14,
§ 8, 10-21-1912]
In all cases of accounts audited and allowed against the City, and for the
payment of which the Mayor and City Council by ordinance, shall make
the necessary appropriation, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to draw
a check on the City Treasury for the amount due. All checks drawn upon
the City Treasury shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk or his
designee.
SECTION 2-276. Sufficient Funds to be Available Prior to Drawing
Warrant or Making Appropriation. [Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 9,
10-21-1912]
No appropriation of money shall be made by the Mayor and City Council,
and no warrant shall be drawn by the City Clerk or paid by the City
Treasurer, unless the amount of money remaining in the Treasury to the
credit of the fund or appropriation upon which the warrant is to be drawn
shall be sufficient to pay the same.
SECTION 2-277. Warrants in Favor of Persons Indebted to City.
[Rev. Ord. No. 14, § 10, 10-21-1912]
No warrants shall be drawn on the City Treasury in favor of any officer who
is in arrears to the City, nor in favor of any person indebted to the City,
25.Cross Reference — Duties Of City Clerk In Regard To The Finances Of City, § 2-128; City
Treasurer, § 2-146 Et Seq.; City Collector, § 2-176 Et Seq.; Finance Committee Established,
§ 2-249; Taxation, § 25-1 Et Seq.
SECTION 2-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-277
1:75
except for the amount due such officer or person in excess of such arrears
or indebtedness.
SECTION 2-278. Manner of Presenting Claims Against the City.
[Rev. Ord. No. 1, § 4, 10-21-1912]
All claims against the City must be presented in writing, and verified by the
oath of the claimant, or his agent, that the claim is correct, reasonable and
just. No claim shall be audited or allowed unless presented and verified,
as provided in this Section. No cost shall be recovered against the City in
any action brought against it for any unliquidated claim which has not been
presented to the City Council to be audited, nor upon claims allowed in part,
unless the recovery shall be for a greater sum than the amount allowed with
interest due. No action shall be maintained against the City in exercising
or failing to exercise any corporate power or authority, in cases where such
action would not lie against a private individual under like circumstances.
SECTION 2-279. through SECTION 2-284. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-277 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-279
1:76
DIVISION 2
Purchases
SECTION 2-285. Sales Tax Exemption.26 [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
All City purchases are exempt from the sales taxes of Missouri and its
political subdivisions.
SECTION 2-286. Purchases. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1, 5-23-2017]
When the City, the Mayor or its City Administrator negotiates any purchase
or contract, except day-to-day operational expenses, for more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), at least three (3) bids shall be solicited, if
possible. The City Administrator shall approve all budgeted items, and
non-budgeted items shall be approved by the City Council. Whenever
competitive bidding is otherwise required by law, the City shall utilize that
process, regardless of the provisions of this Section.
SECTION 2-287. Competitive Quotes and Bids. [Ord. No. 2017-22
§ 1, 5-23-2017]
A. Purchases under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) require department
head approval.
B. Purchases over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), if purchased individually or in bulk, shall
require competitive bids/quotes. Bids/quotes shall be obtained in
writing, by telephone, or from current catalog price lists. Bids/quotes
shall be solicited from at least three (3) vendors, if possible.
Authorization by signature of City Administrator shall be required.
C. Purchases over two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), if purchased individually or in bulk, shall
require competitive bids/quotes. Bids/quotes shall be solicited as sealed
bids/quotes. Authorization by signature of City Administrator shall be
required.
D. Purchases over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) require legal
advertisement, written specifications, sealed bids and are awarded by
the City Council. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City
26.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-285, Purchases up to Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
May Be Made by Mayor/City Administrator Without Prior Approval, adopted and/or
amended by Ord. No. 86-123 § 1, 8-6-1986; Ord. No. 96-23 §§ 1 — 2, 9-10-1996, Ord. No.
2014-29 § I, 12-9-2014; Section 2-286, Competitive Bids Required for Purchase from Five
Hundred Dollars to One Thousand Dollars, adopted and/or amended by Ord. No. 86-123
§ 2, 8-6-1986; Ord. No. 96-23 §§ 1 — 2, 9-10-1996; Section 2-287, Written Bids to be
Submitted for Purchase Over One Thousand Dollars, adopted and/or amended by Ord. No
86-123 § 3, 8-6-1986; Section 2-288, Dispensing of Section 2-287 Upon Declaration of
Emergency by the City Council, adopted and/or amended by Ord. No. 88-8 § 2; and Section
2-289, Request for Proposals, adopted and/or amended by Ord. No. 2011-07 § 1,
2-26-2011; Ord. No. 2011-24 § 1, 7-26-2011; were repealed 5-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-221 § 1.
SECTION 2-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-287
1:77
Administrator for public opening and evaluation prior to the City
Council action. In lieu of the requirement for legal advertisement,
written specifications and sealed bids, the use of an electronic
solicitation process which allows vendors to provide cost estimates to
public entities, and satisfies the spirit and intent of the requirements
for legal advertisement, written specifications, and sealed bids, shall be
authorized.
E. Purchases requiring City Council approval are contracts, agreements
and purchases over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
F. For purchases of property/casualty insurance, however, the contract
may be submitted for competitive bids every six (6) years.
G. For purchases for health insurance, however, the contract may be
submitted for competitive bids every three (3) years.
H. Exceptions. These guidelines may be modified or waived under any of
the conditions listed below by the City Administrator. Written
justification for such must be submitted with the purchase order.
1. The goods or services are available from only one (1) vendor.
2. A concession or maintenance service agreement is being renewed
for good workmanship, material, or performance for no more than
one (1) year up to $5,000.
3. It is advantageous to purchase through the purchasing contracts of
other governmental agencies.
4. The services are not conducive to lowest price bidding such as
legal, engineering, audit or medical services.
5. For purchases that are of an ongoing, repetitive nature, i.e.,
concrete, asphalt, equipment repairs or any other item approved by
the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall have the
authority to approve, on an annual basis, a vendor listing of not less
than three (3) vendors to be used by the City for each approved
product or service. Vendors shall annually submit bids. Purchases
may then be made by department heads on a price/availability
basis, for purchases up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
without obtaining separate quotes on each purchase.
6. Professional services for architecture, engineering, or land
surveying shall be obtained by request for qualifications and
evaluated on experience, technical competence, capacity and
capability to perform work, past performance record and proximity
to and familiarity with the area.
7. When it is determined after reasonable investigation that the goods
may be purchased at retail for less than the cost available through
sealed bids.
SECTION 2-287 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-287
1:78
SECTION 2-288. Notice Defined. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1, 5-23-2017]
The notice required shall consist of one (1) or more of the following:
SECTION 2-289. Sale of Personal Property or Equipment. [Ord. No.
2017-22 § 1, 5-23-2017]
All obsolete and unusable personal property and equipment shall be sold
or disposed of in the most expedient manner possible. Such sales should
be made in good faith and should not be made to any individual which
could constitute a conflict of interest. Proceeds from such sale shall be
immediately deposited to the City Treasury.
SECTION 2-290. Bid Opening Procedure. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk, or other front desk
personnel, and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. They shall be
opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A
tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection and a
tabulation report forwarded to the Mayor, Council and City Administrator.
SECTION 2-291. Lowest Responsible Bidder. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
The City reserves the right to reject any or all bids. Contracts shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Bids shall not be accepted from,
nor contract awarded to, a contractor who is in default on the payment
of taxes, licenses, or other monies due the City. In determining lowest
responsible bidder, in addition to price, the following shall be considered:
8. For license renewals for software or special computer software,
interface upgrades, add-on parts and components to existing Cityowned
equipment.
9. Purchases for chlorine, lime, sand and salt for snow removal.
A. Published in at least one (1) newspaper published in the City or county
or in general circulation within the City or county at least 10 days
preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. The newspaper
notice required herein shall state where bid specifications may be
secured and the time and place for opening bids.
B. Solicit sealed bids by direct mail or telephone.
C. The City Clerk shall, where applicable, also advertise all pending
purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the
City Hall.
A. The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or
provide the service required and the ability of the bidder to provide
future maintenance and service.
SECTION 2-287 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-291
1:79
SECTION 2-292. Justification of Award. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete
statement of the reasons for awarding the bid elsewhere shall be entered
upon the minutes of the City Council.
SECTION 2-293. Emergency Purchases. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of
supplies or contractual services, the Mayor and City Administrator may
authorize the purchase, at the lowest obtainable price, of any supplies
or contractual services. A full explanation of the circumstances of an
emergency purchase shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council.
SECTION 2-294. Cooperative Procurement. [Ord. No. 2017-22 § 1,
5-23-2017]
The City Administrator, or other authorized City official, shall have the
authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing
when the best interest of the City would be served and after approval of the
City Council.
SECTION 2-295. through SECTION 2-298. (Reserved)
B. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
SECTION 2-291 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-295
1:80
ARTICLE VII
Social Security27
SECTION 2-299. Extension of Benefits. [Ord. of 6-14-1954, § 1]
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend, at
the earliest date, to all eligible employees and officials of said City who are
not excluded by law or by this Article, and whether employed in connection
with a governmental or proprietary function of the City, the benefits of
the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by
the Social Security Act Amendment of 1950, and by Senate Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the State of
Missouri and amendments thereof, as the same may be now and hereafter
in effect.
SECTION 2-300. Execution of Agreements. [Ord. of 6-14-1954, § 2]
The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of
the City to prepare, execute and submit to the Office of Administration and
Accounting of the State of Missouri, a State Agency, a plan and agreement
for extending said benefits to said eligible employees and officials of the City
in the form prepared by the State Agency and hereby approved and adopted
by the City Council, which plan and agreement are to become effective
upon approval thereof by the State Agency, and are further authorized and
directed to execute agreements and modifications and amendments thereof
with said State Agency, providing for the extension of said benefits to said
employees and officials as set forth in said plan and agreement, as provided
for in this Division, said plan and agreement to provide that said extension
of benefits is to be effective on July 1, 1954.
SECTION 2-301. Employee's Contribution. [Ord. of 6-14-1954, § 3]
Commencing on the first (1st) day of the month following the date of the
approval of the plan and agreement of the City by the State Agency, there
shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the
City to whom the benefits of said system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement hereinbefore
provided for, the amount of each of said employee's and official's
contributions, as determined by the applicable State and Federal laws and
by said plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of said deductions to be
paid into the Contributions Fund created by Senate Committee Substitute
for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the State of Missouri;
provided however, that from the first (1st) payment of wages made to
each of said employees and officials after the benefits of said system have
been extended to such employees there shall be deducted a sum equal to
the amount which would have been due and payable from each of said
employees and officials had said extension of benefits been provided and
effective on July 1, 1954.
27.State Law Reference — Old-age And Survivors Insurance, RSMo. § 105.300.
SECTION 2-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-302
1:81
SECTION 2-302. City's Contribution. [Ord. No. of 6-14-1954, § 4]
Commencing on the first day of the month following the date of the approval
of the plan and agreement of the City by the State agency, there is hereby
authorized to be appropriated from the General Fund of the City and there
is, and shall be appropriated, the sum of money necessary to pay the
contributions of the City, which shall be due and payable by virtue of the
extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
System to the eligible employees and officials of the City, said sum of
money to be paid into the Contributions Fund created by Senate Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill No. 3 of the 66th General Assembly of the State
of Missouri; provided however, that in making the first payment to said
Contributions Fund, after the benefits of said system have been extended to
such employees and officials, said first payment shall include a sum equal to
the amount which would have been due and payable had said extension of
benefits been provided and effective on July 1, 1954.
The Fund from which said appropriation is made will, at all times, be
sufficient to pay the contributions of the City by this Section directed to be
paid to said Contributions fund.
SECTION 2-303. Administration of Plan. [Ord. of 6-14-1954, § 5]
The City, from and after the approval of the plan and agreement of the
City by the State Agency, shall fully comply with, and shall keep such
records, make such reports and provide such methods of administration
of said plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable State
and Federal laws, rules and regulations, now and hereafter in effect with
respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance System to the employees and officials of the City. For the purpose
of administering said plan and agreement the City Clerk shall be the official
who shall make all required reports, keep all records and be responsible for
the administration of said plan and agreement on behalf of the City, and any
and all notices and communication form the State Agency to the City with
respect to said plan and agreement shall be addressed to the City Clerk.
SECTION 2-302 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-303
1:82
ARTICLE VIII
Disciplinary Action And Classification Of Offenses
SECTION 2-304. Disciplinary Action. [Ord. No. 92-16 § I — II,
6-8-1992]
A. Definitions. Employee as described by this Section shall be defined as
any person employed by the City of Lexington or as a paid volunteer for
the City of Lexington.
B. Initial Action. Whenever the performance or conduct of any employee
falls below a desirable level, supervisors shall inform the employee
promptly. The action to be taken depends on the seriousness of the
incident and the employee's past record. Typically, the first step will be
an oral warning.
C. Written Reprimand. When appropriate, a written reprimand may be
issued any employee in question.
D. Suspension. Any employee may be suspended with pay or without pay
by a department head or appropriate supervisor with the City
Administrator's approval. The department head or appropriate
supervisor shall notify the employee, as soon as practicable, of the
reasons for and the duration of the suspension.
E. Appeal of Suspension. Any employee may appeal any suspension of four
(4) or more working days, or two (2) or more shifts, to the City
Administrator, in writing, stating the reasons for the appeal. The appeal
must be within ten (10) calendar days of the effective date of the
suspension and must be delivered to the City Clerk. The City
Administrator will review the appeal and the records of the action. The
decision of the City Administrator shall be final on matters involving
suspension. The employee shall be notified in writing of the decision.
F. Demotion. Any employee may be demoted by a department head or
appropriate supervisor with the written concurrence of the City
Administrator and upon Council approval. A written statement of the
reasons for any such action must be furnished to the employee. The
employee being demoted must possess the qualifications for the
classification to which being demoted before such action can be
affected.
G. Appeal of Demotion. Any employee may appeal a demotion, in writing,
to the City Administrator within ten (10) days of the effective date of the
demotion. The appeal shall be delivered to the City Clerk. The City
Administrator shall review the appeal and the records of the action. The
employee shall be notified in writing of the decision within ten (10) days
of receipt of approval by the City Administrator. Decisions of the City
Administrator concerning demotions shall be final.
SECTION 2-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-304
1:83
SECTION 2-305. Classification of Offenses as Grounds for Employee
Disciplinary Action. [Ord. No. 92-18 §§ I — III, 6-8-1992]
H. Dismissal. Any employee may be dismissed by a department head, or
appointed authority, with concurrence of City Administrator and upon
approval of the City Council, by delivering a written statement to the
employee. If the department head, because of the reasons for the
discharge, desires to make an immediate separation from the service, a
suspension with pay or without pay pending discharge shall be utilized.
The department head, or a supervisor under the department is vested
with the discretion to exercise such suspension pending discharge
without regard to prior practice or warning if in the judgment of the
department head or supervisor such action is warranted due to
aggravating circumstances, such as the offenses listed as "serious" in
Section 2-305(C).
I. Pre-Termination Procedure. Prior to the final decision to terminate a
nonprobationary employee's employment, and when in the City's
discretion it is determined to be appropriate, the employee will be
given:
1. Oral or written notice of the charges;
2. An explanation of the basis of the City's charges; and
3. An opportunity to present his/her explanation of the matter.
J. Appeal of Dismissal. Any employee may appeal a dismissal, in writing,
to the City Administrator within ten (10) calendar days of the effective
date of dismissal. The appeal shall be delivered to the City Clerk. The
City Administrator shall review the appeal and the records of the
action. The employee shall be notified in writing of the decision.
Decisions of the City Administrator concerning dismissal shall be final.
A. Generally. Any action which reflects discredit upon the municipal
service or is a direct hindrance to the effective performance of the City
Government shall be grounds for disciplinary action against any
employee of the City. Whenever and wherever people work together,
people must conform to standards of reasonable conduct to maintain an
orderly efficient atmosphere. Accordingly, a City employee may be
disciplined up to and including dismissal in order to protect the rights
of others and to encourage correct conduct and cooperation.
B. Classifications of Offenses. The offenses detailed in Subsections (C) and
(D) are listed in two (2) main categories to provide City employees with
an understanding of what can be expected if certain policies or
procedures are violated. It is not possible to list every conceivable
infraction; these lists are not all-inclusive. The two (2) areas listed
below, however, should provide guidance as to what discipline may
apply for situations not listed.
SECTION 2-304 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-305
1:84
C. Serious Offenses. The following offenses are extremely serious and, due
to their severity, will usually subject an employee to immediate
dismissal:
1. Drinking, selling or possessing intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer on duty or on City premises except where
authorized; reporting for duty drunk or impaired by intoxicating
liquor or non-intoxicating beer; being on duty so intoxicated as to
be unable to properly perform assigned duties, or to be a hazard to
self or others;
2. Unauthorized use or possession of controlled substances, imitation
controlled substance or drug paraphernalia on City premises or
while on duty or while off duty; reporting for duty while under the
influence of a controlled substance;
3. Sale or unauthorized transfer of controlled substances, imitation
controlled substances or drug paraphernalia on City premises or
during duty hours or off-duty hours;
4. Insubordinate defiance of authority, refusal to comply with proper
orders, wanton disrespect to authorities, wanton disregard of
directives or insolence;
5. Sleeping while on duty, except where authorized;
6. Theft of City property or the property of another, actual or
attempted;
7. Dishonesty, deliberate misrepresentation; falsification,
exaggeration or concealment of a material fact in connection with
any official document; or withholding of material facts in
connection with matters under official investigation;
8. Loss of, damage to, unauthorized use or destruction of City
property (including motor vehicles), records, or information;
9. Fighting, threatening, or inflicting bodily harm on another, physical
resistance to lawful authority or indecent or immoral conduct while
on the job;
10. Off-duty conduct of such major import that the employee is unable
to fulfill his job responsibilities; off-duty misconduct of such
significance that there is an adverse effect upon the City;
11. Misuse or unauthorized use of City monies or property;
12. Unauthorized possession or use of firearms, dangerous weapons or
explosives while on duty;
13. Serious inefficiency or incompetency that severely hampers
productivity, safety or health of others;
SECTION 2-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-305
1:85
14. Absence from duty for two (2) consecutive working days without
prior notice to and approval of the appropriate supervisor;
15. Falsification of records or the use of official position for personal
advantage, or the attempt to use official position to influence the
results of an official investigation;
16. Criminal convictions for acts or conduct occurring on or off the job
that are plainly related to the job performance and are of such
nature that to continue the individual as an employee would impair
carrying out of the City's responsibility to the citizens or to other
City employees or if not related to job performance would place the
City's image in an unfavorable light;
17. Failure to comply with department policies, special rules or
instructions established by a supervisor when such violation or a
failure to obey amounts to an act of insubordination or a serious
breach of proper discipline;
18. Compromising an examination through unauthorized possession,
use, of furnishing to others examination information or materials;
19. Participating in an unlawful work slowdown, sitdown, or similar
concerted interference with City operations;
20. Harassment of other employees or supervisory personnel,
including sexual harassment of another employee, whether verbal
or physical, when submission to such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual, or when such conduct has the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or
creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment;
21. Abuse of City's sick leave policies;
22. Failure to report to work or to notify the appropriate supervisor of
absence for two (2) consecutive working days after the expiration
of an approved leave of absence;
23. Excessive absenteeism or tardiness;
24. Commission of acts or omission or other conduct prejudicial to the
interests of the City, such conduct reflecting discredit upon the City
or resulting in a direct hindrance to the effective performance of
Municipal Government functions.
D. Other Offenses. The following list of offenses are of the nature that
generally will be handled by forms of minor discipline, (such as verbal
warnings or suspensions without pay). The failure to correct the
violation of these "other serious offenses" may, however, result in
disciplinary action up to and including discharge if warranted by the
circumstances.
SECTION 2-305 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-305
1:86
1. Delay or failure to carry out assigned work or instructions in a
reasonable period of time;
2. Leaving job without permission;
3. Failure to request leave according to established procedures;
4. Loafing on duty while not on authorized rest periods;
5. Careless workmanship or neglect of duty.
6. Careless use of City property resulting in possible or actual damage
and disruption or possible disruption of City services;
7. Failure to observe recognized or instructed safety practices,
including failure to use safety equipment such as eye protective
devices or safety shoes, and failure to follow established
procedures;
8. Rude, boisterous play which adversely affects production,
discipline or morale, use of abusive or offensive language,
quarreling or inciting to quarrel;
9. Interfering with the production of others while on the job;
10. Accepting money or favors or gifts for personal gain for work done
as a City employee;
11. Excessive time at breaks or lunch hour;
12. Failure to complete reports promptly and accurately;
13. Horseplay;
14. Failure to report work-related injury or accident or nonworkrelated
injury or illness that may affect work performance
immediately;
15. Failure to report absence prior to beginning a shift;
16. Failure to be courteous to a citizen;
17. Switching schedules with another employee without prior approval
of management.
18. Failure to follow department operating procedures or
administrative policies;
19. Unauthorized use of City telephone;
20. Unauthorized use or abuse of City materials or equipment or
allowing such use or abuse;
21. Showing disrespect or disregard for authority.
SECTION 2-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-306
1:87
SECTION 2-306. through SECTION 2-314. (Reserved)
SECTION 2-306 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-306
1:88
ARTICLE IX
Administration — Grievance Policy
SECTION 2-315. Policy. [Ord. No. 92-17 § I, 6-8-1992]
It shall be the policy of the City to give individual employees an opportunity
to discuss their grievances with their supervisors in order to find mutually
satisfactory solutions as rapidly as possible, free from restraint,
interference, discrimination or reprisal.
SECTION 2-316. Reason for Grievance. [Ord. No. 92-17 § I,
6-8-1992]
Employees may present a grievance concerning the interpretation of the
provisions of the City personnel ordinances, City policies, departmental
rules and regulations, employee working conditions, and employee
relationship with co-workers or supervisors. Employee service ratings and
merit reviews are specifically excluded from the grievance procedure set
forth in this Article.
SECTION 2-317. Appropriateness of Grievance. [Ord. No. 92-17 § I,
6-8-1992]
Any ambiguities about a particular matter subject to the grievance
procedure will be determined by the City Administrator. A grievance claim
will not be heard or processed if the grievance concerns: application of
ordinance provisions or policies approved by the City Council; State
Statutes; or when the City Administrator has good reason to believe that a
grievance has been brought in bad faith or for inappropriate reasons.
SECTION 2-318. Grievance Procedure. [Ord. No. 92-17 § I,
6-8-1992; Ord. No. 2017-08 §§ 1 — 2, 2-28-2017]
A. If the work problem has not been resolved to the satisfaction of the
employee after an oral discussion with the immediate supervisor, the
employee may initiate the formal grievance procedure by submitting to
the immediate supervisor a written grievance review request stating
the problem and corrective action desired (see Exhibit 15-2). Within five
(5) workdays, the immediate supervisor shall give the employee a
written grievance review disposition stating his/her decision (see
Exhibit 15-3). Copies of the Step 1 grievance review request and
disposition shall be submitted to the City Administrator, if the
Administrator is the immediate supervisor, copies shall be sent to City
Clerk/Personnel Officer.
B. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the immediate
supervisor, the employee may within five (5) workdays after receipt of
that decision submit to the City Administrator a written grievance
review request stating the problem and the corrective action desired.
(If the City Administrator is the immediate supervisor, Step III should
SECTION 2-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-318
1:89
SECTION 2-319. Extension of Time. [Ord. No. 92-17 § I, 6-8-1992]
In the event that the employee, appropriate supervisor or department head
must be absent from work in a manner that affects the time periods listed
herein, these periods may be reasonably extended to allow for adequate
response time at the request of the absent party as approved by the City
Administrator.
be followed). The Administrator shall arrange a conference with the
employee and thereafter give to the employee a written grievance
review disposition stating his/her decision within ten (10) workdays
from the date of the receipt of the grievance review request. Copies of
the Step II grievance review request and disposition shall be submitted
to the City Clerk/Personnel Officer.
C. Step III. If the employee is not satisfied with the Step II decision, the
employee may, within five (5) workdays after receipt of the Step II
decision submit a written request for review of the grievance to the City
Administrator stating the problem and the corrective action desired.
1. The City Administrator will appoint and designate an independent
and disinterested third party licensed to practice law in Missouri to
act as an independent disinterested hearing officer for the matter.
2. A hearing will be scheduled within thirty (30) days. It may be
continued to assemble needed information. A written decision will
be issued within twenty (20) days after the hearing is closed.
3. The decision on Step III will be final. No further right of a grievance
appeal will be provided to an employee. The hearing officer will
forward a copy of the decision to the employee concerned and a
copy to the City Clerk, who will be obligated to maintain files of
grievance disposition and provide copies to appropriate
supervisory personnel legitimately concerned with the issues
determined. These files will be open to review by members of the
City Council to the end that personnel issues may be reasonably
monitored.
4. The City Administrator is authorized to approve a reasonable fee
for the services of the independent and disinterested hearing
officer. The employee may be represented by a layperson or by
counsel. The City may be represented by the City Attorney or his/
her designee. The procedure may be formal or informal as the
parties may agree.
SECTION 2-318 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-319
1:90
ARTICLE X
Lexington Youth Connection28
SECTION 2-320. Purposes. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999;
Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
SECTION 2-321. Appointment and Term. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999]
The term of the membership shall be for two (2) fiscal years or until their
successors are duly appointed and qualified, though membership may be
terminated after the first (1st) fiscal year pending the decision made by the
committee that performs the annual review of current members.
SECTION 2-322. LYC Fiscal Year. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
The fiscal year of LYC shall commence directly prior to the initialization of
new business on the first (1st) Sunday of October and terminate directly
following the completion of old business on the first (1st) Sunday of October
each year, and the books and reports of officers of the LYC shall be made to
conform thereto.
A. To provide the youth of Lexington an opportunity to be involved in the
decision-making process which affects their lives in the community. It
offers formal lines of communication between the teenage youth of the
community and the elected officials. It further provides an opportunity
for local youth to understand how government operates and to
coordinate youth participation in community service and social
activities.
B. To serve the youth of Lexington by:
1. Informing the Lexington Municipal Government of the needs and
wishes of the youth.
2. Planning and implementing social, educational, cultural and
recreational activities for the youth.
3. Working with the Mayor, City Council, City department heads,
schools, Chamber of Commerce, civic clubs and service
organizations to provide service and leadership opportunities for
the youth of the City.
4. To instill a feeling of positive self worth and esteem. To teach
respect for the rights and property of others. To promote
community pride and to eliminate potential negative influences
among our future community leaders.
28.Editor's Note — Ord. No. 99-40 § 1, Adopted November 9, 1999, Repealed This Article And
Enacted The Provisions Set Out Herein. Former Art. X Derived From Ord. No. 98-28
§§ 1 — 6, 9-8-1998.
SECTION 2-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-323
1:91
SECTION 2-323. Members and Alternates. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
LYC shall consist of nine (9) members. A "member of LYC" is defined as
an active participant of LYC with voting power. These nine (9) members
comprise six (6) from the Lexington High School and three (3) from
Wentworth Miliary Academy. LYC shall consist of nine (9) alternates. An
"alternate" of LYC is defined as an active participant of LYC with voting
power only in the absence of any of their respective members. These
nine (9) alternates comprise six (6) from the Lexington Middle School and
three (3) from Wentworth Military Academy. The member positions from
the Lexington High School shall be selected at large from the applicants.
Wentworth will assign positions as they see fit. The Lexington Middle School
shall appoint three (3) seventh (7th) grade alternates and three (3) eighth
(8th) grade alternates.
SECTION 2-324. Oath. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord.
No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
New Youth Connection members and alternates shall be sworn in between
the completion of old business and the commencement of new business
on the first (1st) Sunday in October, assuming that all appointments and
reviews have already been completed. The members shall be given the same
"Oath of Office" that their adult counterparts are given.
SECTION 2-325. Duty to Attend Meeting. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
No member or alternate of the LYC shall absent themselves from any
regular meeting thereof, nor from any adjourned or special meetings after
due notice thereof, unless they have leave, or are sick and unable to attend,
or is otherwise prevented by circumstances beyond their control.
SECTION 2-326. Assignment of Alternates to Members. [Ord. No.
99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
The member and alternate lists of the Lexington High School and Middle
School will be written in alphabetical order by last name. Each alternate
will be assigned to one (1) member. Wentworth Military Academy alternates
will cover their members as they see fit. In the absence of a quorum, all
alternate members present may serve as voting members for that meeting.
SECTION 2-327. Procedure During Summer Absence of Wentworth
Military Academy. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999]
During the summer when Wentworth Military Academy is out of session,
the remaining alternates will fill the positions left by Wentworth Military
Academy. If for some reason there are more alternates than positions
needing to be filled, the alternates with the highest attendance, between
the beginning of the present fiscal year and the time at which the positions
are opened, will assume the positions.
SECTION 2-323 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-328
1:92
SECTION 2-328. Annual Review of Current Members. [Ord. No.
99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Participants of LYC who served as members (this includes the time
alternates spent filling in for their respective members while they were
absent) for at least the majority of the prior term shall be reviewed by a
panel of selected by the principal of their respective school. The purpose of
the panel is to determine if each member met the requirements to remain
on LYC, during the prior fiscal year. Those who meet the requirements
shall retain their membership, but not necessarily their office. Should a
participant not meet the requirements, the panel has three (3) choices: 1)
they may warn the participant, but allow him/her to remain a member, 2)
they may allow the participant to compete through the interview process
along with the new applicants, and 3) they may recommend the dismissal of
the participant from LYC entirely, according to dismissal of LYC participants
procedure. This shall be completed within one (1) month preceding the new
LYC fiscal year.
SECTION 2-329. Selection of New Members and Alternates. [Ord.
No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Participants of LYC who served as members or alternates for less than the
majority of the prior fiscal year shall compete with all other interested
parties for the remaining positions. After indicating an interest, a student
shall be interviewed by the principal of their respective school or a person
or persons he/she appoints. Each applicant will receive a packet containing
the LYC ordinances. The principal or their designated person(s) shall
conduct the interviews and make a appointments to the LYC by the end of
September. Alternates will be selected using the same method.
SECTION 2-330. Filling Vacancies. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999]
When a member position becomes available within the duration of a term,
due to that member no longer being able to serve, the Council shall select
the replacement from within the pool of alternates. The alternate
replacement selection will be the same as that for a new alternate.
SECTION 2-331. Duties and Responsibilities of the Lexington Youth
Connection. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29
§ 1, 9-14-2004]
Duties and responsibilities of the LYC shall be as follows:
1. LYC shall meet in regular session on at least one (1) Sunday of each
month.
2. (Reserved)
3. To recommend changes to these ordinances as needed by a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of members present.
SECTION 2-328 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-331
1:93
SECTION 2-332. Limitations of the Youth Connection Authority.
[Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1,
9-14-2004]
Limitations of authority are as follows:
SECTION 2-333. Responsibility and Authority — Youth Mayor. [Ord.
No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Youth Mayor responsibilities and authorities are as follows:
4. To present to the Mayor and City Council all amendments for their
approval.
5. To select one (1) of its members to act as Youth Mayor and another to
act as temporary Youth Connection Mayor (Mayor Pro Tem) when the
Youth Mayor is absent. The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem are to be from
different schools (Wentworth Military Academy High School and
Lexington High School).
6. To pass motions and resolutions as necessary by a majority vote. A
majority vote is one (1) vote more than one-half (1/2) of the voting
members who are present.
7. To carry out the purposes of the Youth Connection as outlined in these
ordinances.
8. To plan activities for the youth of the community, coordinating all such
activities with the Mayor and the Youth Connection advisors.
9. To select one (1) of the members to serve as a Lexington Youth
Treasurer.
1. The Youth Connection must have a quorum of five (5) voting members in
order to conduct business.
2. All amendments to these ordinances are to be approved by the Mayor
and City Council.
3. The agendas of all Youth Connection meetings are to be posted publicly
at City Hall at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of each meeting.
4. All activities are to be coordinated with the Youth Connection advisors
and the Mayor.
1. To plan and conduct all Youth Connection meetings.
2. To carry out the decisions of the Youth Connection.
3. To meet periodically with the Lexington Mayor and/or Youth Connection
advisor to provide for proper planning and coordination between the
City Council and the Youth Connection.
SECTION 2-331 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-333
1:94
SECTION 2-334. Responsibility and Authority — Youth Mayor Pro
Tem. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999]
It is the Youth Mayor Pro Tem's position to assume all responsibility and
authority of the Youth Mayor during his/her temporary or permanent
absence.
SECTION 2-335. Responsibility and Authority — Youth City Clerk.
[Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1,
9-14-2004]
Youth City Clerk responsibilities and authorities are as follows:
SECTION 2-336. Election of New Officers. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2,
11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Election of new officers shall take place at the first (1st) meeting of the
new fiscal year. If possible, officers should have at least one (1) year
of experience serving as a member of the Youth Connection. The voting
process shall begin with the selection of the Youth Mayor, then proceed
to the Youth Mayor Pro Tem, then Youth City Clerk and then Youth City
Treasurer selections. Only one (1) office will be voted on at a time. Each
voting member will write the name of the one (1) party he/she considers
best qualified for that position. Ballots will be handed to the advisors who
will announce the new officers. Ballots are then destroyed. For each office
that is available, the process will be repeated.
4. To propose to the Youth Connection plans and projects designed to
assist in the fulfillment of the purposes of the Youth Connection.
5. To vote only in case of a tie.
6. To assign each Youth Connection member and alternate to one (1) of the
committees.
1. To attend all Youth Connection meetings, take and maintain minutes of
said meetings.
2. To record the attendance of all members and alternates at all meetings.
3. To carry out assignments of the Youth Connection.
4. To have all Youth Connection records reviewed by the City Clerk every
July and January.
5. To deliver all agendas and minutes to City Clerk for permanent file.
6. To assume all responsibility and authority of the Youth Mayor Pro Tem
during his/her temporary or permanent absence.
SECTION 2-333 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-337
1:95
SECTION 2-337. Committees. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999;
Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
The Youth Connection shall create the following permanent committees
to assist the Connection in carrying out their plans, goals and projects.
The members of the committees are to be appointed by the Youth Mayor.
Committee membership shall be for a one (1) fiscal year period. The
Chairman is selected by the members of the respective committees. The
committees shall be named as follows:
SECTION 2-338. Lexington Youth Connection Advisors. [Ord. No.
99-40 §§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
The Youth Connection shall have one (1) advisor from each school and a City
representative. The advisors should attend Youth Connection meetings and
Youth Connection activities.
SECTION 2-339. Requirements to Serve on LYC. [Ord. No. 99-40
§§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Requirements to serve on Youth Connection are as follows:
SECTION 2-340. Requirements to Remain on LYC. [Ord. No. 99-40
§§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Requirements to remain on Youth Connection are listed below:
1. Community Service Committee: Public buildings, public relations.
2. Social Activities Committee.
1. With the exception of Wentworth Military Academy, applicants must
have resided in the sponsoring City for at least one (1) year.
2. Must be in at least the seventh (7th) grade and not yet be a graduate of
high school.
3. Must have at least one (1) year experience serving as a member to
serve as Mayor of the Youth Connection.
1. With the exception of Wentworth Military Academy, reviewers must
remain a resident of the sponsoring City.
2. Attend at least fifty percent (50%) of all Youth Connection meetings.
3. Maintain at least a 2.0 grade point average in school.
4. Fulfill the responsibilities of the office held.
SECTION 2-337 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2-341
1:96
SECTION 2-341. Dismissal of LYC Participants. [Ord. No. 99-40 §§ 1
— 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Any member or alternate may be removed from their position upon violation
of one (1) or more of the requirements to remain on the LYC and by a
majority vote of the Youth Connection with final approval of the principal of
the member or alternate being removed.
SECTION 2-342. Resignation of an LYC Participant. [Ord. No. 99-40
§§ 1 — 2, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Written resignations should be submitted to the Youth Mayor. Acceptance of
such resignation is to be voted on at the following meeting.
SECTION 2-343. Responsibility and Authority — Youth City
Treasurer. [Ord. No. 2004-29 § 1, 9-14-2004]
Youth City Treasurer responsibilities and authorities are as follows:
1. To keep all financial records of the LYC.
2. To collect and dispense funds as directed by the LYC.
SECTION 2-341 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2-343
1:97
Chapter 2A
TOURISM COMMISSION
SECTION 2A-1. Creation of Commission. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2,
9-14-1999]
There is hereby created a Lexington Tourism Commission with the powers
and duties as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 2A-2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999; Ord.
No. 2001-46 § 1, 8-14-2001]
The purpose of the Lexington Tourism Commission is to increase visitors
to Lexington by promoting and preserving existing attractions, encouraging
development of additional attractions, developing and promoting special
events to attract visitors to Lexington and to work with other organizations,
firms and agencies of State, County and local governments to attract
visitors to Lexington.
SECTION 2A-3. Composition. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999;
Ord. No. 2000-27 § 1, 12-12-2000; Ord. No. 2007-13 § 1, 4-10-2007;
Ord. No. 2009-26 § 1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-10 § 1, 3-27-2012]
A. Composition. The Tourism Commission shall be comprised of seven (7)
person, five (5) of whom shall be citizens of Lexington. Up to two (2)
members of the Commission may be non-residents owning or operating
businesses in Lexington and/or living in adjacent areas of Lafayette
County. The Mayor with the approval of the City Council shall appoint
such members. The Mayor shall make every effort reasonable to
appoint persons with experience, expertise or interest in areas
including, but not limited to: tourism, hotel/motel or bed and breakfast
management, restaurant or food service and historic preservation. The
Mayor shall also appoint a member of the City Council to serve as an ex
officio, non-voting member of the Tourism Commission.
B. Term. Terms of membership shall be for three (3) years. The terms shall
be staggered so that no more than three (3) members are appointed in
any one (1) year. The members shall not serve more than two (2)
complete terms consecutively, however they may be reappointed after a
one (1) year absence.
C. Removal. Any member absent from more than three (3) meetings of the
Commission in one (1) year shall be deemed an automatic resignation.
Upon acceptance of the removal by the Commission, the City Council
will be presented the name for their approval.
D. Resignation. Members may resign at any time by giving written notice
to the Commission. Written notice delivered in person shall be effective
upon delivery unless otherwise provided in the notice of resignation.
SECTION 2-343 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2A-3
1:98
SECTION 2A-4. Officers and Duties of Officers. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1
— 2, 9-14-1999; Ord. No. 2001-46 § 1, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 2009-26
§ 1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-10 § 1, 3-27-2012]
Upon acceptance of the resignation by the Commission, the City
Council will be presented the name for their approval.
E. Vacancies. The Commission will make a recommendation to the Mayor
for presentation to City Council for approval. The appointment will be
for the unexpired term. An unexpired term of more than eighteen (18)
months to which a member is appointed shall be considered a complete
term.
A. Officers. The officers will be designated as Chairman, Assistant
Chairman, Treasurer and Secretary and will be elected by and from the
Tourism Commission at the first (1st) meeting of each fiscal year.
B. Term. Each officer shall not serve more than two (2) terms
consecutively in one (1) office.
C. Duties Of The Chairman. The Chairman shall have the responsibility of
presiding at all meetings of the Commission, to preserve order and
enforce the rules thereof, and have the general supervision of the
interest, the growth and development of the Tourism Commission and
to perform such other duties as are incident to the office. The Chairman
shall appoint committees as they are deemed necessary and shall be an
ex officio of all committees. The Chairman will sign all documents that
require signature to make them valid.
D. Duties Of The Assistant Chairman. The Assistant Chairman shall, in the
absence of the Chairman, or in the event of the Chairman's disability,
perform all duties of that office.
E. Duties Of Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all
funds, keeping accurate account of all receipts and disbursements,
rendering a monthly account to the Tourism Commission, and a yearly
account at the first (1st) meeting of each fiscal year. The Treasurer shall
submit a copy of the monthly report to the City Council. The Treasurer
shall submit all accounting records to the City Clerk for audit purposes
at the end of each fiscal year. The Treasurer may delegate performance
of any or all of these specific duties to the Executive Director, but shall
have responsibility for regular oversight and review.
F. Duties Of Secretary. The Secretary shall take minutes of each meeting.
Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes,
reports, and decisions to the members of the Commission. Give notice
as provided herein by law for all public hearings conducted by the
Commission. Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the Commission and the
expiring terms of members. Prepare and submit to the Council a
complete record of proceedings before the Tourism Commission on any
manner requiring Council consideration. Submit minutes to City Hall
SECTION 2A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2A-4
1:99
SECTION 2A-5. Fiscal Year. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999]
The fiscal year of the Tourism Commission shall begin on the first (1st) day
of April and end on the last day of March of each year.
SECTION 2A-6. Quorum. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999; Ord.
No. 2000-27 § 1, 12-12-2000; Ord. No. 2009-26 § 1, 7-14-2009]
A quorum consists of four (4) members of the appointed body of the
Commission. All decisions or actions of the Tourism Commission shall be
made by a majority vote of those members present and voting at any
meeting where a quorum exists. No member shall vote on any matter that
may materially or apparently be considered a conflict of interest.
for the permanent file. The Secretary may delegate performance of any
or all of these specific duties to the Executive Director, but shall have
responsibility for regular oversight and review.
G. Executive Director. The Commission shall interview persons for the
position and make a recommendation to City Council for approval. The
Executive Director shall take the necessary steps to market and
promote a vigorous and constant tourism program, seeking counsel and
guidance from the Commission. Shall be in charge of and handle all
correspondence and details of the tourism office. Keep accurate office
records and accounts. Shall deposit all funds received in such banks as
may be designated by the Commission without necessary delay and
provide the Treasurer with current records of all financial transactions.
Shall be responsible for carrying out decisions of the Commission. Shall
possess computer skills. If for any reason their tenure of office is
terminated, the Executive Director must surrender all properties of the
Tourism Commission and make final accounting of all matters
pertaining to the Tourism Commission prior to being relieved of their
responsibilities. Coordinates and oversees special events including, but
not limited to, the Vintage Homes Tour and mini-tours. Manage priority
projects designated by the Commission including, but not limited to,
design and publication of brochures promoting Lexington as a tourist
destination and contracts for design and placement of highway
billboards. Maintain liaison with other organizations, firms and
agencies of State, County and local government to promote visits to
Lexington by individual and groups including, but not limited to, bus
tours. Represent Lexington Tourism Commission at conventions and
similar events. Supervise the staff and operation of the Tourism
Commission's office. Develop applications for grants.
H. Compensation. The members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. The Commission and City Council with City Council
having final approval shall determine the salary of the Executive
Director.
SECTION 2A-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2A-7
1:100
SECTION 2A-7. Meetings. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999; Ord.
No. 2009-26 § 1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-10 § 1, 3-27-2012]
SECTION 2A-8. Committees. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2, 9-14-1999;
Ord. No. 2009-26 § 1, 7-14-2009]
The Chairman shall establish such committees as deemed necessary and
proper to carry out the purpose and policies of the Tourism Commission.
The Chairman, with approval of the Commission, shall appoint or withdraw
the committee members who are to serve on said committees.
SECTION 2A-9. Amendments to Chapter. [Ord. No. 99-36 §§ 1 — 2,
9-14-1999]
This Chapter may be altered, amended or repealed by action of two-thirds
(2/3) majority vote of the members appointed. The proposed changes will be
submitted to City Council for approval.
Chapter 2B
FAIR BOARD
SECTION 2B-1. Creation of Board. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 1,
1-27-2009; Ord. No. 2017-14 § 1, 4-11-2017]
There is hereby established a Fair Board for the City of Lexington, Missouri,
which shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council of the City of Lexington. To be a member of
the Fair Board, a person must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
SECTION 2B-2. Term of Office. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 2, 1-27-2009;
Ord. No. 2017-14 § 1, 4-11-2017]
The term of office of each such appointee shall be for a term of three (3)
years, except three (3) of the first nine (9) members of the Board shall be
appointed for a three-year term, three (3) shall be appointed for a twoyear
term and three (3) shall be appointed for a one-year term to permit
staggered terms of the membership. The terms shall be from September 1
through August 31.
A. The Commission shall meet at least nine (9) times during the year. The
date, time and place of the meeting shall be posted at City Hall seventytwo
(72) hours in advance. Special meetings may be held as often as
necessary at the call of the Chairman or by a quorum of the Commission
members.
B. All business shall be conducted by parliamentary law with Robert's
Rules of Order, Revised (current edition) being the authority.
SECTION 2A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2B-3
1:101
SECTION 2B-3. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 3, 1-27-2009]
The purpose of the Fair Board shall be to organize, sponsor, operate and
manage fairs, festivals and other types of similar gatherings for the City of
Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 2B-4. Composition. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 4, 1-27-2009]
The Fair Board shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and a Secretary/
Treasurer. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Fair Board and
the Secretary shall take minutes thereof. The Secretary shall post a notice
of the agenda of all Fair Board meetings at City Hall and all meetings of
the Fair Board shall be open to the public and be conducted pursuant to the
Sunshine Law requirements of the State of Missouri.
SECTION 2B-5. Advisory Board. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 5, 1-27-2009]
The Fair Board shall be an advisory board. All expenditures of City funds
and contracts concerning City land must be approved by the City Council
of the City of Lexington. All revenues and/or donations shall be given to
the Treasurer of the Fair Board, money shall be deposited and withdrawn
from the Fair Board account. Any net proceeds resulting from a fair event
or donation shall be used for projects benefiting the general public of the
City of Lexington. Said projects shall be determined by the Fair Board and
where such project may affect City owned property, coordinate with the City
Council.
SECTION 2B-6. Duties. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 6, 1-27-2009]
The Fair Board shall insure that the City causes signs to be posted and
maintained at all locations clearly visible at all major entrances and other
locations throughout the event where the Fair Board is sponsoring an event.
Such signs shall provide the following language:
WARNING
Under Missouri Law the City of Lexington, Missouri, is not liable for an
injury to or the death of any person resulting from the inherent risks of
participating in or observing any activities at this event pursuant to the
Revised Statues of Missouri Section 537.550.
SECTION 2B-7. Funds. [Ord. No. 2009-02 § 7, 1-27-2009]
Should the Fair Board cease to exist for any reason, any funds held by the
Fair Board shall be turned over to the City of Lexington for deposit in the
general fund. The City may then use these funds for any purpose deemed
necessary by the City.
SECTION 2B-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 2B-7
1:102
Chapter 3
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 3, Airport Authority, Airports And Aircraft,
containing Sections 3-1 through 3-35, which derived from Ord. No.
83-19 §§ 1 — 9, 10-1983, was repealed 2-14-2017 by § 1 of Ord. No.
2017-04.]
Chapter 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Cross Reference — Operating motor vehicle under influence of alcohol or
drugs, § 15-2.
State Law Reference — Liquor control law, RSMo. Ch. 311; Municipal
authority to require liquor licenses, RSMo. § 311.220.
SECTION 2B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2B-7
1:103

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 4-1. Intoxicating Liquor Defined.29 [Ord. of 11-4-1963,
§ 10; Ord. No. 2014-18 § 1, 7-8-2014]
The term "intoxicating liquor," as used in this Chapter, shall mean and
include alcohol used for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous,
fermented, malt or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which
is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures used
for beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent (1/
2 of 1%) by volume. All beverages having an alcoholic content of less than
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) by volume shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 4-2. Hours of Sale.30 [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 6]
No person licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall sell, give away
or otherwise dispose of, or suffer the same to be done, upon or about his
premises, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30
A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
SECTION 4-3. Sales on Sundays.31 [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 7; Ord. No.
93-09 § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 94-29 § I, 1-24-1995; Ord. No.
2003-26 § 1, 11-4-2003]
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, any person
possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements for the issuance
of a liquor license, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original
package at retail under Section 311.200, RSMo., and the ordinances of the
City, may apply for a special license to sell intoxicating liquor in the original
package at retail, between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight on
Sundays.
SECTION 4-4. Sales to Drunkards and Persons Under Influence of
Intoxicating Liquor. [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 9]
No person shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor or permit the same to be
sold or supplied to an habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or
apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
SECTION 4-5. Selling and Supplying Intoxicating Liquor to Minors
Prohibited; Exceptions.32 [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 9]
A. Intoxicating liquor shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
29.State Law Reference — Intoxicating liquor defined, RSMo. § 311.020.
30.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 311.290.
31.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 311.290.
32.State Law Reference — See RSMo. § 311.310.
SECTION 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4-5
1:105
SECTION 4-6. Selling and Dispensing Intoxicating Liquor by Minors
Prohibited. [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 9]
Except as otherwise provided by State law, no person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of
intoxicating liquor.
SECTION 4-7. Sales in Violation of Chapter or License. [Ord. of
11-4-1963, § 8]
No person shall sell intoxicating liquor in any other place than that
designated in a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, or at any time not
authorized by this Chapter or in any manner other than as authorized by
this Chapter.
SECTION 4-8. Consumption in Public Places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume intoxicating liquor in any
public place. For the purposes of this Section, the term, "public place" shall
include, but not be limited to, any common carrier, building, street, park or
place of public resort, recreation or amusement other than privately owned
and operated business establishments.
SECTION 4-9. Violations. [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 12]
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition to the penalty
provided for in Section 1-8, if such person is a licensed dealer in intoxicating
liquor in the City, his license shall be revoked.
SECTION 4-10. Permitting Wine, Malt Beverages, and Distilled
Spirit Tasting on Premises. [Ord. No. 96-18 §§ 1 — 2, 8-13-1996]
SECTION 4-11. through SECTION 4-20. (Reserved)
B. The provisions of Subsection (A) shall not apply to the supplying of
intoxicating liquor to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
for medicinal purposes only, or by the parent or guardian of such person
or to the administering of said intoxicating liquor to said person by a
physician.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person processing the qualifications and meeting the requirements
for the issuance of a liquor license, who is licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor in the original package at retail under Section 311.200, RSMo.,
and the ordinances of the City, may apply for a special permit to
conduct wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tasting on the licensed
premises between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 1:30 A.M.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit the licensee to sell
wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits for on-premises consumption.
SECTION 4-5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 4-11
1:106
ARTICLE II
Licenses33
SECTION 4-21. Required. [Ord. No. 83-05, § 2, 3-8-1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, business entity or
corporation to manufacture, brew, sell, possess or transport within the City,
or to offer for sale, any intoxicating liquor as defined by State law and the
Statutes of the State of Missouri, without first obtaining a license therefore.
SECTION 4-22. Fees. [Ord. No. 77-5, § 2, 4-12-1977; Ord. No. 93-09
§ 2, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 96-19 § 1, 8-13-1996; Ord. No. 2007-26 § 1,
7-10-2007]
The fee for a license required by this Article shall be in accordance with the
following:
1. For the sale of intoxicating liquor by a wholesale dealer of three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%), the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), a
wholesale dealer of five percent (5%), the fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and wholesale dealer of twenty-two percent (22%),
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year.
2. For the sale at retail of intoxicating liquor as defined by State law for
consumption on the premises of the licensee, the fee shall be three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per year, the retail sale of intoxicating liquor
of five percent (5%) beer for consumption on the premises, the fee shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year (no Sunday required), the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor on Sundays for consumption on the premises, the fee
shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year.
3. For the sale at retail of intoxicating liquor as defined by State law and in
the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold
Monday through Saturday, the fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00), the retail of intoxicating liquor in the original package three
and two-tenths percent (3.2%) beer, not to be consumed on the
premises, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor in the original package five percent (5%) beer (not
Sunday required), not consumed on the premises, the fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00), the retail sale of intoxicating liquor in the original
package on Sundays, not consumed on the premises, the fee shall be
two hundred dollars ($200.00). For retailers selling intoxicating liquor
in the original package at retail as defined in Section 311.200, RSMo.,
retailer shall sell between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight on
Sundays.
33.Cross Reference — Licenses and business regulations generally, § 13-1 et seq. State Law
Reference — Municipal authority to license, RSMo. §§ 311.220, 312.140.
SECTION 4-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4-22
1:107
SECTION 4-23. Fee May be Paid in Semi-Annual Installments. [Ord.
of 11-4-1963, § 4]
The license fee provided for under this Article, may be paid in semi-annual
payments on January first (1st) and July first (1st) of each year.
SECTION 4-24. Qualifications of Applicants. [Ord. No. 83-05, § 3,
3-8-1983; Ord. No. 96-17 § I, 7-27-1996]
4. To conduct wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the
licensed premises by a retail dealer, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00), which shall be paid in addition to any other license fees.
5. Any type of liquor license that may be required that is not specifically
stated above shall comply with RSMo., Chapter 311 "Liquor Control
Law" regarding fees.
A. No person shall be granted a license to sell intoxicating liquor under
this provisions of the Article unless such person is of good moral
character, nor shall any corporation be granted such license unless the
managing officer of such corporation be of good moral character, and
the corporation must have a principal place of business within the City
of Lexington, Missouri.
B. Any application by a corporation must specify at least one (1) individual
responsible party who qualifies under the individual qualifications
listed above and such individual shall be required to execute a surety
contract and any and all documents jointly with, for and on behalf of
said corporation in order to show his full and complete responsibility for
all of the laws of the State of Missouri and the City of Lexington with
regard to the maintaining of said license.
C. No person shall be granted a license or permit whose license as such
dealer has been revoked, or who has been convicted, since the
ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States, of a violation of any of the provisions of any law
applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor, or who
employs in his business as such dealer, any person whose license has
been revoked or has been convicted of violating such law since the date
aforesaid. Before any license or permit is issued or granted under the
provisions of this Article for the sale or delivery of any beer or alcohol
or liquor, other than a manufacturer's license or permit, the applicant
for such license and permit shall take and subscribe to an oath that he
will not allow any intoxicating liquor of any kind or character, including
beer, but not limited thereto, having an alcoholic content in excess of
fourteen percent (14%) by weight, to be kept, stored or secreted in or
upon the premises described in such permit, and that such applicant
will not otherwise violate any law of this State or this Code, or any other
ordinance of this City, or knowingly allow any other person within his
employ, purview, management or control to violate such laws while in or
upon such premises.
SECTION 4-22 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 4-24
1:108
SECTION 4-25. License to Specify Premises at Which Sales May be
Made. [Ord. of 11-4-1963, § 11]
Each license issued under the provisions of this Article shall particularly
describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor may be sold thereunder,
and said license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of
intoxicating liquor at any place other than that described therein.
D. This Section anticipates and authorizes only individual persons or
corporations with individual sureties, guarantors, and signatories to so
apply for these licenses.
SECTION 4-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4-25
1:109
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Cross References — Health, § 12-1. et seq.; Keeping animals and fowl in
unwholesome surroundings declared a nuisance; § 18-104; Offensive animal
pens declared a nuisance, § 18-105; Keeping dead animals in city declared a
nuisance, § 18-106; Bringing diseased or injured animals into city declared
a nuisance, § 18-107.
State Law Reference — Authority of third class city to regulate or prohibit
animals from running at large and to provide for impoundment thereof,
RSMo. § 77.510; Restraint of animals running at large, RSMo. Ch. 270.
SECTION 4-25 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 4-25
1:110
ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 5-1. Policy. [Ord. No. 92-31 § 1, 2-9-1993; Ord. No.
2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
The intention of this Chapter is to require animal owners to comply with
the law and not merely to operate an impoundment program. Police Officers
and the Animal Control Officer shall therefore place primary emphasis upon
apprehending and initiating prosecution of violators of this Chapter and
with a secondary emphasis on adoption of fully vetted animals suitable for
rehoming.
SECTION 5-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 92-31 § 2, 2-9-1993; Ord. No.
2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2015-21 § 1, 7-28-2015]
The following words shall have the meanings set out below when used in
this Chapter:
ACFA — The State of Missouri Animal Care Facilities Act CSR 30-9.010.
ALTERED — Spayed or neutered.
ANIMAL — Every living vertebrate except a human being.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person designated by the Mayor to
enforce or assist in the enforcement of this Chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any facility operated by a humane society, municipal
agency, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for
animals held under the authority of this Chapter or State law.
AT LARGE — Animals shall be deemed to be at large when off the property
of the owner and not under restraint.
BITE — The puncturing of skin by the teeth or claws of an animal.
CAT — Any of a family (Felidae) of the domestic cat, both male and female.
DOG — All animals of the canine species, both male and female.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL OR FOWL — An animal of a species of
vertebrates that has been domesticated by humans so as to live and breed
in a tame condition and depend on humankind for survival or a bird of a
species that has been domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a
tame condition and depend on humankind for survival.
DOMESTICATED FARM LIVESTOCK — Animals that may be harbored or
raised to provide various types of labor, food, or fiber (e.g., feathers, fur,
hides, wool) for the benefit of humans or other animals. Livestock species
include but are not limited to horses, mares, mules, jacks, jennies, colts,
cows, calves, yearlings, bulls, oxen, sheep, goats, lambs, kids, swine, poultry
and bees. Includes species variations such as pygmy, dwarf, miniature and
potbellied.
EUTHANIZE — To put to death in a humane manner.
SECTION 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-2
1:111
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal of the class Aves (birds), class Mammalia
(mammals), class Amphibia (frogs, toads, salamanders, etc.), class
Osteichtyes (bony fishes, etc.), class Monorhina (lampreys, etc.), class
Reptilia (reptiles, etc.), class Crustacea (crayfish, etc.), or class Gastropoda
(slugs, snails, etc.) which is not normally domesticated in this State.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — Any dog, whether it has been registered or
vaccinated for rabies or not, or other animal which has bitten, been fighting
with or consorted with an animal known or suspected to have rabies or
showing objective symptoms of rabies.
FARM ANIMAL — An animal raised on a farm or ranch and used or intended
for use in farm or ranch production, or as food or fiber.
FULLY VETTED — All veterinarian care required by the State Animal Care
Facility Act or is common practice before an animal is released for adoption.
Example: spay or neuter, rabies and FVRCP or D/P shots as well as
heartworm testing for dogs.
HUMANE MANNER — Care of an animal to include, but not limited to,
adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water,
consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's
size, species, and breed.
IMPOUND — The apprehending, catching, trapping, netting, tranquilizing,
confining, or, if necessary, the destruction of any animal by the Animal
Control Officer or his agent.
IMPOUNDING FACILITIES — Any premises designated by the City for the
purposes of impounding and caring for all animals found in violation of this
Chapter.
KENNEL — Any place or tract of land, whether indoors or outdoors,
whether enclosed or not, used for the purpose of selling, breeding,
boarding, or training dogs or cats or both, or the keeping of four (4) or
more dogs and/or four (4) or more cats over six (6) months of age, or the
keeping of more than five (5) dogs and cats. The word "selling" as herein
used shall not be construed to include the sale of animals six (6) months of
age or younger which are the natural increase of animals kept by persons
not operating a kennel as herein defined; nor shall selling be determined
to include isolated sales of animals over six (6) months old by persons not
operating a kennel as herein defined.
LEASH — Any leash, cord, chain, leather strap or line for leading or
restraining a dog, cat or other animal, and being no longer than six (6) feet
in length.
NEUTERED — Any male animal rendered permanently incapable of
reproduction.
OWNER — Any person owning, keeping or harboring one (1) or more
animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered
for three (3) consecutive days or more. If an owner is a minor, each adult
person having the care, custody and control of such minor is hereby
required to exercise the duties of an owner and for the purposes of this
SECTION 5-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-2
1:112
Chapter, each such person shall conclusively be deemed to be the owner. If
an animal is kept at a household that has more than one (1) adult owner or
tenant of the premises, each such adult is hereby required to exercise the
duties of an owner and for the purposes of this Chapter, each such person
shall conclusively be deemed to be the owner.
REGISTRATION — The procedure by which an owner, or someone for said
owner, shall register a dog and be issued an identification number by the
City of Lexington.
SPAYED — Any female animal rendered permanently incapable of
reproduction.
TAG — Any object, regardless of shape and material, which bears a
registration number and wording that makes reference to rabies
vaccination.
TAG, REGISTRATION — Any object, regardless of shape and material, which
bears a registration number and wording that makes a reference to a dog
license for the City of Lexington, Missouri.
3 CSR 10-9 — Rules of Missouri Department of Conservation, Division 10
— Conservation Commission, Chapter 9 — Wildlife Code: Confined Wildlife:
Privileges, Permits, and Standards.
UNALTERED — Not spayed or neutered.
UNDER RESTRAINT —
VACCINATE — The injection, by a veterinarian, of a specified dose of antirabies
vaccine into the body of an animal.
VACCINATION, REGISTRATION — The procedure of vaccinating for rabies
and issuing an identification number and an appropriate certificate by
a State-licensed veterinarian. The above referenced words shall be
interchangeable.
VETERINARIAN — Any veterinarian holding a current State license.
Any animal, off the premises of its owner's real property, shall be under
restraint within the meaning of this Chapter:
If it is controlled by a line or leash, when said line or leash is held
by a competent person;
a.
b. When within a vehicle being driven, parked or stopped;
When not more than twenty-five (25) feet from a competent person,
if such animal is not annoying or worrying any human being or
domestic animal, or trespassing on private property, or in a public
area where animals are forbidden, and is obedient to that person's
commands.
c.
1.
An animal shall be considered under restraint if it is under the control
of a competent person within the property limits of the owner or keeper
of said animal without the use of a line, leash or fence.
2.
SECTION 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-2
1:113
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat
to human beings or other animals, or having the propensity or tendency to
do an act which may endanger the safety of persons or property of others in
a given situation.
WILDLIFE — See definition of "exotic animal."
SECTION 5-3. Animal Care. [Ord. No. 92-31 § 3, 2-9-1993; Ord. No.
2006-08 § 1, 2-28-2006; Ord. No. 2015-21 § 1, 7-28-2015]
A. It is unlawful to domicile any species of domesticated livestock, poultry,
honey bees, or any wildlife species, including non-human primates and
exotic species, on any premises, in any zoning district, in the City of
Lexington, except as set forth below in this Article.
1. Species permitted in all zoning districts.
a. Poultry.
[1] Chickens: no limit but subject to nuisance ordinances.
[2] Ducks: no limit but subject to nuisance ordinances.
b. Rabbits, domesticated breeds: No limit but subject to nuisance
ordinances.
c. Birds, fish, reptiles, and small animals that are legally sold
through pet stores and not prohibited by Missouri or Federal
law and that do not require a permit from either jurisdiction for
citizens to confine or own. Excludes poisonous or dangerous
snakes and all snakes that mature at over five (5) feet in length.
d. Live fishing bait purchased or obtained from a licensed
commercial fisherman or other legal sources must be species
listed in the Approved Aquatic Species List (3 CSR 10-9.110) of
the Wildlife Code of Missouri). Live bait obtained as described
in this rule may be possessed in any number.
e. Dogs: three (3) over six (6) months old. (Reference Section 5-8
below).
f. Cats: three (3) over six (6) months old. (Reference Section 5-8
below).
2. Species restricted to specific zoning districts.
a. Domesticated fowl hatchlings, not over the age of six (6)
weeks, offered for sale by licensed wholesale or retail
businesses located in a qualifying commercial or industrial
zoned district.
b. Domesticated farm livestock, including but not limited to: as
pets, for food, for breeding purposes, or for commercial sales,
not allowed for any reason in residential zoned districts. They
SECTION 5-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-3
1:114
are allowed in "A-1" General Agricultural District and "HC"
zoning districts. (Refer to Chapter 29 for limitations in "A-1"
and "HC" districts.) Exception: those fowl and animals
delineated in Subsection (A)(1)(a) and (b) above when kept for
non-commercial purposes.
c. Species limitations in Subsection (A)(2)(a) and (b) above do not
apply to "A-1" General Agricultural District and "HC" zoned
properties or to other agriculture properties annexed in the
year 2000 and subsequently zoned to "R-1" or "HC," as long as
the properties continue to be maintained and used for
agriculture purposes. (Refer to Chapter 29 for limitations in
these districts.)
d. Certain wildlife species, as permitted by Missouri Wildlife
Code 3 CSR 10, may be bred and raised for commercial
purposes in "A-1" General Agricultural District and "HC" zoned
districts and other agriculture properties annexed in the year
2000 and subsequently zoned to "R-1" or "HC," as long as the
properties continue to be maintained and used for agriculture
purposes. A permit on review authorization is required prior to
beginning the project.
e. Livestock kept in a clinic for treatment by licensed
veterinarians shall not constitute a violation of this ordinance.
f. Honey bees: restricted to "A-1" General Agricultural District
and "HC" zoned properties and other agriculture properties
annexed in the year 2000 and subsequently zoned to "R-1" or
"HC," as long as the properties continue to be maintained and
used for agriculture purposes; and
[1] Hives of bees are kept in a manner in which they are
inaccessible to the general public and so that bee
movements to and from the hive do not interfere with the
ordinary movements of persons on adjacent properties or
the public right-of-way. Hives shall be located at least 50
feet from the nearest property line.
[2] Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of
water is available to the bees at all times during the year
so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools,
bibcocks, pet watering bowls, bird baths or other water
sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic
pet contact.
[3] No aggressive type bee strains shall be hived in any zoning
district.
[4] The owner's name, address, and telephone number must
be prominently displayed on each hive.
SECTION 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-3
1:115
3. Species not permitted.
a. No wildlife, except as noted in Subsection (A)(2)(d) above,
including non-human primates and exotic species, and
including bird, fish, crayfish, mussel, amphibian, reptile,
mammal, or other forms of wildlife, regardless of classification
or type, may be harbored, possessed, restrained or confined
within the City of Lexington, Missouri, except that:
[1] Such species may be publicly exhibited for not more than
seven (7) days by persons properly licensed in accordance
with Missouri Wildlife Code 3 CSR-10.
[2] May be transported through the City by persons properly
licensed in accordance with Missouri Wildlife Code 3
CSR-10.
[3] This Subsection (A)(3)(a) shall not be construed to apply to
wildlife legally held by circuses, publicly owned zoos,
American Zoo and Aquarium Association (AZA) accredited
not-for-profit facilities, or bona fide research facilities.
B. No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the
weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with
humane care and treatment.
C. No person shall wound, torture, maim, cruelly ill treat, torment,
overload, overwork, mutilate, kill, or otherwise abuse an animal; or
cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans.
D. No person shall give, sell, lend, barter or otherwise knowingly furnish
any instrument, means, compound or other thing to be used for the
purpose of maltreating, torturing, maiming, or killing any animal.
E. No owner of any animal shall abandon such animal within or near the
vicinity of the corporate City limits of Lexington.
F. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the appropriate
local authority.
G. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any
animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on
his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable
substances.
H. No person shall keep or maintain within the City limits any cows,
horses, or other domestic animals or fowls, in any pen, building, or
enclosures, which shall be kept unclean, filthy, or in such a manner as to
SECTION 5-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-3
1:116
SECTION 5-4. Animal Control. [Ord. No. 92-31 § 4, 2-9-1993; Ord.
No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
SECTION 5-5. (Reserved)34
SECTION 5-6. Confinement of Female Animals "In Heat." [Ord. No.
92-31 § 6, 2-9-1993]
Every unspayed female animal when in heat shall be confined in a building
or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female animal cannot come
into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
cause obnoxious or disagreeable odors either from the animals, pens or
enclosures.
I. No person shall tie an animal to a tree or any other object.
A. All animals shall be kept under restraint by the owner or a competent
person on behalf of the animal's owner.
B. No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her
animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. The owner
of every animal shall be held responsible for every behavior of such
animal and shall be held liable for damages caused by such animal
under the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Any dog, cat, or other such domestic animal running at large may be
picked up and impounded by the City Police or the Animal Control
Officer, and the owner thereof notified as soon as is reasonably possible.
D. When and/or if any dog, cat, or other animal is found running at large
and cannot be safely taken up and impounded, then the Animal Control
Officer or any Police Officer is hereby authorized to use such force as
may be necessary to capture said animal, including the actual killing of
such animal.
E. Any owner who permits any animal, while kept upon his premises, to
fight, howl, bark, yelp, crow, or make other loud, frequent, habitual
noises for such period of time that such noises shall annoy or disturb
any neighbor or neighborhood shall be deemed guilty of disturbing the
peace and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in this
Chapter.
F. Any owner who shall own, keep or harbor upon his premises any dog,
cat, or other animal that, by threat of attacking or biting, causes fear or
annoyance to the neighborhood or to persons passing upon the streets
or sidewalks, shall be deemed guilty of a public nuisance.
34.Editor's Note: Former Section 5-5, Keeping of Wild Animals, adopted and amended by Ord.
No. 92-31 § 5, 2-9-1993, was repealed 7-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21 § 1.
SECTION 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-7
1:117
SECTION 5-7. Violation of Section 5-4 — Fines. [Ord. No. 92-31 § 7,
2-9-1993; Ord. No. 96-48 § 1, 3-25-1997; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1,
4-14-2015]
SECTION 5-8. Limitation Upon the Number of Dogs/Cats Kept.
[Ord. No. 2000-03 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08 § 1, 2-28-2006;
Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
No person or household shall possess or keep more than three (3) dogs over
the age of six (6) months and/or three (3) cats over the age of six (6) months
unless the person has first obtained a kennel license and has complied with
the zoning requirements that are set forth in the Code of Ordinances for the
City. This provision shall not apply to a lawfully operated commercial kennel
or a kennel maintained in connection with a small animal hospital or the
City animal shelter.
SECTION 5-9. through SECTION 5-15. (Reserved)
A. In the prosecution of a violation under Section 5-4, proof that an animal
was running at large in violation of said Section, together with proof
that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time described in
the complaint, the person who was the owner of such animal, shall
constitute a prima facie presumption sufficient for conviction that the
owner of such animal was the person that permitted such animal to run
at large.
B. Failure to comply with the provisions of such Section shall subject the
owner to the following fines:
1. First offense.
a. Vaccinated: fifty dollars ($50.00).
b. Unvaccinated: seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
2. Second offense.
a. Vaccinated: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
b. Unvaccinated: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00).
3. Third offense.
a. Vaccinated: no less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
b. Unvaccinated: no less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00);
no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
SECTION 5-7 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-9
1:118
ARTICLE II
Vaccination and Registration
SECTION 5-16. Vaccination Required. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II § 1,
2-9-1993]
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City limits to own, keep,
possess, harbor, and control or permit to remain on his premises any dog
or cat over the age of six (6) months which has not been vaccinated against
rabies in accordance with the terms set forth in this Article.
SECTION 5-17. Veterinarian to Perform Rabies Vaccination. [Ord.
No. 92-31 Art. II § 2, 2-9-1993]
Vaccination against rabies shall be performed by a duly licensed
veterinarian.
SECTION 5-18. Requirements for License. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II
§ 3, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
SECTION 5-19. Fees. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II § 4, 2-9-1993; Ord. No.
96-48 § 2, 3-25-1997]
A. A City dog license shall be issued by the City Collector when the
following requirements have been met:
1. An application stating the name, address, and telephone number of
the owner of the dog, in addition to the name, breed, sex,
description of the dog and the date of vaccination against rabies
shall be given to the City Collector.
2. The owner, at the time of application for a dog license, shall deliver
to the City Collector a written memorandum or receipt signed by a
licensed veterinarian, verifying the last date of vaccination of the
dog against rabies. The City Collector shall not issue a license
unless the dog, as shown by the receipt, has been vaccinated for
rabies within one (1) year of said application.
B. The license fee shall be paid to the City Collector at the time of making
application for the license.
A. The annual fees for a dog license shall be as follows:
Dog (neutered male or spayed
female)
$10.00
Dog (unneutered male or
unspayed female)
$15.00
B. The license fee shall be paid to the City Collector at the time of making
application for the license.
SECTION 5-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-20
1:119
SECTION 5-20. Licenses to be Purchased Annually. [Ord. No. 92-31
Art. II § 5, 2-9-1993]
All dog licenses shall be required to be purchased annually and shall be due
and payable by the first (1st) day of May of each year. It shall be unlawful for
any person within the City limits to own, keep, possess, harbor, and control
or permit to remain on his premises any dog over the age of six (6) months
which is not licensed with the City.
SECTION 5-21. Issuance of Tag and Receipt; Records to be Kept of
Tags and Receipt. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II § 6, 2-9-1993]
The City Collector shall issue a receipt and a numbered metallic or plastic
tag for each dog licensed pursuant to this Article and shall maintain for
three (3) years, two (2) records of such receipts and tags, one (1) arranged
alphabetically by the name of the dog owner and the other arranged
numerically by tag number. Such records shall be open to public inspection
at all business hours.
SECTION 5-22. Tag to be Affixed to Collar or Harness. [Ord. No.
92-31 Art. II § 7, 2-9-1993]
The owner of the dog shall cause the City license tags issued by the City to
be securely fastened to a collar or harness. Said collar or harness is to be
worn continuously around the dog's neck and in such a manner that the tag
can be easily seen.
SECTION 5-23. Tags Not to be Used on Dogs for Which Tag was Not
Issued. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II § 8, 2-9-1993]
No person shall use any dog tag for any dog other than the dog for which it
was issued.
SECTION 5-24. Duplicate Licenses. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. II § 9,
2-9-1993]
If a license issued pursuant to this Article is destroyed or lost, a duplicate
or replacement license may be obtained from the City Collector for a fee of
one dollar ($1.00).
SECTION 5-25. Application of Article to Non-Residents. [Ord. No.
92-31 Art. II § 10, 2-9-1993]
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to non-residents of the City
unless they keep a dog within the City for more than thirty (30) days.
SECTION 5-26. through SECTION 5-30. (Reserved)
SECTION 5-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-26
1:120
ARTICLE III
Vicious Dogs
SECTION 5-31. Presence of Dangerous, Vicious, or Ferocious
Animals Prohibited; Penalties. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. III § 1, 2-9-1993;
Ord. No. 2005-28 § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2006-48 § 1, 1-9-2007]
A. Classification. The Animal Control Officer or his designated
representative shall classify any animal with the following
characteristics as a "dangerous animal" for purposes of this Section and
Section 5-31 of this Code:
1. Any animal which has inflicted a severe or fatal injury on a human
on public or private property. "Severe injury" means any physical
injury resulting directly from an animal's bite, which results in
broken bones or lacerations or hospitalization. The victim receiving
severe injuries, as defined above, must provide the Police Chief
with a signed physician's statement documenting the injury and the
treatment qualifying such as a severe injury or sign an
authorization for the release of such statement.
2. Any animal which has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic
animal, without provocation, on public or private property other
than the property of the owner.
3. Any animal which, while on the owner's property, has attacked or
bitten, without provocation, a human being other than the owner or
a member of the owner's family who normally resides at the place
where the animal is kept or domestic animal.
4. Any animal which, while off the owner's property, has killed a
domestic animal, livestock or poultry without provocation.
5. Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of fighting or any animal trained for fighting.
6. Any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a
person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or private
property other than that property of the owner in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack, regardless of whether or not
a person is injured by said animal.
7. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the
safety of human beings or domestic animals.
B. Notice. Within five (5) working days after classifying an animal as a
"dangerous animal", the Animal Control Officer or his designated
representative shall notify the animal's owner of such classification, in
writing. The notice shall identify the requirements and conditions for
maintaining a dangerous animal as set forth in this Section. If the
SECTION 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-31
1:121
owner cannot be located, the animal may be immediately impounded
and notice shall be posted at the owner's last known address.
C. Appeal And Hearing. If the circumstances surrounding the
classification as a dangerous animal under any of the definitions listed
in Subsection (A) of this Section are in dispute or if the animal owner
contests the classification, then the owner has the option of submitting,
within five (5) working days of notice of said classification, a written
request to the Animal Control Officer for a hearing to contest the
"dangerous animal" classification.
1. The City Administrator shall, within ten (10) working days after
receipt of a bona fide written request, designate a hearing officer to
conduct the hearing and render a decision.
2. Pending the outcome of such a hearing, the animal must be
confined in such a manner so as not to be a threat to any person.
The confinement may be on the owner's premises or with a licensed
veterinarian.
3. The hearing officer shall determine whether to declare the animal
to be a "dangerous animal" based upon evidence and testimony
presented at the time of the hearing, in addition to witnesses,
animal control personnel, Police or any other person possessing
information pertinent to such determination. The hearing shall be
informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner may
be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence and
cross-examine witnesses.
4. The hearing officer shall issue a decision after the close of the
hearing and notify the owner in writing of the decision. The owner
or possessor of the animal found to be a "dangerous animal" shall
be required to maintain the animal as herein provided in this Code.
5. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the hearing officer
may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of Lafayette County
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo.; provided
however, that any appeal must be filed with the Circuit Court within
five (5) days of the date of the hearing officer's decision.
D. Exemptions To Dangerous Animal Classification.
1. No animal may be declared a "dangerous animal" if the threat,
injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past,
been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime.
SECTION 5-31 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-31
1:122
2. The Animal Control Officer may, because of extenuating
circumstances, determine from the investigation of an incident that
an animal is not dangerous. However, the owner, being responsible
for said animal, shall be warned of the animal's tendencies and
shall take appropriate action to prevent subsequent incidences.
This, however, does not exempt the owner from being cited for
other animal control ordinance violations.
3. Animals owned by governmental or law enforcement agencies
when being used in the services of those agencies are exempt.
4. Actions to be taken for dangerous animals causing severe or fatal
injuries.
a. An animal responsible for an unprovoked severe or fatal attack
shall be humanely destroyed.
b. An animal responsible for a provoked severe or fatal attack
should be maintained as a dangerous animal pursuant to this
Section of the Code.
E. Dangerous Animals — Owner's Responsibilities. From and after January
9, 2007, owners or keepers of an animal that has been declared a
dangerous animal may maintain the dangerous animal only subject to
the following limitations, requirements and conditions:
1. Registration. Within ten (10) days of January 9, 2007, or the
acquisition of a dangerous animal, every owner or keeper of a
dangerous animal in the City shall register said animal with the
Animal Control Officer of the City on the "dangerous animal"
registry. Failure to so register shall constitute a violation of this
Section. Notice of this requirement shall be given by posting a copy
of this Section in City Hall.
2. Rabies quarantine impoundment. Any dangerous animal which
bites or scratches a human, or any animal which is determined to
be dangerous because of such biting or scratching of a human,
shall be impounded for a ten (10) day rabies quarantine in
accordance with the provisions of this Section of the Code.
3. Collar. Any dangerous animal shall wear at all times a bright
orange collar with a large brightly colored metal tag attached to
the collar so the animal can readily be identified as a dangerous
animal. Any dangerous animal shall also be required to have
attached the City dog tag, the rabies tag and the microchip tag.
4. Loose, unconfined or missing dangerous animal. The owner or
keeper shall notify the Police Department immediately if a
dangerous animal is loose, unconfined or missing, has attacked
another animal or has attacked a human being.
SECTION 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-31
1:123
5. Reporting requirements. The owner or keeper shall notify the
Animal Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours:
a. Death or transfer of ownership. If a dangerous animal has died
or has been sold or given away or otherwise transferred in
ownership or possession. If the animal has been sold, given
away or otherwise transferred in ownership or possession, the
owner or keeper shall provide the Animal Control Officer with
the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or
keeper and, if the animal is kept within the City limits of
Lexington, the new owner or keeper must comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
b. Birth. All offspring born of dangerous animals within the City
must be removed from the City within two (2) months of their
birth.
c. New address. If the owner or keeper of a dangerous animal
moves from one address within the corporate City limits to
another address within the corporate City limits.
6. Confinement.
a. All dangerous animals must be securely confined indoors or in
a securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel or other structure,
except when leashed and muzzled as provided herein. The pen,
kennel or other structure must be suitable to prevent the entry
of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen, kennel or other structure must have
minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet and must
have secure sides and secure top attached to all sides. The pen,
kennel or other structure must be locked with a key or
combination lock when dangerous animals are confined within.
The pen, kennel or other structure must have a secured bottom
or floor attached to all sides; however, if it has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the
ground no less than twelve (12) inches. The enclosure must
also provide protection from the elements for the animal.
b. The enclosure, when occupied by a dangerous animal, shall not
be occupied by any other animal. If the dangerous animal is a
female with offspring under three (3) months of age, the
offspring may occupy the same enclosure as the mother.
c. All structures erected to house dangerous animals must
comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All
such structures must be adequately lifted and ventilated and
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
d. No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any
part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit
such building on its own volition, in addition, no such animal
SECTION 5-31 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-31
1:124
may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are
open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only
obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure.
e. No dangerous animal shall be kept within five hundred (500)
feet of school property.
7. Signs. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his premises that
there is a dangerous animal on the property and which bears a
symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous animal.
This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public
highway or thoroughfare from which the property is entered. In
addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or
pen or fenced yard of such animal.
8. Leash and muzzle. A dangerous animal may be off the owner's
premises if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash not exceeding four (4) feet in length and under the control of
a responsible person. The muzzle must not cause injury to the
animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it
from biting any person or animal.
9. Insurance. The owner or keeper of a dangerous animal shall
present to the Animal Control Officer proof that the owner or
keeper has procured liability insurance in a single incident amount
of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily
injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to
property owned by any persons which may result from the
ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal covering the
twelve (12) month period during which licensing is sought. The
owner or keeper must maintain an effective insurance policy with
the coverage and in the amounts specified herein at all times. This
policy shall contain a provision requiring the City of Lexington
receive ten (10) days' written notice by the insurance company
prior to any cancellation, termination or expiration of the policy.
10. Photographs. All owners or keepers of dangerous animals must,
within ten (10) days of such classification, provide the Animal
Control Officer with three (3) color photographs (one (1) showing
the left profile, one (1) showing the right profile and one (1)
showing the direct face) of the animal, clearly showing the color,
distinguishing markings and approximate size of the animal.
11. Microchip. All dangerous animals shall be required to show proof of
microchip implant from a licensed veterinarian.
12. Compliance, violations and penalties.
a. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dangerous
animal within the City of Lexington to fail to comply with
requirements and conditions set forth in this Section. Any
animal found to be in violation of this Section may be, in
SECTION 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-31
1:125
SECTION 5-32. Leash Law. [Ord. No. 2000-03 § 2, 4-11-2000; Ord.
No. 2005-28 § 2, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2006-48 § 2, 1-9-2007]
Leash. No person shall permit a dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless
such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four (4) feet in
length with a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds. No
person shall permit a dangerous, vicious or ferocious animal to go outside
of its kennel or pen unless in compliance with Section 5-31 of this Code.
SECTION 5-33. through SECTION 5-38. (Reserved)
addition to other penalties provided by the Municipal Code,
subject to immediate seizure and impoundment for a minimum
of ten (10) days or the time necessary for the owner or keeper
to show compliance with this Section, whichever is shorter.
b. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
Section shall be punished as provided in Section 5-69 of this
Chapter. In addition to any penalty as provided above, the
court shall order the registration of the subject dangerous
animal revoked and the animal revoked from the City. Should
the defendant refuse to remove the animal from the City, the
Municipal Court Judge may find the defendant owner in
contempt and order the immediate confiscation and
impoundment of the animal. Each day that a violation of this
Section continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In
addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates
this Section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food,
handling, veterinary care and testimony, necessitated by the
enforcement of this Section.
F. Guard Animal.
1. No person shall own, keep, harbor, maintain or allow to be upon
any premises occupied by him or under his charge or control any
guard animal without such animal being confined behind a fence
from which it cannot escape. No guard animal may be kept in any
part of a house or structure when the windows are open or when
screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing
the animal from exiting the structure. Guard animals must not be
used or maintained in a manner which, as determined by the
Animal Control Officer, endangers individuals on or off the
premises guarded.
2. Any guard animal, including law enforcement dogs, used in the City
by virtue of such use is hereby declared to be subject to the license
and rabies vaccination requirements of this Chapter.
3. All guard animals residing in or used as such in the City of
Lexington must be registered annually with the Animal Control
Officer.
SECTION 5-31 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-33
1:126
ARTICLE IV
Impoundment
SECTION 5-39. Authority to Impound. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. IV § 1,
2-9-1993]
Unrestrained, unlicensed, abandoned, vicious, and/or nuisance animals
shall be seized by the Animal Control Officer, or any Police Officer, and
impounded in an animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.
SECTION 5-40. Confinement Period. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. IV § 2,
2-9-1993; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than seven (7) business days
from the date of capture if not retrieved earlier by the owner.
SECTION 5-41. Notification to Owner of Impoundment. [Ord. No.
92-31 Art. IV § 3, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
If the owner of an impounded animal can, by any reasonable means, be
identified and located by inquiring of residents of the neighborhood where
the animal was found, by identification of owners using information found
on any tags or microchip that may be on the animal, or by utilizing any
social media available in the area, the Animal Control Officer shall take
immediate action to notify the owner.
SECTION 5-42. Reclamation Fees. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. IV § 4,
2-9-1993; Ord. No. 96-48 § 3, 3-25-1997; Ord. No. 2002-40 § 1,
9-10-2002]
An owner redeeming an impounded animal shall pay, before release, the
following reclamation fees:
1. First impoundment $15.00 plus boarding fee
2. Second impoundment $30.00 plus boarding fee
3. Third impoundment $40.00 plus boarding fee
4. Fourth impoundment Not returned
A boarding fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each twentyfour
(24) hours or fraction thereof that the animal has been impounded.
Impoundment fees, boarding fees and/or any other related fees shall be
paid to the City Collector before a receipt is provided to the owner in order
for the animal to be redeemed.
SECTION 5-43. Vaccination Required Prior to Release. [Ord. No.
92-31 Art. IV § 5, 2-9-1993]
All animals shall be vaccinated, registered, and bear appropriate tags
before being released to the owner. The Animal Control Officer shall have
authority to cause vaccination-registration of those animals having
SECTION 5-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-43
1:127
identifiable owners seeking to reclaim the animal. A vaccination fine of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed and paid for each animal not vaccinated
at time of capture. The vaccination fine will apply in addition to other
outstanding reclamation fines.
SECTION 5-44. Disposition of Unclaimed Animals. [Ord. No. 92-31
Art. IV § 6, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within seven (7) calendar days from
the date of capture may be disposed of in one (1) of the following ways, but
in no other ways:
SECTION 5-45. Adoption. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. IV § 7, 2-9-1993; Ord.
No. 96-48 § 4, 3-25-1997; Ord. No. 2015-11 § 1, 4-14-2015]
SECTION 5-46. Diseased or Injured Animal — Release. [Ord. No.
92-31 Art. IV § 8, 2-9-1993]
1. By euthanasia, using a method approved by the Humane Society of the
United States.
2. By release for adoption by a new owner who shows evidence of ability
and intention to provide the animal with an appropriate home and
humane care.
A. No impounded dog or cat shall be released for adoption without being
vaccinated within seven (7) business days of release. Persons failing to
vaccinate adopted animals within the required time following release
shall be punished by a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
B. No unaltered animal shall be released for adoption unless a licensed
veterinarian certifies in writing that he has been paid in full for altering
of the dog or cat and will perform the operation within thirty (30) days
or before the dog's first estrous period.
C. Any new owner adopting an animal from the dog pound shall first obtain
a license for the animal (if a license is required) and shall, in addition,
pay an adoption fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
D. An adoption contract, conforming to the requirements of the Animal
Care Facilities Act (MO ACFA 30-9.020) and Sections 273.400 thru
273.405, RSMo., will be completed with a copy to the adopter, City and
vetting entity. In addition to Missouri State requirements, the contract
shall show how the animal was acquired, description and receipt of fees
paid, and release of responsibility.
E. A new owner adopting an animal from the pound shall pay all of the
vetting fees for animals being adopted and a copy of the medical
records will be provided to the adopter.
A. Every animal impounded which is found to be diseased or injured and in
the opinion of the Animal Control Officer is deemed to be a danger to
SECTION 5-43 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-46
1:128
SECTION 5-47. Impoundment of Animals Suspected of or Having
Bitten or Scratched Any Person or Animal; Penalty for Failure to
Comply. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. IV § 9, 2-9-1993]
SECTION 5-48. Reimbursement of Cost for Animal Impoundment or
Boarding. [Ord. No. 98-14 § I, 4-28-1998]
the public or itself, and whose owner seeks release, shall be released to
the owner or to a licensed veterinarian acting in the owner's behalf. All
such expenses shall be the owner's responsibility.
B. Every animal impounded which is founded to be diseased or injured in
the opinion of the Animal Control Officer and whose owner is unknown,
may be immediately disposed of by euthanasia.
A. If any animal has bitten or scratched any person, or in the event that
said animal is suspected to have bitten or scratched any person, it shall
be held for observation for a period of ten (10) days at a veterinarian
hospital or clinic, or such other place as may be designated by the City
Council, and the owner shall pay all costs. If the owner is not found, or
the animal is not claimed, then the City shall pay the cost of
impoundment for the purpose of insuring the health and welfare of the
City residents. Any unclaimed or disowned dog shall be disposed of
after the ten (10) day observation period unless said dog is redeemed
and all costs in connection with the observation be paid all in
accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the City of
Lexington.
B. If the owner of any dog, upon request by any member of the
Department of Police, or any Animal Control Officer, shall refuse or
neglect to surrender said dog for the purpose of having the dog
confined for observation as provided herein, he shall upon conviction be
found guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and any
law enforcement officer of the City of Lexington shall be authorized to
enter upon the private premises of said owner for the purpose of taking
the dog.
A. Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the
provisions of Chapter 5 ("Animals and Fowl"), the court may, in addition
to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the person to
reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs associated with
such violation.
B. Such costs shall include the reasonable costs of causing the
impoundment or boarding of any animal or fowl, including the costs of
any chemical tests to determine any illness which may be a concern to
the health and safety of other animals and citizens of the City of
Lexington, Missouri, and the costs of feeding, watering, caring for and
euthanization of the animal or fowl.
SECTION 5-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-48
1:129
SECTION 5-49. through SECTION 5-55. (Reserved)
C. The schedule of costs for submission to the court will be set by City
Council and made a part of Chapter 5 of the City Code of the City of
Lexington, Missouri.
D. These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the Municipal
Court and shall be collected by the court in the same manner as other
costs and fees are collected and remitted to the City Treasurer.
SECTION 5-48 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-49
1:130
ARTICLE V
Rabies Control and Animal Bite Procedure35
SECTION 5-56. Biting. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. V § 1, 2-9-1993]
SECTION 5-57. Confinement of Animals Exposed to Rabies. [Ord.
No. 92-31 Art. V § 2, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 2005-28 § 3, 8-9-2005]
Every rabid animal or animal exposed to rabies shall be immediately
confined by the Animal Control Officer or by a licensed veterinary hospital.
The owner shall be responsible for all costs. The animal may be quarantined
a maximum of two (2) weeks, but shall be released earlier if certified by a
licensed veterinarian to be free of rabies.
A. No dog, cat, or other animal shall be kept in any way by its owner so as
to permit it to bite members of the public.
B. The owner of any dog, cat or other animal which bites any person,
regardless of the circumstances, or irrespective of whether such dog is
vaccinated and registered, shall be required to place such dog, cat or
other animal in the custody of the Animal Control Officer and in a
manner that will prevent contact with people and other animals for a
period of ten (10) days, following the evening of the day of the bite, for
the purpose of clinical observation. All expenses shall be borne by the
owner of the dog, cat, or other animal. If such dog, cat or other animal
develops clinical symptoms suggestive of rabies, it shall be allowed to
die a natural death, or, if for any reason, such dog, cat, or other animal
dies while in confinement, it head shall be removed by a licensed
veterinarian and submitted to a qualified laboratory. If, at the end of
such ten (10) day period, such dog, cat or other domestic animal is alive
and healthy, it may be released to its owner upon payment of applicable
fines.
C. All animals under clinical observation as the result of biting a person
must fulfill all other conditions of this Article prior to release.
D. It shall be the duty of any person bitten by any animal or the parent or
guardian of any minor bitten by an animal to report the same to the City
Police Department immediately. Such report shall contain the name and
address of the owner and of the animal, the day and time bitten, and
location where bitten, and a general description of the animal. The
person bitten shall also make himself available so as to permit viewing
of the wound by the Police Officer or Animal Control Officer, his agents,
and all other concerned parties and persons.
35.State Law Reference — Protection against rabies, RSMo., Chapter 322.
SECTION 5-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-58
1:131
SECTION 5-58. Animal or Body of Animal Exposed to Rabies shall
be Surrendered Upon Demand. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. V § 3, 2-9-1993]
The body of any animal dead of rabies or having been exposed to rabies
prior to death, shall be surrendered by the owner upon demand of the
Animal Control Officer or a Police Officer.
SECTION 5-59. Killing or Removing From City Animals Exposed to
Rabies Prohibited; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art. V § 4, 2-9-1993]
No person shall kill a rabid animal or an animal exposed to rabies, nor
remove any such animal from the City, without permission from the Animal
Control Officer or a Police Officer, except when it is necessary to kill such
animal to prevent it from escaping or from biting any other animal or
person.
SECTION 5-60. through SECTION 5-65. (Reserved)
SECTION 5-58 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-60
1:132
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
SECTION 5-66. Right of Entry of Police Officers and Animal Control
Officer — Interfering with Police Officer and Animal Control Officer.
[Ord. No. 92-31 Art. VI § 1, 2-9-1993]
The civil and criminal provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by
the Animal Control Officer and/or the Police Department for the City of
Lexington. Any Police Officer or Animal Control Officer is authorized to
enter any premises where a dog, cat, or other animal is kept or harbored
to inspect conditions under which the dog, cat, or other animal is kept, and
has complete and full authority to require the owner to exhibit a license for
the dog. No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with the Animal Control
Officer or any Police Officer in the performance of his or her duties. This
Article is subject to all constitutional rights of property owners.
SECTION 5-67. Interference with Enforcement. [Ord. No. 92-31 Art.
VI § 2, 2-9-1993]
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open the pound
or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any dog, cat or other animal
therefrom. Any person who shall interfere with, resist, hinder, or obstruct
an official in the enforcement of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
SECTION 5-68. Prosecution of Owner when Dog is At Large. [Ord.
No. 92-31 Art. VI § 3, 2-9-1993]
Whenever a dog is at large, known to be owned, harbored, kept or fed at a
certain residence or by a certain family, then the head of such residence or
family, or any adult living there is hereby declared to be the owner of said
dog and shall be charged with a violation of this Section even though the
dog is not captured; and the officer may, upon request, search the premises
where he believes the dog is kept to attempt to verify that said dog is being
kept by such person as owner.
SECTION 5-69. Penalties — When not Specified. [Ord. No. 92-31
Art. V § 4, 2-9-1993]
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any
provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). If any violation be continuing, each
day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
SECTION 5-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 5-69
1:133
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Cross References — Fire prevention and protection, § 9-1 et seq.; Unsafe
structures declared a nuisance, § 18-91; Municipal auditorium, § 16-1 et
seq.; Planning and zoning generally, § 20-1 et seq.; Streets, sidewalks and
public grounds, § 23-1 et seq.; Subdivisions, § 24-1 et seq.; Water and
sewers, § 28-1 et seq.; Building inspector/code enforcement
officer — authorized to enforce ch. 6, § 2-209.
SECTION 5-69 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 5-69
1:134
ARTICLE I
Dangerous Buildings
The provisions contained in this Article are referred to as the "Dangerous
and Nuisance Building Code of the City of Lexington, Missouri," and may be
cited as such in any proceedings under this Article.
SECTION 6-1. Conditions of Buildings or Structures Constituting a
Dangerous Building and/or Public Nuisance. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-201436]
A. Definitions Specific To Chapter 6:
DANGEROUS BUILDING — Any building or structure having any of the
conditions listed in Section 6-1(B) below.
DILAPIDATED — Any one (1) or all of the following: decayed, decaying,
deteriorated, or fallen into partial ruin especially through neglect or
misuse, abandoned, battered, broken-down, crumbling, decrepit, fallen
in, falling apart, in ruins, ramshackle, rickety, ruined, run-down, shabby,
shaky, tumbledown, uncared for, worn-out.
GENDER — A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations
as well as to males.
INTERESTED PARTIES — The owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee,
agent and all other persons having an interest in the building,
structure, premises, or equipment as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds for Lafayette County, will be considered as a party/
parties as that term is used within this Chapter.
OCCUPIED — A structure, building, mobile home, vehicle, or other
place suitable for human occupancy which has a person/persons living
in, dwelling in, inhabiting, residing in, or working in said structure,
building, mobile home, vehicle, or other place and such structure,
building, mobile home, vehicle, or other place is legally connected to
and using all of the following:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — All buildings or structures defined by the terms
of Section 6-1(B) as dangerous buildings or structures.
An approved and functioning method of wastewater treatment and
disposal;
1.
2. The public electrical system;
3. An approved and functioning water supply.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Dangerous Buildings, adopted
3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 03-85-05, as amended.
SECTION 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-1
1:135
B. Dangerous Buildings or Structures. Any building or structure having
any of the following conditions is hereby declared a dangerous building:
1. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structure members list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through
the center of gravity falls outside the middle one-third (1/3) of its
base.
2. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting
members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the
non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
3. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used or
intended to be used.
4. Those which have been substantially damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood, neglect, or by any other cause(s).
5. Those which are unoccupied and are open at door, window, wall or
roof. As used herein, an "unoccupied" building is one which is:
abandoned or uninhabited for any residential or nonresidential
purpose; "open" at door, window, wall or roof when, because of
removal, breakage, deterioration, destruction, disrepair, or decay,
the interior has become exposed to the elements and the structure
has become an attractive nuisance, including being accessible for
entry by animals, trespassers or others acting without the building
owner's consent.
6. Those under construction upon which work has ceased to the point
that substantial progress has not been made for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days after a notice has been issued under
Section 6.6 for the completion or demolition thereof.
7. Those in the process of demolition upon which work has ceased to
the point that substantial progress has not been made for a period
of seven (7) consecutive calendar days after a notice has been
issued under Section 6.6 for the completion or demolition thereof.
8. Those containing therein substantial accumulations of trash,
garbage or other materials susceptible to fire, or constituting or
providing a harboring place for vermin or other obnoxious animals
or insects, or in any way threatening the health of the occupants
thereof or the health of persons in the vicinity thereof.
9. Those condemned as unfit for human occupancy under Section
108.1.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, or
subsequent versions thereof, and upon which no substantial work
has been performed to remedy the conditions causing the
condemnation thereof for a period of thirty (30) consecutive
SECTION 6-1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-1
1:136
SECTION 6-2. Dangerous Buildings are Nuisances. [Ord. No.
2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
All dangerous buildings and structures, as defined by the terms of Section
6-1(B) of this Chapter, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided by this Chapter.
SECTION 6-3. Building Commissioner. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-2014]
The Mayor of the City of Lexington or his designee shall be the Building
Commissioner.
calendar days after a notice has been issued under Section 6-6
for the demolition or repair of the building. [Ord. No. 2018-38,
11-27-2018]
10. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or other
panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes
or other means of exit.
11. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or
deteriorated that they may fall upon public ways or upon the
property of others or may injure members of the public or the
occupants thereof.
12. Those buildings existing in violation of any building, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, fuel gas, fire, or zoning codes or other
ordinances of the City of Lexington and used in violation thereof,
which makes the building unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the building occupants,
adjacent properties, or their occupants, or the general public.
13. Those which are used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes
and, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, are determined by the Building Official or
his representatives to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or
in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, or a
detriment to the safety or general welfare of those occupying such
buildings.
14. Those buildings or structures which, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition(s), deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring,
gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, are
determined by the Building Official and Fire Chief to be a fire
hazard.
SECTION 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-3.1
1:137
SECTION 6-3.1. Duties of Building Commissioner. [Ord. No.
2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
The Building Commissioner shall:
1. The Building Commissioner shall supervise all inspections required by
this Chapter and cause the Building Official and Building Inspector to
make inspections and perform all of the duties required of him by this
Chapter.
2. Upon receipt of a report from the Building Official of failure to vacate or
to commence work of reconditioning or demolition within the time
specified or upon failure to proceed continuously with the work without
unnecessary delay, the Building Commissioner shall call and have a full
and adequate hearing upon the matter.
3. Give at least ten (10) business days' written notice to the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an
interest in the dangerous building, as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of Lafayette County, to appear before him on the
date specified in the notice to show cause why the building, structure,
premises or equipment reported to be a dangerous building should not
be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished in
accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in notice of the
Building Official. Such notice shall be served either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting such notice on
the premises. If service cannot be had by the methods set forth above, a
notice to the owner of the hearing shall be had by publication in a
newspaper qualified to publish legal notices. Any party may be
represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be
heard. The City is to be notified in writing, no later than ten (10)
calendar days before the hearing date, if any party will be bringing
legal counsel so arrangements for the attendance of the City Attorney
may be made.
4. Make written findings of fact from the evidence offered at the hearing
as to whether or not the building or structure in question is a dangerous
building within the terms of Section 6-1(B) of this Chapter.
5. After the hearing, if the evidence supports a finding that the building,
structure, premises or equipment is a nuisance or detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the City, the Building
Commissioner or designated officer shall issue an order making specific
findings of fact, based upon competent and substantial evidence, that
shows the building, structure, premises or equipment to be a nuisance
and detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
City and ordering the building, structure, premises or equipment to be
demolished and removed or repaired. If the evidence does not support a
finding that the building, structure, premises or equipment is a
nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents
of the City, no order shall be issued.
SECTION 6-3.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-3.1
1:138
SECTION 6-4. Building Official. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
If the City employs only one Building Inspector, that Inspector shall act as
the City Building Official.
SECTION 6-4.1. Duties of Building Official or Building Inspector.
[Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
6. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the
order, or extension of time, within thirty (30) days, the Building Official
shall cause the building or structure to be repaired, vacated and
repaired, or vacated and demolished, as the facts may warrant, under
the standards herein provided for in Section 6-8 of this Chapter, and the
Building Official shall certify the charge for such repair, vacation or
demolition and its administrative costs to the City Clerk as a special
assessment represented by a special tax bill against the real property
affected in accordance with Section 6-9 of this Article.
A. The Building Official or Building Inspector shall:
1. Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary, all
residential, institutional, assembly, commercial, industrial, garage,
special or miscellaneous occupancy buildings for the purpose of
determining whether any conditions exist that render that place to
be a dangerous building when he has reasonable grounds to believe
that the building is dangerous.
2. Inspect any building, wall, or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person or any department of the City alleging that the
building or structure contains any of the conditions described in
Section 6-1(B).
3. Post any building, structure or property, when it reasonably
appears to the Inspector that there is an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of any persons because of any condition
described in Section 6-1(B), with a notice reading substantially as
follows: "DANGEROUS BUILDING, THIS STRUCTURE IS UNSAFE
AND ITS OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE CITY
CODE OFFICIAL."
4. Serve notice of the declaration of nuisance for buildings or
structures deemed to be dangerous buildings in accordance with
Section 6-6 of this Article.
B. Absent exigent or emergency circumstances, whenever it is necessary
to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter,
the Building Official or his representative may enter the building,
structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed by this Article, provided that, if the building
or structure is occupied, he has first presented proper credentials and
has requested and received permission to make the inspection from the
SECTION 6-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-4.1
1:139
SECTION 6-5. Inspections by Persons Other Than Building Official
or Building Inspector. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
Whenever the Building Official shall deem it advisable, he may also request
inspections be made by the Fire Department, Health Department, or by
any other department of the City or appropriate agency, or by any person
who might have knowledge and information useful in the determination of
whether a building or structure is a public nuisance or, if so, how it might
be alleviated. In addition, the Building Official, if he deems it advisable,
may request such an inspection be made by an architect or engineer at the
expense of the property owner, with approval from the City Administrator
or the Mayor.
SECTION 6-6. Notice of Public Nuisance and Order of Abatement.
[Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
Whenever the Building Official or Building Inspector has determined that
any building or structure is a public nuisance under the provisions of this
Article, he shall, as soon as possible thereafter, serve notice to the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest
in the building or structure, as shown by the land records of the Recorder
of Deeds for Lafayette County, that such building or structure has been
found to be a public nuisance under the provisions of this Article. The notice
shall set forth the description of the conditions found in the building or
structure so as to constitute the building or structure as a public nuisance
under Section 6-1(B). The notice shall also provide for abatement of the
nuisance by ordering the building or structure to be vacated, if such be the
case, reconditioned, repaired, removed or demolished, giving a reasonable
time for commencement of the work, but not exceeding thirty (30) days'
time, and requiring the work to proceed continuously without unnecessary
delay. The Building Official may grant an extension of time to complete the
abatement process, and such extension of time must be given in writing.
The notice of public nuisance and order of abatement may be served in the
manner set forth in Section 6-6.1.
SECTION 6-6.1. Service of Notices. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-2014]
owner, occupant or other person having possession, management or
control of the building, structure or premises. Reasonable effort shall
be made to locate the owner, occupant or other person having
possession, management or control of the building, structure or
premises. In the event that permission to conduct the inspection is
denied, the Building Official shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to,
requesting an appropriate order from a Judge of the Municipal or
Circuit Court having competent jurisdiction. The Building Official or his
representative may enter abandoned buildings, structures or premises
without consent or a search warrant for the purpose of conducting an
inspection pursuant to this Chapter.
SECTION 6-4.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-6.1
1:140
SECTION 6-6.2. Posting Notice on Building; Removal of Notice;
Entry. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
A. Whenever, under this Article, a notice is required to be served upon the
persons with a vested interest in the building or structure, the notice
shall be in writing and signed by the Building Official or on his behalf by
an inspector of buildings who shall have made an inspection of the
building or structure of which the notice is to be given. The notice shall
be served by one (1) of the following methods:
1. Delivered personally. The notice may be served by handing the
notice to the person to be served by anyone competent to be a
witness or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the
one to be served with a member of the household over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
2. Service may be made by certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the person's last known address. Mail returned by the
United States Post Office marked "refused" shall constitute proof of
service; if the certified mailing shall be returned by the United
States Post Office marked "address unknown" or "unclaimed," it
shall not be considered legal service.
3. If the party to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after
diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such party by
posting the order on the building or structure described in the
order.
A. A notice of the dangerous condition of a building shall be posted on any
building determined to be a dangerous building. The notice shall
contain the words, "DANGEROUS BUILDING. This structure is unsafe
and its occupancy has been prohibited by the Code Official." followed by
text authorized by the Building Official.
B. Any person removing, defacing, or mutilating the "DANGEROUS
BUILDING" notice placed on a dangerous building shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense.
C. No person shall enter a building that has been posted as provided above
unless such entry is authorized by the Building Official. This does not
prevent entry at their own risk by the owner or an agent of the owner
for the purpose of repair or demolition. Any person entering a building
without authorization shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as set forth in Lexington City Code,
Chapter 1, Section 1-8.
SECTION 6-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-7
1:141
SECTION 6-7. Standards for Determining Action Required to
Alleviate Public Nuisance. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
Whenever a notice shall be given that any building or structure constitutes a
public nuisance under the provisions of this Article, the Building Official or
Building Inspector giving the notice shall base his order as to the necessary
actions to abate the nuisance by observance of the following standards:
SECTION 6-8. Failure to Comply with Building Commissioner
Decision. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
Non-Compliance. If, within sixty (60) days, the record owner, appellant,
or any other person entitled to service of notice pursuant to Section 6-6
1. If the conditions which cause the building or structure to be a public
nuisance can be reasonably repaired or maintained so that the building
or structure will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Article,
the building or structure shall be ordered so repaired or maintained,
and if it is not repaired or maintained by the owner, then the City may
abate the nuisance by repairing, securing, boarding, demolition or
other appropriate means.
2. In any case where the state of deterioration of a building or structure
constituting the public nuisance is such that necessary repairs would
amount to a substantial reconstruction of the building or structure, it
shall be ordered repaired or demolished, and if it is not repaired or
demolished by the owner, then the City may abate the nuisance by
repairing, securing, boarding, demolition or other appropriate means.
3. In all cases where the conditions causing the building or structure to be
a public nuisance cannot be reasonably repaired or maintained so that
the building or structure will no longer exist in violation of the terms of
this Article, the building or structure shall be demolished.
4. If the conditions are such as to make the building or structure
immediately dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants,
the building or structure shall be ordered vacated pending abatement
of the nuisance.
5. Any building or structure constituting a public nuisance because of the
conditions described in Section 6-1(B)(6) shall be ordered to be
completed in accordance with lawful plans and specifications; and if it
shall not be so completed or demolished by the owner within the time
specified in the order of abatement, then the City shall abate the
nuisance by demolition.
6. Any building or structure found to be a public nuisance because of the
conditions described in Section 6-1(B)(7) shall be ordered demolished
by the owner within the time specified in the order of abatement; and if
the owner fails to do so, then the City shall abate the nuisance by
demolition. The owner may appeal this decision according to Section
6-14.
SECTION 6-7 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-8
1:142
fails to comply with the decision and order of the Building Commissioner,
the Building Official shall advise the City Administrator/Mayor, who will
authorize abatement of the violation. The Building Official shall cause the
building or structure to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and
demolished, as the facts may warrant, under the standards herein provided
for in Section 6-7, Subsection (6), of this Chapter.
SECTION 6-9. Issuance of Tax Bill for Cost of Work; Manner of
Payment. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
SECTION 6-9.1. Enforcement of Tax Bills. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-2014]
A. Whenever the City shall have caused the work to be done as provided
by Section 6-2, 6-8, or 6-16 or incurred costs for emergency abatement
as provided in Section 6-8 or 6-10, the Building Official shall certify the
cost of the work to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall cause the amount
of unrecovered costs to be included in a special tax bill or added to the
annual real estate tax bill for the property, at the collecting official's
option, and the costs shall be collected by the City Collector collecting
taxes in the same manner and procedure for collecting real estate
taxes. This tax bill shall be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of land
upon which the building or structure is located and against the property
owner. The special tax bill, from the date of its issuance, shall be
deemed the personal debt of the property owner and shall also be a lien
on the lot, tract, or parcel of land until paid and shall be registered in
the office of the City Clerk in a book kept by her for such purposes.
B. At the written request of the taxpayer delivered to the City Clerk, a tax
bill for repair or demolition of a building or structure may be paid in ten
(10) equal annual installments, which installments, with interest
thereon to date on the unpaid balance, shall be due annually on the
anniversary of the date of issuance of the bill. Interest shall be at the
rate of eight percent (8%) per annum on the unpaid balance of the
special assessment, computed from the date of issuance. If any annual
payment of principal or interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days
of its due date, the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall
immediately become due and payable.
C. If a request for ten (10) annual payments is not made prior to the time
the Building Official shall certify the cost of the work to the City Clerk,
the tax bill shall be payable in sixty (60) days from its date of issuance,
with interest thereon at eight percent (8%) per annum until paid.
A. Special tax bills issued under Section 6.9 shall be prima facie evidence
of the validity of the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the
property and the property owner for the charges stated in the bill and
shall be collected if default should occur by suit brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction on behalf of the City. Judgment in any such suit
may, at the election of the City, order the property sold under special
SECTION 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-9.1
1:143
SECTION 6-10. Emergency Cases. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
In all cases where it reasonably appears that an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of any person exists, the Building Official may take
emergency measures to vacate, repair or demolish a building or structure
which is a public nuisance under the provisions of this Article.
SECTION 6-11. Unlawful to Allow an Unoccupied Building to
Become Open. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I, 3-11-2014]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any unoccupied building to allow
the same to become open at door, window, wall or roof for a period of
time exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, except when such building is being
boarded, repaired or demolished under a valid permit issued by the Codes
Administration Department of the City.
SECTION 6-11.1. Administrative Liability. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-2014]
SECTION 6-11.2. Insurance Proceeds. [Ord. No. 2014-06 § I,
3-11-2014]
writ of execution, with the proceeds thereof being applied first to
the costs of sale, and the remainder to the amount of the judgment,
provided the property owner shall remain personally liable for the
amount of any deficiency remaining if the proceeds of sale are not
sufficient to pay the full amount of the lien, or the City may forego the
lien and elect to take a personal judgment against the property owner
for the entire amount of the unpaid special tax bill, with a general
execution to issue therefor.
B. Notwithstanding any provision above to the contrary, the City may
discharge the special tax bill upon a determination by the City that a
public benefit will be gained by such discharge, and such discharge
shall include any costs of tax collection, accrued interest, or attorneys'
fees related to the special tax bill.
A. No officer, agent or employee of this City shall be personally liable for
any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act
required of him or permitted to be taken by him in the discharge of his
duties under this Chapter.
B. Any person who prevents, obstructs, resists or otherwise interferes
with a City officer or official in the administration of his duties under
this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/
or thirty (30) days in jail for each offense.
A. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered
claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or structure
caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss,
SECTION 6-9.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-11.2
1:144
and if the covered claim payment is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
the face value of the policy covering a building or other structure, then
the following procedure shall apply:
1. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment twentyfive
percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and shall pay the
amount to the City to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any
named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority
over any obligation under this Section.
2. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has
accrued on such proceeds received under Subsection (A)(1) of this
Section to the insured, or as the terms of the policy and
endorsements thereto provide, within thirty (30) days after receipt
of such insurance monies, unless the City has instituted legal
proceedings under the provisions of Chapter 6. If the City has
proceeded under the provisions of Chapter 6, all monies in excess
of that necessary to comply with the provisions of this Section for
the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, shall be
paid to the insured.
3. The City may certify that, in lieu of payment of all or part of the
covered claim payment under this Section, it has obtained
satisfactory proof that the insured has or will remove debris and
repair, rebuild or otherwise make the premises safe and secure. In
this event, the City shall issue a certificate within thirty (30) days
after receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to the
insured without deduction. It shall be the obligation of the insured
or other person making claim to provide the insurance company
with the written certificate provided for in this Subsection.
4. No provisions of this Section shall be construed to make the City a
party to any insurance contract.
SECTION 6-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-11.2
1:145

ARTICLE II
Appeals
SECTION 6-12. Appeal to the Board of Code Appeals. [Ord. No.
96-25 § 3, 11-12-1996]
A. Appeal. Any person entitled to service of the notice and order of the
Building Official may appeal from such notice and order, or any other
action of the Building Official under this Chapter, by filing at the office
of the Building Official a written appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words. "Before the Board of Code Appeals of the
City of Lexington, Missouri. . ."
2. A caption reading. "Appeals of . . ." giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and
order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific
order or action protested, together with any material fact claimed
to support the contentions of the appellant. Only those matters or
issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the
hearing of the appeal.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
7. The verification by declaration under penalty of perjury of at least
one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. Fees. The fee for such appeal shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and shall accompany the application for appeal. The application fee
shall not be refundable.
C. Timing Of Appeal. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from
the date of the service of such notice and order or action of the Building
Official. However, if the building or structure is in such condition as to
make it an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person,
or any adjacent property as defined in Section 6-10, and is ordered
vacated and is posted in accordance with Section 6-10, such appeal
shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice
and order of the Enforcement Officer.
D. Stay Of Order. Except for orders to vacate the premises made pursuant
to Section 6-10, enforcement of any notice and order of the Building
SECTION 6-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-12
1:147
SECTION 6-13. Board of Code Appeals. [Ord. No. 96-25 § 3,
11-12-1996]
The Municipal Code of the City of Lexington establishing a Board of Code
Appeals is hereby adopted with the duties and powers as set forth in Section
6-14 herein to be in addition to all other powers, duties and responsibilities
referred to in Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code of the City of Lexington.
Official issued under this Chapter shall be stayed during the pendency
of a properly and timely filed appeal.
E. Failure To Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance
with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a waiver of the right
to request an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and
order, or to any portion thereof.
1. Creation, composition, qualifications. The Board of Code Appeals shall
consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members, who shall be
electors of the City and who shall have the qualifications as follows:
building maintenance, building construction and business experience
and knowledge.
2. Appointment, term of office. The members of such Board of Code
Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the
City Council. One (1) member shall be appointed to serve a one-year
term; two (2) members shall be appointed to serve a two-year term; and
two (2) members shall be appointed to serve a three-year term. Each of
the two (2) alternate members shall be initially appointed to a one-year
term and shall be designated as "first alternate" or "second alternate."
All appointments shall be made effective from the same date, and
annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint as before, or reappoint
members whose terms have expired, to three-year terms of office,
including the alternate members. Appointments to fill unexpired terms
of members or alternates shall be for the remainder of the term.
Members and alternates shall serve until their successors are
appointed, confirmed, and qualified.
3. Election of officers. At the first regular meeting of the Board and
annually thereafter, the Board shall elect one (1) of its members as
President and another as Vice-President.
4. Rules, by-laws, meetings, quorum.
a. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules of procedure
and by-laws, subject to City Council approval, as it shall deem
proper and necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article,
which are not inconsistent with the laws of the State or ordinances
of the City.
b. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of the
Board; however, the President of the Board may call special
meetings by providing notice to each member at least twenty-four
SECTION 6-12 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-13
1:148
SECTION 6-14. Duties of Board of Code Appeals. [Ord. No. 96-25
§ 3, 11-12-1996]
The Board of Code Appeals shall have and perform the following duties
pursuant to this Chapter:
(24) hours prior to such meeting. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public and conducted in compliance with Chapter 610,
RSMo.
c. The Board shall appoint a Secretary, who shall keep the minutes of
all proceedings of the Board which shall show the vote of each
member upon each question. The Secretary shall keep records of
all official actions of the Board, and all minutes and records shall be
kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be open to the
public.
d. Three (3) members or alternate members shall constitute a quorum
of the Board. If one (1) member is absent, the first alternate shall
be designated as a voting member; if the first alternate is also
absent, the second alternate shall be designated as a voting
member. If two (2) members are absent, both the first and second
alternate shall be designated voting members. Every determination
by the Board, in order to carry, must be decided by a quorum of the
Board and must receive the affirmative vote of not less than three
(3) members of the Board.
e. No member or alternate member of the Board shall take part in any
hearing or determination in which they have a personal or financial
interest.
5. Removal of members-filling vacancy-compensation of members. The
Mayor may, by and with the consent of the City Council, remove any
member or alternate member for misconduct or neglect of duty. The
unexpired term of any member or alternate member who shall be so
removed, or who shall resign or for any other reason cease to be a
member of the Board, shall be filled by appointment in the same
manner as described in this Article. No member or alternate member
shall receive compensation for his/her services on the Board of Code
Appeals.
1. Date of hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal under Section 6-12, or after the receipt of the report of the
Building Official pursuant to Section 6-3.1, the Board of Code Appeals
shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Such date shall be not
less than ten (10) working days nor more than sixty (60) days from the
date the appeal was filed with the City Clerk's office from the date the
Building Official filed the report with the Board, whichever is
applicable, unless continued by the Board of Code Appeals for good
cause shown.
SECTION 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-14
1:149
2. Notice. The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Board
of Code Appeals at ___ on the ___ day of ______ 20 ___, at the hour
______, related to the property described as . . . ., to show cause why the
building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not
be repaired, vacated and/or demolished in accordance with the state of
particulars set forth in the Building Official's notice as provided for in
this Chapter. You may be present at the hearing. You may present any
relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all
witnesses testifying against you." Said notice shall advise the recipient
of the procedures involved in the hearing pursuant to this Section.
3. Service of notice. Written notice of the time and location of the hearing,
and any amended or supplemental notice, shall be served upon each
appellant and/or the record owner of the dangerous building.
Additionally, one (1) copy shall be served on each of the following if
known to the Board of Code Appeals or disclosed from the land records
of the Recorder of Deeds of Lafayette County, Missouri:
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease of record;
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest in or to the building
or the land on which it is located; and
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
4. Method of service.
a. Service of the notice of the hearing shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
to each such person at their address as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of Lafayette County or as known to the
Board of Code Appeals. Such notice shall be served or received at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date.
b. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Board of Code Appeals, then notice shall be given by publication in
a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the hearing date, specifically addressed to the person
for whom no address is known and all other persons having an
interest in said building, to appear before the Board of Code
Appeals on the date specified and to show cause why the structure
or building reported to be a dangerous building should be repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of
particulars set forth in the Code Building Official's notice or
SECTION 6-14 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-14
1:150
decision. Said notice shall notify the recipient of the procedures
involved in the hearing pursuant to this Section.
5. Proof of service. If service is obtained by personal service, proof of
service of the notice and order shall be certified as to the time of service
by a written declaration executed by the person effecting service,
declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. This
declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy
of the notice and order retained by the Board of Code Appeals.
6. Failure of service. The failure of the Board of Code Appeals to serve any
person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve
any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions
of this Section.
7. Hearing. Upon receipt of the report of the Building Official or duly filed
appeal, and after having given the required notice, the Board of Code
Appeals shall hold a full and adequate hearing and hear such relevant
testimony as the Code Enforcement Official, any appellant, the record
owner, any other person entitled to service of notice shall offer relative
to the dangerous building.
8. Decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Code Appeals
shall make written findings of fact based upon competent and
substantial evidence offered at the hearing as to whether or not the
building in question is a "dangerous building" as defined by Section 6-1
herein, and:
a. If the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure is a
dangerous building, detrimental to the health, life or safety of any
person or to any adjacent property, the Board of Code Appeals shall
issue an order based upon the findings of fact, commanding the
appellant and/or the record owner, as well as any other person
entitled to notice of the hearing, to vacate and ordering the
demolition of the building or structure.
b. It is further provided that the appellant and/or the record owner, as
well as any other person entitled to notice of the hearing, shall have
the privilege of either repairing or vacating and repairing said
building, if such repair will bring such building into compliance
with the ordinances and codes of the City of Lexington, provided
that such repair is completed within sixty (60) days of the order
being entered by the Board of Code Appeals.
c. The appellant and/or the record owner, as well as any other person
entitled to notice of the hearing, shall have the privilege of vacating
and demolishing said dangerous building at their own risk, to
prevent the City of Lexington from acquiring a lien against said
land on which the dangerous building is located, provided that such
SECTION 6-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-14
1:151
SECTION 6-15. Recording of Certificate of Dangerous Building.
[Ord. No. 96-25 § 3, 11-12-1996]
SECTION 6-16. Failure to Comply with Board Decision — Lien. [Ord.
No. 96-25 § 3, 11-12-1996]
demolition is completed within sixty (60) days of the order entered
by the Board of Code Appeals.
d. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or
structure is a dangerous building, then no order shall be issued.
e. The findings of fact shall be in writing and shall contain findings, a
determination of the issues presented, and an order as to any
requirements to be satisfied. A copy of the decision shall be
personally delivered to the appellant and/or the record owner as
well as any other person entitled to notice of the hearing, or shall
be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested
to each such person. The effective date of the decision shall be as
stated therein.
A. Non-Compliance. If compliance is not had with the order of the Board of
Code Appeals within the time provided, and no appeal is properly and
timely filed pursuant to Section 6-17, a certificate shall be filed in the
Recorder's Office in Lafayette County, Missouri, certifying:
1. The legal description and street address of the property;
2. The building is a dangerous building; and
3. The landowner and all other persons with known interests of
record in the property have been so notified;
4. The decision rendered by the Board of Code Appeals.
B. Subsequent Compliance. In the event that, subsequent to the filing of
the certificate of dangerous building, the corrections ordered shall be
completed or the building demolished, so that the building or structure
no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in
the certificate, a new certificate shall be filed in the Recorder's Office of
Lafayette County, Missouri, certifying that the building is no longer a
dangerous building.
A. Non-Compliance. If, within sixty (60) days, the record owner, appellant,
or any other person entitled to service of notice pursuant to Section
6-14 fails to comply with the decision and order of the Board of Code
Appeals, the Board of Code Appeals or the Building Official shall so
advise the City Administrator, who shall cause such building or
structure to be repaired, vacated and/or demolished as the facts may
warrant.
B. Tax Bill.
SECTION 6-14 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-16
1:152
SECTION 6-17. Appeal to Circuit Court. [Ord. No. 96-25 § 3,
11-12-1996]
Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the decision of the Board of Code
Appeals, any person entitled to notice pursuant to Section 6-14 as to
dangerous building may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of
Lafayette County pursuant to the procedure established in Chapter 536,
RSMo.
SECTION 6-18. Violations and Punishment. [Ord. No. 96-25 § 3,
11-12-1996]
1. Whenever the City shall have caused repair or demolition work to
be completed as provided in the Municipal Code of the City of
Lexington, the Building Official shall certify costs of the repair or
demolition work to the City Clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill
to be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of land until paid, and
shall cause the same to be registered in the office of the Recorder
of Lafayette County and to be mailed by certified mail to all owners
of record of the property. The tax bill shall be collected by the
official collecting taxes.
2. Upon written request of the taxpayer delivered to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days after completion of the demolition or repair
work, a tax bill for repair or demolition of a building or structure
may be paid in ten (10) equal, annual installments, which
installments, with interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance,
shall be due annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of
the bill. Interest shall be paid at the maximum rate per annum
allowable by law on the unpaid balance of the special assessment
computed from the date of issuance. If any annual payment or
principal or interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of its
due date, the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall
immediately become due and payable.
3. If said request for the payment plan is not made within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the repair or demolition work, then the
entire tax bill shall be payable within sixty (60) days of issuance,
with interest thereon.
4. Tax bills so issued shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of
the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property for
the damages stated in the bill. If default should occur, said amounts
shall be collected by suit brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction by the City Attorney on behalf of the City.
A. It is violation of this Chapter to:
1. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate or demolish a
dangerous building given by the Building Official, unless a proper
appeal is duly filed; or
SECTION 6-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-18
1:153
SECTION 6-19. Duties of the City Attorney. [Ord. No. 96-25 § 3,
11-12-1996]
The City Attorney shall prosecute all persons failing to comply with the
terms of the notices and orders provided for herein; appear at all hearings
before the Board of Code Appeals pursuant to this Chapter; bring suit to
collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred by the City in the
repairing or demolishing of dangerous buildings; and take all such other
legal actions as are necessary to carry out and enforce the terms and
provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 6-20. (Reserved)
2. Fail to proceed continuously with the repair or demolition of any
dangerous building without unnecessary delay; or
3. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate or demolish a
dangerous building given by the Board of Code Appeals unless a
proper appeal is duly filed; or
4. Violate any other provision of this Chapter.
Each and every person violating any of the foregoing shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00),
or be imprisoned in jail for not more than three (3) months, or both
such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a person violates any
provision of this Chapter.
SECTION 6-18 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-20
1:154
ARTICLE III
Construction, Renovation and Demolition of Structures
SECTION 6-21. Waste Disposal and Site Management. [Ord. No.
2014-10 § I, 4-22-201437]
A. The Missouri Department of Natural Resources (DNR) regulates,
pursuant to Chapter 260, RSMo., demolition and renovation projects for
institutional, commercial, public and industrial structures, and
residential structure projects such as apartment buildings with more
than four (4) units or two (2) or more residential structures within five
hundred (500) feet of each other. Single residential structures
containing four (4) units or less that have never been used for any
commercial activity, including child or adult care, are "exempt" from
regulation.
B. Disposal of construction, renovation, and demolition waste shall be
according to provisions set forth in this section and current DNR
standards.
C. City of Lexington Regulatory Requirements. In addition to State and
Federal regulations, the City of Lexington, Missouri, herein sets forth
the following additional site safety, cleanup, backfill, disposal, and
permit requirements for all construction, renovation and demolition
activities within the City.
D. Definitions Explicit To Section 6-21.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet in floor area and less than fifteen (15) feet high, having no
basement and not used as a dwelling, the use of which is incidental and
appurtenant to the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
CLEAN DIRT/EARTH — Any type of soil not containing any rock, wood,
brush, vegetation, litter, trash, or construction or building materials.
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated soil, rock, sand, gravel, concrete,
asphaltic concrete, cinder blocks, brick; and minimal amounts of wood
(but not lumber), metal and inert solids used for fill [§ 260.200(5),
RSMo.]. DNR's "minimal amounts" is an amount of less than ten percent
(10%) based on the total volume of material.
Concrete containing wire mesh or rebar, when used as clean fill, must
have protruding rebar or mesh cut off before use.
EXEMPT FROM REGULATION — "Exempt," as used in this Article,
means notification to DNR of asbestos or hazardous materials
abatement is not required. All other regulations apply.
HAZARDOUS WASTE/REGULATED WASTE — Asbestos-containing
material, lead paint and objects contaminated by lead paint are
37.Editor's Note: Sections II and III of this ordinance also provided for the renumbering of
former Arts. III and IV as Arts. IV and V, respectively.
SECTION 6-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-21
1:155
SECTION 6-22. Certificates, Approvals and Permits Required. [Ord.
No. 2014-10 § I, 4-22-2014]
examples of the most common hazardous materials encountered during
demolition and renovation projects.
RECOVERED MATERIALS — Those materials removed for reuse
(lumber, doors, windows, ceramic tile and glass) and those removed to
be recycled into new products.
REGULATED WASTES — Those wastes that cannot be used as clean fill
and cannot be recovered for reuse or recycling. These wastes must be
taken to a permitted landfill or transfer station for proper disposal.
RENOVATION — Construction work that results in significant envelope
modifications or major interior rehabilitation and is extensive enough
to prevent normal residential occupation or where normal commercial
operations cannot be performed within a commercial building while the
work is in progress. This does not apply to a homeowner performing
minor maintenance or repair activities or painting work in his/her own
home.
TOPSOIL — Soil suitable for growing grass and containing no
contamination, rock, wood, brush, vegetation, litter, trash, or
construction or building materials.
WASTE — The word "waste," as used in this Section, shall apply equally
to all and any solid building material waste, whether generated by
construction, renovation, demolition, disaster, or other means.
A. A certificate of inspection and clearance for asbestos and a letter of
approval to proceed from DNR are required for those structures
regulated by RSMo. Chapter 260 prior to the issuance of any demolition
permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall wreck, demolish, or raze a building
or other structure within the corporate limits of the City of Lexington
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Inspector.
Such permit shall be issued only to an insured person, firm or
corporation as hereinafter provided. However, a permit may be issued
to an uninsured owner of record of land who desires to wreck or
demolish or raze any building thereon; except that if such building shall
be more than two (2) stories high or shall be less than ten (10) feet back
from the street property line, such owner shall be required to give a
certificate of insurance to the City of Lexington as hereinafter provided
and required from persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the
business of wrecking, demolishing, or razing buildings.
C. A person who has made arrangements for the demolition of a building
by burning by the Fire Department for training purposes shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this Section.
SECTION 6-21 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-23
1:156
SECTION 6-23. Liability Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No.
2014-10 § I, 4-22-2014]
SECTION 6-24. Bonding Requirements. [Ord. No. 2014-10 § I,
4-22-2014]
A. Except as otherwise provided in Section 6-22(B) above, every person
renovating or demolishing [see Definitions, Section 6-21, Subsection
(D), definition of "renovation"] a building or portion of a building,
except an accessory building, in the City of Lexington shall file with the
City Clerk one (1) of the following:
1. A liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding
a certificate of authority to do insurance business in Missouri; or
2. A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation; or
3. Other evidence of liability and property damage insurance. (Note:
For homeowners doing their own renovation or demolition, some
insurance companies will provide the required coverage under the
homeowners insurance policy).
B. The insurance required under this Section shall insure the person
demolishing or renovating the building against loss from the liability
imposed by law for injury to, or death of, any person or damage to any
property growing out of the demolition or renovation of such building,
with a cap of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), exclusive of interest
and costs, on account of injury to, or death of, any one (1) person, and of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage to property of others
resulting from demolishing or renovation of any one (1) building.
C. Such insurance coverage shall indemnify the City and save it harmless
against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever
which might arise or accrue against it by reason of the granting of such
permit or the exercise of any privilege thereby conferred and to repay
all damages which may be suffered by the City or by any other person
by reason of the exercise of the permit, including, by way of illustration,
but not limited to, injury or damage to pavement, curbs, sidewalks,
poles, wires or trees.
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of the property and building
which is to be renovated or demolished, or his licensed contractor, shall
file with the City Clerk bonds or other form of security or a cash deposit
in favor of the City, conditioned as follows:
1. A license or permit bond; and
2. A performance bond.
B. Bonds shall be for a sum no less than the contract price plus ten percent
(10%) and shall name the City as obligee and shall be in a form
approved by the City Attorney.
SECTION 6-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-25
1:157
SECTION 6-25. Safety and Site Management. [Ord. No. 2014-10 § I,
4-22-2014]
SECTION 6-26. Waste Disposal. [Ord. No. 2014-10 § I, 4-22-2014]
A. Before a regulated project begins, a licensed inspector must inspect the
structure for asbestos-containing material. If the inspector finds
regulated quantities of asbestos-containing material or assumes, based
on a preponderance of evidence, for it to be in the structure, an
asbestos abatement contractor must complete the project. Copies of
both the asbestos report and the asbestos removal contractor's
certification report of proper asbestos removal shall be provided to the
City.
B. When requested by the Building Official, the applicant shall provide: a
structural engineer's report that describes the methods of demolition,
including all necessary shoring; and plans and information necessary to
determine that no hazards will be created that will damage adjoining
properties or endanger the occupants or the general public.
C. When the construction, renovation or demolition site is near or adjacent
to a pedestrian walkway, public site or public street, the site must be
fenced, barricaded, signed against trespassing, or otherwise restricted
to prevent unauthorized entry or injury to persons or damage to
vehicles or property. Required safety fencing, barricades, or other
restrictions must be coordinated with the Police Department and
Building Inspector to ensure that traffic and pedestrian access to other
properties, streets, public walkways, and public areas is not
unnecessarily impeded.
D. All walkways, sidewalks, and streets open to the public must be kept
clean and free of debris at all times. Failure to observe this requirement
will result in citations in accordance with Chapter 18, Section 18-14, of
the City Code.
E. Demolition and debris removal will occur during daylight hours only.
F. Dust must be controlled by wetting. All material to be removed shall be
wetted sufficiently to lay the dust incidental to its removal.
A. All construction, renovation and demolition waste, other than clean fill,
must be properly disposed of at a permitted transfer station or landfill
regardless of whether it was generated from a commercial or
residential structure. Burying construction waste, other than clean fill,
anywhere on the property is illegal (§ 260.210.1, RSMo.).
B. Open burning of construction or demolition waste or other debris
requires approval and a permit from the City Fire Department. Burn
permits may be issued in accordance with City Ordinance, Chapter 9,
Section 9-3. Only untreated waste lumber may be burned.
SECTION 6-25 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-27
1:158
SECTION 6-27. Cleanup and Restoration of Site. [Ord. No. 2014-10
§ I, 4-22-2014]
A. When the primary structure on a building site is demolished, all wells,
cisterns, septic tanks, cesspools and storage caves/cellars/pits on that
building site must be listed on the building permit and be secured,
removed, or filled in accordance with current DNR regulations and
Lexington City Codes.
1. Abandoned wells may not be filled without prior DNR approval. The
owner or contractor shall submit an abandonment registration
record form (780-1603) to the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources' Water Protection Program for the plugging of an
abandoned well. A copy of the approval document must be provided
to the Building Inspector prior to filling the well.
2. Abandoned cisterns must have the covers, domes, and as much of
the vertical walls removed as possible before backfilling.
3. Abandoned cesspools and septic tanks must first be emptied of all
sewage by a qualified professional waste hauling company that
disposes of the waste at a permitted landfill application site or
wastewater treatment facility. Maximum effort must be made to
keep the effluent away from human contact and from seeping into
the soil. Cesspools must have covers, domes, and as much of the
vertical walls removed as possible before backfilling. Septic tanks
must be removed.
4. Caves/cellars/storage pits must have all building materials
removed before backfilling.
B. Rubbish and all building material waste shall be removed from the site.
1. Basement walls that also serve as retaining walls for adjacent
grade levels may remain in place if approved by the Building
Inspector.
C. Sidewalks and concrete slabs shall be removed unless:
1. Required for access to other structures or areas.
2. They are to be part of any reconstruction.
3. Existing sidewalks located on street rights-of-way are not to be
removed; however, the Building Inspector may waive this
requirement if the existing sidewalk is in an unsafe condition prior
to demolition.
D. Foundations shall be removed unless:
1. They are to be incorporated into any reconstruction.
2. They are part of a necessary retaining wall.
SECTION 6-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-27
1:159
SECTION 6-28. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-10 § I, 4-22-2014]
The Missouri Solid Waste Management Law provides for civil penalties for
persons who dispose of or allow the disposal of regulated construction and
demolition wastes in unpermitted areas. The law also contains criminal
provisions for some types of illegal construction and demolition waste
disposal. Additionally, and except as provided in Section 6-25(D) above,
each and every person violating provisions of Article III shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day any such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
E. A building permit for new construction must be issued within sixty (60)
days of final cleanup if any of the above items are to be incorporated
into new construction. Otherwise, they must be removed.
F. Backfill material shall be clean earth free from organic matter. Use of
any other type of backfill material shall require authorization of the
Code Official and shall be stated on the permit. Should stone, brick or
concrete be authorized as a supplement for a portion of the backfill, it
must be a minimum of twelve (12) inches below grade level. The
supplement shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total backfill and
shall be thoroughly compacted.
G. The lot surface shall be returned to a grade level compatible with
surrounding property and be leveled with excavations and depressions
filled. The applicant shall remove all rubbish and materials and fill
excavations to existing grade so that the premises are left in a safe and
sanitary condition and can be maintained in accordance with the
International Property Maintenance Code within twenty-eight (28) days
from the date of the demolition. Provisions for stormwater control and
runoff must be approved by the Building Inspector.
H. Where demolished buildings shared a party wall/common wall with
another building or where attached to an adjacent building:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the
demolished structure to ensure that the remaining exterior wall
and roof complies with City Code, Article V, Section 6-34. No
residual plaster, outlines of rooms, boarded or missing windows,
remnants of the demolished building, or other evidence shall be
visible from public areas or nearby private property. Roof joining
lines on adjoining walls must be obliterated as much as possible
and approved by the Building Inspector. The remaining exterior
wall shall be properly weather protected.
SECTION 6-27 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-28
1:160
ARTICLE IV
Building Code Adoption — Permit Fees
SECTION 6-29. Building Code Adoption. [Ord. No. 96-27 §§ 2-3,
11-26-1996; Ord. No. 96-38 § 1, 2-25-1997; Ord. No. 2002-06 § 1,
1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2005-07 § 1, 3-8-2005; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1,
9-22-2009; Ord. No. 2012-02 § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2015-19 § 1,
7-14-2015; Ord. No. 2018-38, 11-27-2018]
A. This Building Code is an ordinance for the purpose of prescribing,
regulating and governing the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area, maintenance and all matters relating
thereto for the prevention of conditions hazardous to life and property
and for the common welfare, protection and benefit of the residents of
the City.
B. General Regulations. Construction, demolition and property
development within the City of Lexington, Missouri, both on private and
public properties, shall be regulated under the provisions of this Code.
In the event of conflicting standards, this Code shall apply. In the event
of duplication the more restrictive shall apply.
C. The following codes, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as the Building Codes of the City of Lexington, in the
State of Missouri, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, set forth herein, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said codes are hereby adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section:
1. International Building Code 2018®.
2. International Residential Building Code 2018®.
3. International Property Maintenance Code 2018®.
4. National Electrical Code®, NFPA 70, 2017 Edition.
5. International Fire Code 2018®.
6. International Mechanical Code 2018®.
7. International Plumbing Code 2018®.
8. International Fuel Gas Code 2018®.
9. International Private Sewage Disposal Code 2018®.
10. International Existing Building Code 2018®.
11. International Swimming Pool And Spa Code 2018®. [Ord. No.
2019-08, 2-12-2019]
SECTION 6-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-29
1:161
D. The following Appendices to the International Residential Code, 2018
Edition, shall be adopted by the City:
1. Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwelling.
2. Appendix H: Patio Covers.
3. Appendix J: Existing Buildings and Structures.
4. Appendix M: Home Day Care R-3 Occupancy.
E. The following Appendices to the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, shall be adopted by the City:
1. Appendix E: Supplementary Accessibility Requirements.
2. Appendix G: Flood-Resistant Construction.
3. Appendix I: Patio Covers.
4. Appendix J: Grading.
5. Appendix K: Administrative Provisions.
F. Section R313.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, as
adopted by the City, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R313.1. Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. A builder
of single-family dwellings or residences or multi-family dwellings of
four (4) or fewer units shall offer to any purchaser, on or before the date
of entering into a purchase contract, the option to install or equip such
dwellings or residences with a fire sprinkler system at the purchaser's
cost. The requirement that the builder offer the purchaser the option
to install a fire sprinkler system in a multi-family dwelling of four (4)
or fewer units (not including single-family dwellings) shall expire on
December 31, 2019. Effective January 1, 2020, an automatic residential
fire sprinkler system: (1) shall be required to be installed in townhouses
in accordance with Section R313.1.1; and (2) shall not be required
when additions or alterations are made to existing town houses that do
not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
G. Section R313.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, as
adopted by the City, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R313.2. One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler
systems. A builder of single-family dwellings, or residences or multifamily
dwellings of four (4) or fewer units shall offer to any purchaser,
on or before the date of entering into a purchase contract, the option
to install or equip such dwellings or residences with a fire sprinkler
system at the purchaser's cost. The requirement that the builder offer
the purchaser the option to install a fire sprinkler system in a multifamily
dwelling of four (4) or fewer units (not including single-family
dwellings) shall expire on December 31, 2019. Effective January 1,
2020, an automatic residential fire sprinkler system: (1) shall be
SECTION 6-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-29
1:162
SECTION 6-30. Permits and Fees for Residential/Commercial New
Construction. [Ord. No. 96-27 §§ 4-5, 11-26-1996; Ord. No. 96-38
§§ 2 — 3, 2-25-1997; Ord. No. 99-11 § 1, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 2005-07
§ 2, 3-8-2005; Ord. No. 2007-06 § 1, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2012-02
§ 2, 1-10-2012]
required to be installed in two-family dwellings in accordance with
Section R313.2.1; and (2) shall not be required for additions or
alterations to existing two-family dwellings that are not already
provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system. At no time are
automatic residential fire sprinkler systems required to be installed in
one-family (or single-family) dwellings.
H. Section 903.2.8 of the Uniform Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as adopted by
the City, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.8. Automatic Sprinkler Systems. An automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area, except for singlefamily
dwellings or residences or multi-family dwellings of four (4) or
fewer units. A builder of single-family dwellings or residences or multifamily
dwellings of four or fewer units shall offer to any purchaser,
on or before the date of entering into a purchase contract, the option
to install or equip such dwellings or residences with a fire sprinkler
system at the purchaser's cost. The requirement that the builder offer
to purchaser the option of installing a sprinkler system at the
purchaser's cost shall expire on December 31, 2019. Effective January
1, 2020, automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all multifamily
dwellings of two (2) or more units, except automatic sprinkler
systems shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing
multi-family dwellings that are not already provided with an automatic
residential sprinkler system. At no time are automatic residential fire
sprinkler systems required to be installed in single-family dwellings.
I. The 2018 Edition of the International Codes, Appendices and
subsequent amendments to said codes shall remain on file for public
use, inspection and examination in the office of the City Clerk. The
Building Official shall perform the functions provided for the Building
Official in the 2018 International Codes and shall have such other
functions as may be provided from time to time.
A. All building permits shall be issued for a maximum period of one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days, except where the permit holder
can demonstrate in a written report that unusual circumstances have
created unavoidable delays. The Building Official may at his/her
discretion issue an extension not to exceed one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days. [Ord. No. 2015-19 §1, 7-14-2015]
B. Permit Fees. All permit fees shall be assessed in accordance with Table
A. The Building Official shall make determination of the valuation of a
project regulated by the private work code. Churches, schools and not-
SECTION 6-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-30
1:163
for-profit organizations will not be charged a permit fee. However,
permit applications shall be submitted and all other requirements of the
building permit will be applicable. [Ord. No. 2015-19 §1, 7-14-2015]
Table A
Building Permits and General Inspection Fees
Valuation Permit Fee
$1.00 to $500.00 $15.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $15.00 for the first $500.00, plus $2.00
for each additional $100.00 or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $45.00 for the first $2,000.00, plus $8.00
for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $229.00 for the first $25,000.00, plus
$6.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including
$50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $379.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus
$4.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including
$100,000.00
$100,001.00 to
$500,000.00
$579.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus
$3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including
$500,000.00
$500,001.00 to
$1,000,000.00
$1,779.00 for the first $500,000.00, plus
$2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up $2,779.00 for the first $1,000,000.00,
plus $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof
Demolition Flat fee of $25.00
Water heater replacement Flat fee of $10.00
Sidewalk and driveway Flat fee of $20.00
Fencing, residential
[reference Section
29-37.1(B)], commercial or
industrial
Flat fee of $10.00
C. Work Exempt From Permit. With the exceptions/additions of those items
listed below, work exempt from permit shall be as specified in the 2018
International Residential Code 105.2 and the 2018 International
SECTION 6-30 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-30
1:164
Building Code 105.2: [Ord. No. 2015-19 §1, 7-14-2015; Ord. No.
2018-38, 11-27-2018]
1. Requires permit.
a. Garages and accessory buildings on foundations or otherwise
designed or anchored to be non-movable, regardless of size.
b. Portable buildings/structures with footprint area greater than
one hundred (100) square feet.
c. Fencing as required by residential [over three and one-half
(3 1/2) feet in height, reference Section 29-37.1(B)],
commercial, or industrial zoning regulations.
d. All sidewalks and driveways.
e. Prefabricated swimming pools greater than twenty-four (24)
inches deep. Also see Chapter 29, Section 29-32, for permitted
locations.
2. Permit not required.
a. Repair or replacement of roofing.
b. Installation or repair of siding on existing structures.
D. Violation And Penalties.
1. Notice of violation. Whenever the Code Official determines that
there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe
that a violation has occurred, the Code Official is authorized to
serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for
violations of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall be in
writing and direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
2. Penalties. Any person, firm or organization found in violation of this
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents, or of a permit or
certificate used under provisions of the codes adopted herein, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
3. Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of the
penalties herein described, the Code Official is authorized to
institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal
SECTION 6-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-30
1:165
occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act,
conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any
premises.
4. Interference with enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or organization to hinder the Codes Enforcement Officer in the
lawful performance of his/her duties as set forth in this code.
5. Means of appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
Code Official, a notice of violation, or an order issued under this
code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals. The
appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the Code Official
and shall be filed at City Hall within twenty (20) days after the
decision, notice or order was served. The Board shall meet upon
notice from the Chairman within twenty (20) days of the filing of an
appeal or at stated periodic meetings.
6. Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this Chapter and/or codes
promulgated therein and/or the rules legally adopted thereunder
has been incorrectly interpreted and/or that the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, and/or that at least an equivalent method of
health, welfare, protection or safety is proposed. The Board shall
have no authority to otherwise waive the requirements of this code
or legislate changes thereto.
7. Building without permit. [Ord. No. 2015-10 §I, 3-24-2015]
a. It is a violation of City Code to begin construction without
having obtained all required permits. Failure to obtain a
building permit may result in assessment of a double permit
fee and requiring the contractor to remove construction for
which required inspection fees have not been obtained. No
inspections will be made until required permits have been
obtained.
b. In the event any person, firm or corporation shall fail to obtain
the necessary permit within one (1) week after being notified
in writing to do so by the Building Official, said person, firm or
corporation shall pay, in addition to the customary fee or the
increased fee as above provided, the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) for each day in excess of the aforesaid one (1) week
that transpires prior to obtaining the necessary permit.
SECTION 6-30 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-30
1:166
ARTICLE V
Exterior of Buildings
SECTION 6-31. Applicability. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1, 2-8-2000]
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any portion of a building or structure
within the corporate limits of the City to fail to comply with the
requirements of this Article, irrespective of when such building or structure
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired.
SECTION 6-32. Conflict with Other Ordinances. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1,
2-8-2000]
In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, fire, safety, health, building, mechanical, electrical
or plumbing code or ordinance of the City existing on February 8, 2000,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any other ordinance or code of the City existing on February 8, 2000, which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety
and health of the people, the provisions of this Article shall prevail, and such
other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent
that they may be found in conflict with this Article.
SECTION 6-33. Minimum Exterior Property Standards. [Ord. No.
99-51 § 1, 2-8-2000]
This Section's provisions shall govern the minimum exterior conditions of
buildings and structures. Every building or structure within the corporate
limits of the City shall comply with the provisions of this Article. It shall be
unlawful and a public nuisance for a person to own, occupy or let to another
for occupancy any building or structure which does not comply with the
requirements of this Article.
SECTION 6-34. Foundations, Walls and Roof. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1,
2-8-2000]
A. Generally. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior
surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and
repair.
B. Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points. Every foundation shall be reasonably
weathertight and kept in good repair.
C. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose
or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls or to the
occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surfaces must be kept in
good repair.
SECTION 6-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-34
1:167
SECTION 6-35. Stairs, Porches and Railings. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1,
2-8-2000]
SECTION 6-36. Windows, Doors and Other Openings. [Ord. No.
99-51 § 1, 2-8-2000]
Every window, exterior door, basement hatchway and other exterior
opening shall be waterproof and weathertight and kept in good repair. In
the commercial districts of the City, windows above the main floor shall
have proper decor, curtains or draperies hung to give the appearance of
quality inhabited property. No profanity or obscenities will be permitted on
curtain material. All curtains or draperies used shall be maintained in good
condition.
SECTION 6-37. Windows and Other Openings. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1,
2-8-2000]
The boarding up of windows in the commercial district will only be
permitted until glass can be replaced. Glass damage shall be replaced
within fourteen (14) calendar days.
SECTION 6-38. Property Violations. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1, 2-8-2000;
Ord. No. 2012-01 § I, 1-10-2012]
All properties located within the commercial districts of the City can only
be utilized for storage pertaining to the business operation of the property.
However, second floors (above street level) or higher may be used as
residential (29-21-Residential-A.13).
D. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, weathertight, and have no
defects which might admit rain or birds into the interior portion of the
building or structure. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the
building. Every building and structure in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in floor space (not including unfinished attics,
basements and garages) shall be guttered where appropriate and
equipped with ample downspouts properly positioned and in good
repair. Roof water shall not be channeled directly to adjacent property.
A. Generally. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safe exit
from the interior of the building or structure in case of fire.
B. Structural Safety. Every outside stair or porch, or railings or
balustrades attached thereto, shall be so constructed as to be able to
use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as
required by the Building Code and shall be kept in sound condition and
good repair. No outside stair or porch shall have rotting, loose or
deteriorating supports or floor.
SECTION 6-34 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 6-39
1:168
SECTION 6-39. Violations and Punishment. [Ord. No. 99-51 § 1,
2-8-2000; Ord. No. 2014-10 § III, 4-22-2014]
Each and every person violating provisions of Article V shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day any such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 6-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6-39
1:169
Chapter 7
CIGARETTES
State Law Reference — Authority to impose license taxes, RSMo. § 94.110;
Issuance of licenses, RSMo. § 94.120; Authority to prohibit sales to minors,
RSMo. § 71.740; tax, RSMo. Ch. 149; State cigarette tax, RSMo. § 149.011
et seq.
Editor's note — Ord. No. 96-30 adopted December 10, 1996, repealed ch. 7
and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former ch. 7 derived from
ord. no. 73-28 §§ 1 — 2, 2-19-1974.
SECTION 7-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-1), 12-10-1996]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
herein indicated:
CIGARETTE — Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco
irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such tobacco is flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of
which is made of paper or any other substance of material except tobacco.
JOBBER — Any person who shall sell, distribute, deliver, convey or give
away cigarettes to retail dealers or other persons in the City, for the purpose
of resale only.
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX — The tax imposed by the City under this
Chapter upon the business and for the privilege of selling cigarettes at retail
in the City.
PACKAGE — A quantity of cigarettes wrapped and sealed in paper, tinfoil
or otherwise by the manufacturer of the cigarettes prior to being placed in
cartons and shipment from the manufacturer.
RETAIL DEALER — Any person other than a wholesale dealer, jobber or
manufacturer engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, by personal
handling or through a vending machine, to the ultimate consumer or agent.
RETAILER — Any person other than a dealer or wholesaler as defined in
this Section, who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes at retail,
who shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes, irrespective of quantity, number of
sales, giving the same away or exposing the same where it may be taken, or
purchased, or otherwise acquired.
SALE — Any transfer of title or possession, exchange or barter, conditional
or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration
or any agreement therefor.
STAMP — A small piece of paper with such printing thereon as may be
prescribed by the Mayor which, when affixed to a package of cigarettes,
shall evidence payment of the occupational tax thereon.
SECTION 6-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 7-1
1:170
VENDING MACHINE — A mechanical device used for the sale and
dispensing of cigarettes and automatically operated by the purchaser
through the deposit of coins, slugs, or tokens.
VENDING MACHINE OPERATOR — Any person engaged in the distribution
or sale of cigarettes by means of coin-operated vending machines.
WHOLESALE DEALER — Any person who shall sell, distribute, deliver,
convey or give away cigarettes to retail dealers or other persons in the City
for the purpose of resale only.
SECTION 7-2. Licensing — Registration Fees — Tax Levy. [Ord. No.
96-30 § II(7-2), 12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-3. Occupational Tax License. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-3),
12-10-1996]
In addition to the license provided for in Section 7-2, each wholesale dealer
or jobber or licensee shall pay an occupational license tax at a rate of one
dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per thousand (1,000) for each and all cigarettes
sold, offered, delivered or displayed for sale.
SECTION 7-4. Monthly Payment, Evidence of Payment. [Ord. No.
96-30 § II(7-4), 12-10-1996]
It shall be the duty of every retail dealer or wholesaler, as defined in Section
7-1, selling, offering or displaying for sale any package of cigarettes, to
remit the monthly cigarette tax reporting form and full payment of the
tax by the fifteenth (15th) day of the following month. Every wholesaler
or jobber shall generate a report detailing daily purchases and returns
of cigarette sales by retail dealers or customers within the City. Monthly
cigarette sales reports shall detail each day the invoice number, customer
name, location, and total cigarettes purchased by each retail dealer or
customer. The cancelled check, accompanied by the monthly cigarette tax
reporting form, shall be proof of payment. The wholesaler or jobber is
A. License Required. Every wholesale dealer, jobber, retail dealer,
manufacturer or other person engaged in selling cigarettes or offering,
delivering or displaying the same for sale within the City shall procure
an annual license therefor for each place of business that he/she desires
to have for the sale or distribution of cigarettes.
B. Procedure. Every application for a cigarette license shall be made upon
a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the City Collector, and
shall set forth such information as shall be required. Upon approval of
the application, the Collector shall grant and issue to the applicant a
cigarette license as herein provided.
C. Fees. At the time such license is issued, the City Collector shall collect
the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) as a registration fee for each place of
business.
SECTION 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 7-4
1:171
hereby granted a discount of two percent (2%) on the net tax due after
refunds as provided for in Section 7-3 to cover collection costs.
SECTION 7-5. Alternative Payment Method — Stamps. [Ord. No.
96-30 § II(7-5), 12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-6. Sale of Cigarettes. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-6),
12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-7. Unstamped Cigarettes. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-7),
12-10-1996]
A. Tax Provision. The tax provided for in Section 7-3 may be paid to the
City Collector upon purchase of stamps of such design and
denomination as may be prescribed by the Mayor or his/her duly
authorized representative. The City Collector may require the use of
stamps for enforcement purposes.
B. Cigarette Stamp, Impression To Be Affixed. Such stamps will be so
affixed to each package of cigarettes intended for sale at retail, as will
evidence the payment to the City of the tax imposed by this Chapter.
Stamps shall be affixed to each package of cigarettes in an aggregate
denomination not less than the amount of the occupation tax, based
upon the contents therein and shall be affixed in such manner as to be
visible to the purchaser.
C. Discounts. Any wholesale dealer, jobber, retail dealer, retailer,
manufacturer or other person engaged in selling cigarettes or offering,
delivering or displaying cigarettes for sale within the City under the
alternate payment method of stamps shall not be eligible for any
discount on the denominational value of the stamps to be affixed to each
cigarette package.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer or display for sale at
retail any cigarettes unless said tax has been paid.
B. No person shall sell or offer for sale or display for sale at retail any
cigarettes unless on the container thereof, there has been affixed a
stamp evidencing the payment of the tax or in lieu thereof, proof of
monthly payment of the tax to the City Collector as outlined in Section
7-3 of this Chapter.
C. No person shall falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit
any stamp, as shall be prescribed by the Mayor, or procure or cause to
be falsely or fraudulently made, forged, altered or counterfeited any
such stamp, or knowingly and willfully utter, publish, pass or tender as
true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp.
A. Duty of Dealer. Whenever a retail dealer or other person engaged in the
business of selling cigarettes shall obtain or receive and have in his/her
possession for resale at retail in the City, packages of cigarettes upon
SECTION 7-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 7-7
1:172
SECTION 7-8. Vending Machines. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-8),
12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-9. Assignability of Licenses. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-9),
12-10-1996]
Cigarette licenses shall not be assignable, and shall be valid only for the
person in whose name issued and for the transaction of business in the
places designated therein.
SECTION 7-10. Display of Licenses. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-10),
12-10-1996]
Cigarette licenses shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the places
for which issued.
which no stamps have been affixed or for which monthly payment
has not been made of the cigarette tax imposed by this Chapter, that
person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such person
within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the same, notifies the City
Collector of his/her possession of the packages of the cigarettes and
identifies the wholesale dealer or jobber who sold and delivered the
packages of cigarettes to him/her.
B. Presumption Of Violation. Whenever any cigarettes are found in the
place of business of such retail dealer or other person without the
stamps affixed in the manner prescribed by this Chapter, and not
marked as having been received within the preceding twenty-four (24)
hours, the presumption shall be that the cigarettes are being kept in
violation of the provisions of this Section.
A. Licensing. Every person who, in the capacity of owner, lessee, tenant, or
in any other capacity shall operate or cause to be operated, directly or
indirectly, a vending machine for selling and dispensing of cigarettes to
the public, shall obtain from the City Collector a license as required in
Section 7-2 for each vending machine in a form prescribed by the
Mayor. Said license shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of such
vending machine.
B. Unlawful Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell and dispense
through a vending machine any cigarettes upon which the tax has not
been paid. It shall be unlawful for any person, through a vending
machine or otherwise, to remove the container of cigarettes, in whole
or in part, or mutilate the same, before the tax thereon has been paid.
The fee shall be as set out in Section 7-3.
SECTION 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 7-11
1:173
SECTION 7-11. Duration, Expiration of Licenses. [Ord. No. 96-30
§ II(7-11), 12-10-1996]
All cigarette licenses shall expire on June thirtieth (80th) in each and every
year, unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the City
Collector.
SECTION 7-12. Issuance of Duplicate Licenses. [Ord. No. 96-30
§ II(7-12), 12-10-1996]
Whenever any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter is
defaced, destroyed or lost, the City Collector shall issue a duplicate license
for the defaced, destroyed or lost license upon the payment of a fee of five
dollars ($5.00).
SECTION 7-13. Suspension, Revocation of License, and Hearing.
[Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-13), 12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-14. Inspection of Books, Records, Stock. [Ord. No.
96-30 § II(7-14), 12-10-1996]
For the purpose of enabling the City to enforce the terms of this Chapter,
the following provisions are enacted:
A. Hearing Required. Whenever it has been determined by the City
Collector that the holder of a cigarette license has failed or refused to
comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any rules or
regulations prescribed or promulgated under this Chapter, the City
Council shall be notified of such violation. The City Collector shall
submit to the Council evidence of the same and a full report thereof,
and the Council shall thereafter afford the person alleged to have
violated the Chapter or regulations a hearing at such time and place as
the Council may designate. The City Administrator shall provide written
notice to the licensee of the hearing by regular mail at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the hearing. At the hearing the City Attorney
shall present witnesses and evidence on behalf of the City to provide a
full report of the alleged violation of this Chapter or regulations. The
licensee shall have the right to present witnesses and evidence of its
own which are relevant to the alleged violation.
B. Authority Of City Council. The Council may thereafter, for good cause
shown, suspend or revoke the cigarette license of the offender upon a
written finding that the licensee has not complied with the provisions of
this Chapter or the rules and regulations prescribed or promulgated
hereunder.
C. Notice Of Penalty. When the City Council suspends or revokes a
cigarette license, the City Collector shall notify the holder of the license
immediately, and the holder shall promptly surrender the license to the
City Collector on request.
SECTION 7-11 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 7-14
1:174
SECTION 7-15. Refund of Tax. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-15),
12-10-1996]
1. Each retail dealer in the City and those wholesalers and retailers as
defined in Section 7-1 shall procure and retain invoices showing the
amount and value of the shipment of cigarettes received, the date
thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a
period of three (3) years subject to the use and inspection of the City.
2. All dealers, wholesalers and retailers as defined in Section 7-1 within
the City shall maintain and keep for a period of three (3) years such
other records of cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the City as
may be required by the City Collector.
3. The City Collector or other duly authorized City representative is
authorized to examine books, records, invoices, papers, stock of
cigarettes in and upon any premises where the cigarettes are placed,
stored or sold, and equipment of any such wholesale dealer, jobber or
retail dealer pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable
under this Chapter.
4. To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and assessed by
this Chapter, each such person is directed and required to give to the
City Collector or other duly authorized City representative the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examinations as are provided for and
required in this Section.
5. Cigarette tax reporting information received from the State of Missouri
shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax
payments.
A. Refund. Whenever any cigarettes have become unfit for use and
consumption and are not salable or have been destroyed, upon which
stamps have been affixed or evidence of payment verified, they shall be
entitled to a credit of the actual amount of the tax paid on such
cigarettes.
B. Monthly Payment. The City Collector is authorized to adopt, prescribe
and promulgate rules and regulations including a monthly cigarette tax
reporting form with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for
refunds and credits as the Collector may deem advisable.
C. Stamps. Whenever any cigarettes upon which stamps have been affixed
by a wholesale dealer or jobber, have been sold and shipped by him/her
into another City or State for sale or use there, or have become unfit for
use or consumption or have become unsalable, or have been destroyed,
such wholesale dealer upon the presentation and proof of a claim for
refund as required by rules and regulations promulgated in Sections
7-14 and 7-15. If the City Collector is satisfied that any wholesale
dealer, jobber or retail dealer is entitled to a refund, the Collector shall
submit evidence thereof to the City Council for approval of the refund.
SECTION 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 7-16
1:175
SECTION 7-16. Verification, Recording of Stamp, License Sales.
[Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-16), 12-10-1996]
The City Collector shall, within five (5) days after the first (1st) day of each
month, furnish to the City Clerk, duplicate copies of receipts of stamp sales
and a verified statement of all license sales, or in lieu thereof, duplicate
copies of cigarette license sales for the purpose of verification and
recording.
SECTION 7-17. Confiscation, Sale of Illegal Cigarettes. [Ord. No.
96-30 § II(7-17), 12-10-1996]
SECTION 7-18. Oaths and Subpoenas. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-18),
12-10-1996]
The Mayor, or his/her employees or agents duly designated and authorized
by him/her, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits
in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers
and duties under this Chapter. The Mayor, or his/her duly authorized
representative, shall have the power to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents
to secure information pertinent to the enforcement of this Chapter and to
examine them in relation thereto.
SECTION 7-19. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-19),
12-10-1996]
A. Seizure. Whenever the City Collector or any other duly authorized
representatives shall discover any cigarettes subject to tax provided by
this Chapter, and upon which said occupation tax has not been paid and
the stamps affixed, or evidence of payment of said occupation tax
verified, the City Collector or any duly authorized representatives are
hereby authorized and empowered forthwith to seize possession of such
cigarettes, together with any vending machine or other automatic
mechanical device for selling and dispensing cigarettes, or receptacle
in which they are held for sale, and the same shall thereupon be
deemed to be forfeited to the City.
B. Sale. The City Collector may, within a reasonable time thereafter, by
public notice at least five (5) days before the day of the sale, sell such
forfeited cigarettes at a place designated by the Collector, and from the
proceeds of such sale, shall collect the tax thereon, together with a
penalty of fifty percent (50%) thereof, and the costs incurred in such
proceedings. The City Collector shall pay the balance, if any, to the
person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found. Such
seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from fine or
imprisonment provided herein for violation of any provisions of this
Chapter.
SECTION 7-16 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 7-19
1:176
SECTION 7-20. Disbursement of Revenue. [Ord. No. 96-30
§ II(7-20), 12-10-1996]
The revenue accruing to the City from the permits and occupation licenses
relating to the retail sale of cigarettes shall be paid into the General Fund.
SECTION 7-21. Violations — Penalty. [Ord. No. 96-30 § II(7-21),
12-10-1996]
A. Authority. In addition to the other powers herein granted the Mayor, he/
she is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to:
1. The denomination and sale of stamps;
2. The delegation of his/her powers to the City Collector, a deputy or
employee of the Collector's office to enforce payment of the tax; or
3. Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, subject at all times to
the approval of the City Council.
B. Duty. It shall be the duty of the City Collector each year to annually
renew the "request for Cigarette Tax Records" with the Missouri
Department of Revenue.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon first (1st) conviction thereof
be fined in the sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment.
Upon second (2nd) conviction thereof, in the sum of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or be
punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon any subsequent
conviction thereof shall be fined in the sum of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or be punished by both
such fine and imprisonment. If the person so subsequently convicted
shall be a licensed wholesale dealer, jobber or retailer dealer in
cigarettes, his/her license shall thereupon be revoked, and the license
shall not be renewed for a period of one (1) year therefrom.
B. Failure to file each monthly report and make each monthly payment
shall be deemed a separate offense.
SECTION 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 7-21
1:177
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Cross Reference — Power of the mayor to call upon male inhabitants of city
during civil disturbances, § 2-109.
SECTION 8-1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 1, 2-6-1980; Ord. No.
93-02 §§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
There is hereby created within and for the territory of the City of Lexington
an Emergency Management Organization to be known as the City of
Lexington Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible for the
preparation and implementation of emergency functions required to
prevent injury and minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include
emergency management of resources and administration of such economic
controls as may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and
emergency activities (excluding functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., 1978, and
supplements thereto, and the Missouri Emergency Options Plan adopted
thereunder.
SECTION 8-1.a. National Incident Management System (NIMS).
[Ord. No. 2018-06, 2-20-2018]
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is hereby adopted as the
City’s system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents.
SECTION 8-2. Organization. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 2, 2-6-1980; Ord. No.
93-02 §§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
This agency shall consist of a Director and other members appointed by the
Mayor to conform to the State Organization and procedures for the conduct
of emergency operations as outlined in the Missouri Emergency Operations
Plan.
SECTION 8-3. Functions. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 3, 2-6-1980; Ord. No.
93-02 §§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
The Organization shall perform emergency management functions within
the territorial limits of the City of Lexington, and may conduct these
functions outside the territorial limits as directed by the Governor during
the time of emergency pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.,
1978, and supplements thereto.
SECTION 8-4. Director. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 4, 2-6-1980; Ord. No. 93-02
§§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
A. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve during the
pleasure of the City Council.
SECTION 7-21 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 8-4
1:178
SECTION 8-5. Executive Officer. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 5, 2-6-1980; Ord.
No. 93-02 §§ I — II 4-21-1993]
The Mayor and the Director, in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., 1978
and supplements thereto, may:
SECTION 8-6. Oath. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 6, 2-6-1980; Ord. No. 93-02
§§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in any
organization established under this Act who advocates or has advocated a
change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the Government
of the United States or in this State or the overthrow of any Government
in the United States by force or violence, or has been convicted of or is
under indictment or information charging any subversive act against the
United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in an organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before a
person authorized to administer oaths in this State, which oath shall be
substantially as follows:
B. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of local emergency management
activities.
C. The Director shall be responsible for maintaining records and
accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed
under the jurisdiction of the Emergency Management Agency.
1. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute
equipment, materials, and supplies for civil defense purposes; provide
for the health and safety of persons, including emergency assistance to
victims of an enemy attack; the safety of property, and direct and
coordinate the development of disaster plans and programs in
accordance with the policies and plans of the Federal and State disaster
and emergency planning.
2. Appoint, provide, or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police
personnel and other emergency operations teams, units or personnel
who may serve without compensation.
3. In the event of enemy attack, waive the provisions of Statutes requiring
advertisements for bids for the performance of public work or entering
into contracts.
4. With the approval of the Governor and consistent with the Missouri
Emergency Operations Plan, enter into mutual-aid agreements with
other public and private agencies within and without the State for
reciprocal emergency aid.
5. Accept services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds granted or
loaned by the Federal Government for disaster planning and operations
purposes.
SECTION 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 8-6
1:179
"I,__________, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Missouri, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of
the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such
a time as I am a member of the City of Lexington Emergency Management
Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence."
SECTION 8-7. Office Space. [Ord. No. 80-6 § 7, 2-6-1980; Ord. No.
93-02 §§ I — II, 4-21-1993]
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in any City owned or leased
building for the City of Lexington Emergency Management Office.
Chapter 8A
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION 8A-1. Declaration of Policy. [Ord. No. 94-26 § 1,
11-22-1994]
The City Council of the City of Lexington hereby declares it to be the public
policy of the City to eliminate discrimination and safeguard the right of any
person to see, purchase, lease, rent, or obtain real property without regard
to race, sex, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, religious affiliation,
handicap, and without regard to whether a family has children. This
Chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the Police powers of the City of
Lexington, Missouri, for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity,
health, and peace of the people of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 8A-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 94-26 § 2, 11-22-1994; Ord.
No. 98-23 § 1, 7-14-1998]
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless the context
otherwise indicates:
AGGRIEVED PERSON — Shall include any person who is attempting to
provide housing for himself and/or his family in the City of Lexington,
Missouri.
DISCRIMINATE — Distinctions in treatment because of race, sex, color,
national origin, ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, and
without regard to whether a family has children.
SECTION 8-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 8A-2
1:180
PERSON — Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, or corporation.
SECTION 8A-3. Discriminatory Practices. [Ord. No. 94-26 § 3,
11-22-1994; Ord. No. 98-23 § 2, 7-14-1998]
It shall be a discriminatory practice and a violation of this Chapter for any
person to:
SECTION 8A-4. Administration. [Ord. No. 94-26 § 4, 11-22-1994]
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse
to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, national
origin, ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, and without
regard to whether a family has children.
2. Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, national origin,
ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, and without regard to whether a
family has children.
3. Make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any
notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination
based on race, sex, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, religious
affiliation, and without regard to whether a family has children, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.
4. Represent to any person because of race, sex, color, national origin,
ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, and without regard to whether a
family has children, that any dwelling is not available for inspection,
sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
5. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex,
color, national origin, ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, and
without regard to whether a family has children.
6. Bars discrimination in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of a
handicap, and requires the design and construction of new multi-family
dwellings with four (4) or more units to meet certain adaptability and
accessibility requirements.
7. Bars discrimination in the sale or rental of housing because a person
has children, but exempts certain types of buildings that house older
persons, e.g. Section 202 housing.
A. There is hereby created a Fair Housing Committee whose membership
shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the City with the approval of the City Council.
SECTION 8A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 8A-4
1:181
SECTION 8A-5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 94-26 § 5, 11-22-1994]
Chapter 9
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Cross References — Fire, water, and police committee established, § 2-249;
burning of refuse, § 11-8; storage of certain explosives declared a nuisance,
§ 18-98.
B. Every complaint of a violation of this Chapter shall be referred to the
Fair Housing Committee. The Fair Housing Committee shall forthwith
notify the person against whom the complaint is made. The identity of
the aggrieved person shall be made known to the person against whom
the complaint is made at that time. If the Fair Housing Committee, after
investigation, finds there is not merit to the complaint, the same shall
be dismissed. If the Fair Housing Committee finds that there is merit in
the complaint, in their opinion, then and in that event, the Fair Housing
Committee will endeavor to eliminate the alleged discriminatory
practice by conference and conciliation.
C. If the Fair Housing Committee is unable to eliminate the alleged
discriminatory practice by conference and conciliation, then and in that
event, the Fair Housing Committee shall forward said complaint to the
City Attorney for handling. The final determination of whether or not to
prosecute on said complaint shall be left to the City Attorney.
A. Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by
confinement in the City Jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
B. The City Attorney, instead of filing a complaint in Municipal Court of the
City, may, as an alternative remedy, seek to have the alleged
discriminatory practices abated by an action for an injunction to be
maintained in the appropriate Circuit Court of the State of Missouri.
SECTION 8A-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 8A-5
1:182
ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 9-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. [Ord. No. 87-0012,
§ 1, 7-28-1987; Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 2009-40 § 1,
9-22-2009]
SECTION 9-1.1. Penalties. [Ord. No. 79-27, § 3, 9-11-1979; Ord. No.
95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
A. There is hereby adopted by the City of Lexington, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire or explosion or hazardous materials and for the
purpose of prescribing minimum requirements for the governing of the
erection of improvements, buildings and structures of all kinds, the
following 2009 Edition of the International Fire Code and any
subsequent amendments to said International Code be and is hereby
adopted and enacted as and for the Fire Prevention Code of the City of
Lexington, Missouri.
B. The 2009 Edition of the International Fire Code and subsequent
amendments to said code shall remain on file for public use, inspection
and examination in the office of the City Clerk. From the date of which
this Chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the City of Lexington, Missouri. The Fire Chief shall
recommend any amendments to the codes adopted by this Article
which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
C. Upon adoption of these codes, all buildings as new construction will
immediately comply. Buildings that are to be renovated, as well as
existing building, shall be in compliance within twelve (12) months of
adoption of this Code.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code hereby
adopted or rules promulgated consistent therewith or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has
been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or
modified by the Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall
severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor
more than sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such person shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each one (1) day that
SECTION 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-1.1
1:183
SECTION 9-1.2. Compliance. [Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
Prior to the construction, alteration, relocation or other construction of any
improvements within said boundaries of the City of Lexington, the owner
and/or builder, thereof shall submit to the Fire Chief or his designated
representative, full and complete building and plot plans of any such
proposed construction, reconstruction, relocation, improvement or other
building to be down with such plans and specifications to be in sufficient
detail to be determined and interpreted under the terms of the Codes
herein above referred to and at such time, such owner and/or builder
shall be responsible to purchase a fire inspection permit. Such permit fees
as required shall be for the inspection of the plans of said construction
and necessary inspection thereof to insure that said buildings and/or
improvements conform with Codes herein above referred to.
SECTION 9-1.3. Fees for Fire Inspection and Building Plan Review.
[Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
Fees for fire inspection permits and owner requested fire inspections shall
be charged by the appropriate officials in accordance with the table below.
Fees shall be paid in full prior to any inspection or building plan review. The
determination of value of valuation under any of the provisions of this Code
shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Administrator in accordance with
the building permit fees schedule.
Table 9-1.A. Fire Permit Fee Schedule
Total Valuation Fee
$0 to $25,000.00 $50.00
$25,001.00 to
$50,000.00
$75.00
$50,001.00 to
$100,000.00
$75.00 for first $50,000.00 plus $3.50 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00
$100,000.00 and
up
$250 for first $100,000 plus $1 for each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof.
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. Each offense is herewith declared a nuisance for abatement
purposes.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
C. Nuisances may be suppressed on notice given and expenses added as
costs on to the tax bill.
SECTION 9-1.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-1.3
1:184
Table 9-1.B. Additional Fees, for Inspections and Other Services
Service Fee
1. Inspection outside of normal City business hours
(minimum charge of one hour; additional charges in 1/
2 hour increments)
$30.00 per
hour
2. Residential upgrade: plumbing, electrical, mechanical;
other inspections for which no fee is specifically
indicated (minimum charge of one hour; additional
charges in 1/2 hour increments)
$20.00 per
hour
3. Additional plan review required by changes, additions
or revisions to approved plans (minimum charge of 1/2
hour)
$20.00 per
hour
A plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and
specifications for review. The plan review fees specified in this Subsection
are separate fees from the permit fees and are in addition to the permit
fees shown in Table 9.1 A.
Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at a rate shown in
Table 9.1B.
Adoption of these Fire Protection and Prevention Codes will initiate a
public service program by the Fire Department for a period of twelve (12)
months, to assist owners of existing structures in determining compliance
requirements. The first compliance visit will be at no charge to the property
owner; additional visits requested by the property owner will be charged
at the additional plan review rate in Table 9.1B.
SECTION 9-1.4. Inspection Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-02 § I,
4-11-1995]
The Chief of the Fire Department of his designated representative shall
receive from the City Clerk or the Planning and Zoning Administrator
requests for building permits and shall obtain copies of plans which shall
be deposited at the fire station with the Fire Chief or his designated
representative, and thereafter, the Fire Chief or his designated
representative shall inspect said plans to insure that all of said plans
conform in reasonable compliance with the Codes herein above referred to.
In the event that said plans do conform with such Codes, then a building
permit, upon payment of the fees as aforesaid, shall be issued. Thereafter,
during the period of construction, relocation, reconstruction or other
building or improvement, the Fire Chief or his designated representative
shall make periodic inspections of said premises to insure that said building
construction, reconstruction or other improvement conforms with the plans
as furnished to the Fire Chief or his designated representative. No building,
construction, reconstruction or other improvement shall be commenced
without the prior issuance of a building permit as herein set forth.
SECTION 9-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-1.5
1:185
SECTION 9-1.5. Modifications. [Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power to modify any of the
provisions of the Codes adopted by this Article upon application in writing
by the owner or tenant when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of such Code, provided that the spirit of the
Code shall be observed, that the public safety shall be secured and that
substantial justice shall be done. The particulars of such modification when
granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department
shall be entered upon the records of the Department, signed original copies
shall be promptly provided the City Clerk and the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
SECTION 9-1.6. Failure to Comply. [Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
In the event any owner and/or builder shall fail to carry out construction,
reconstruction, building or other alteration without having first obtained
a building permit and approval of plans, or shall vary from the plans as
submitted to the Fire Chief or his designated representative as above set
forth and that said deviation is a violation of the Codes herein above
referred to, the Fire Chief or his designated representative may
immediately cause all said construction, reconstruction, building, alteration
or other activity at said premises to cease and terminate immediately until
such time as corrections are made to fulfill the purposes and intents of this
Chapter.
SECTION 9-1.7. Appeals. [Ord. No. 95-02 § I, 4-11-1995]
Whenever the Fire Chief or his designated representative shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief or his designated
representative to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Lexington within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed.
However, during such appeal period, no construction, reconstruction,
building or alteration shall occur.
SECTION 9-2. Fire Department Designated Fire Prevention Bureau.
Wherever reference is made to the Fire Prevention Bureau in the Fire
Prevention Code, adopted in Section 9-1, such reference shall be deemed to
mean and refer to the Fire Department of the City.
SECTION 9-3. Burning Guidelines — Rules and Regulations. [Ord.
No. 93-08 §§ I — IV, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2006-43 § 1, 9-12-2006;
Ord. No. 2009-20 § 1, 4-28-2009]
A. Allowed Practices — Regulations.
SECTION 9-1.5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-3
1:186
SECTION 9-4. through SECTION 9-15. (Reserved)
1. Residents of the City shall be allowed to burn weeds, leaves, grass
and other plant life from gardens and areas being used as gardens,
brush and tree clippings during any months with a burn permit
from the Fire Department.
2. All fires, consisting of the above referenced material, shall be kept
to a size where flame height shall not exceed five (5) feet.
3. Residents are required to accompany all controlled burning areas
with a garden hose and rake.
4. Controlled burning fires are to be completely extinguished by 6:00
P.M., and shall not endanger the life or property of the community.
5. Campfires/bonfires shall be allowed to burn after 6:00 P.M.,
provided that the proposed area is inspected by an authorized Fire
Official prior to issuing the required burning permit to allow such
burning.
6. Under severe drought conditions, the Fire Department reserves the
right to ban all burning privileges.
B. Prohibited Practices. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or
unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air
pollution control agency;
2. Burn weeds, grass, leaves, brush, or tree clippings during the
months not allowed as burning months without an authorized
burning permit;
3. Burn any materials of any nature upon any public street, sidewalk,
or thoroughfares within the City;
4. Burn any materials other than those allowed by this Section
without prior approval from the Fire Department.
C. Burning Permit. A burning permit issued by the Fire Department is
required by residents desiring to burn during any months. There is no
fee charged for a burning permit. A person may obtain a burning permit
by going to the fire station and contacting a Fire Official.
D. Penalty. Anyone violating any of the terms and provision of this Section
shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor punishable by confinement for a
term of not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
SECTION 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-4
1:187

ARTICLE II
Fire Department38
SECTION 9-16. Establishment, Purpose.
There is hereby established for the City a Fire Department for the welfare
and protection of the citizens of the City and of their property.
SECTION 9-17. Composition.
SECTION 9-18. Compensation.
The Chief of the Fire Department and other members of the Fire
Department shall receive such compensation as is or may be fixed by
ordinance.
SECTION 9-19. Authority of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be in general charge of the Fire Department and firefighting
equipment of the City.
SECTION 9-20. Duties of Members. [Ord. No. 97-15 § I, 7-22-1997;
Ord. No. 98-13 § I, 4-28-1998]
A. The Fire Department shall be composed of such members as may be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the City
Council.
B. Fire Marshal, Deputies And Assistants. The Fire Chief or his designee
shall be the Fire Marshal for the City of Lexington. Within the Fire
Department, there shall be appointed by the Fire Marshal such
deputies or assistants as may be necessary. These deputies or assistants
shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the Fire
Marshal, at his direction or in his absence. The Fire Marshal shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code referenced
by Chapter 9 of this Code and related laws of the City and State and for
the investigation and/or prosecution of all cases of alleged arson and
other fire-related incidents. [Ord. No. 2014-22 § I, 9-23-2014]
A. It shall be the duty of members of the Fire and Rescue Department to
attend with utmost haste all alarms of fire, to engage in such drills and
practices at such times as the Mayor may designate, to preserve in good
condition the equipment and apparatus furnished the Department, and
to report to the City Council any repairs on equipment that may be
needed.
B. It shall be the duty of members of the Fire and Rescue Department to
provide twenty-four (24) hour a day emergency medical services, at the
advanced life support level to the citizens of the City of Lexington,
38.Cross Reference — Performance of duties of members of fire department while on
vacation, § 2-93.
SECTION 9-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-20
1:189
SECTION 9-21. Duty to Attend Fires, Answer Alarms.
It shall be the duty of every member of the Fire Department to attend every
fire and answer every call or alarm. If any member of the Fire Department is
unable to answer an alarm by attendance, it shall be his duty to immediately
notify the Fire Chief in such a manner and within such a time that a
substitute fireman may attend in the place of said regular fireman.
SECTION 9-22. Adoption of Fire Control Measures and Regulations.
[Ord. No. 79-28, § 1, 9-11-1979]
There is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Lexington, Missouri,
the fire control measures and regulations as herein set forth for the
purposes of controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire
suppression forces.
SECTION 9-23. Authority at Fires and Other Emergencies. [Ord. No.
79-28, § 2, 9-11-1979]
The Fire Official, or his duly authorized representatives, as may be in
charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection
of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks
or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action
necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire Official may
prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may
remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object
which may impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire Department.
The Fire Official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or
object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area
shall do so immediately and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to
do so by the Fire Official.
SECTION 9-24. Interference with Fire Department Operations.
[Ord. No. 79-28, § 3, 9-11-1979]
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel
Lexington R-5 School District and citizens in areas under contract with
the City of Lexington for fire or EMS services. "Emergency" is defined
as a situation or occurrence that requires immediate action to save life
or prevent suffering or disability, as defined in Section 321.225, RSMo.
C. Lexington Fire and Rescue will provide patient assessment, treatment
at the basic and advanced life support level and transport of patients to
area hospital emergency departments, if appropriate as determined by
the Lexington Fire and Rescue advanced life support protocol or a
medically licensed physician. All transport procedures will follow the
standard operating procedures and protocols as approved by the
Medical Director and adopted by department policy.
SECTION 9-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-24
1:190
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any Fire
Department operation.
SECTION 9-25. Compliance with Orders. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 4,
9-11-1979]
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of
another individual.
SECTION 9-26. Vehicles Crossing Fire Hose. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 5,
9-11-1979]
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alley-way, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Official in
command of said operation.
SECTION 9-27. Definition of Authorized Emergency Vehicle. [Ord.
No. 79-28, § 6, 9-11-1979]
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Missouri.
SECTION 9-28. Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized
Emergency Vehicles. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 7, 9-11-1979]
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge or
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles
shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Official or a Police
Officer.
SECTION 9-29. Vehicles Following Fire Apparatus. [Ord. No. 79-28,
§ 8, 9-11-1979]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow closer than five hundred (500) feet from any
fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle
within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
SECTION 9-30. Unlawful Boarding or Tampering with Fire
Department Emergency Equipment. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 9, 9-11-1979]
A person shall not without proper authorization from the Fire Official in
charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any Fire Department
SECTION 9-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-30
1:191
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or a rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell, or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate
or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
SECTION 9-31. Damage, Injury; Fire Department; Equipment,
Personnel. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 10, 9-11-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle
at any time, or to injure, or attempt to inure or conspire to injure Fire
Department personnel while performing departmental duties.
SECTION 9-32. Emergency Vehicle Operation. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 11,
9-11-1979]
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in Section 9-27 of this
Chapter, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights
on or disobey any existing traffic regulations, except when said vehicle
is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon
returning from a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to
"move-ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency
vehicle may:
SECTION 9-33. Blocking Fire Hydrants and Fire Department
Connections. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 12, 9-11-1979]
1. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he does not endanger life
or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions;
5. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary,
and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including
fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on
public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property.
SECTION 9-30 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-33
1:192
SECTION 9-34. Hydrant Use Approval. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 13,
9-11-1979]
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the Fire Official and the Water Company
having jurisdiction. This Section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the Water
Company having jurisdiction.
SECTION 9-35. Public Water Supply. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 14,
9-11-1979]
The Fire Official shall recommend to the Chief Administrative Official of
the City the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Official.
SECTION 9-36. Yard Systems. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 15, 9-11-1979]
All new and existing ship yards, oil storage plants, lumber yards,
amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes
and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire, or life hazards, and
which are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public
street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the
public water distribution system, shall be provided with properly placed
fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows
as required by the Fire Official and shall be connected to a water system
in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The Fire Official shall
designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire
Official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment
housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires
such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Official.
B. If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Official shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of
necessary work shall be paid from the Municipal Treasury on certificate
of the Fire Official and with the approval of the Chief Administrative
Official; and the legal authority of the Municipality shall institute
appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
SECTION 9-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-37
1:193
SECTION 9-37. Maintenance of Fire Suppression Equipment. [Ord.
No. 79-28, § 16, 9-11-1979]
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the Fire Official.
SECTION 9-38. Street Obstructions. [Ord. No. 79-28, § 17,
9-11-1979]
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps,
fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type
of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the City. The
word "street" as used in this Chapter, shall mean any roadway accessible
to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private
streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the
boundaries of the City.
SECTION 9-39. Fees for Response to Rural Fires. [Ord. No. 80-19,
§§ 1-2, 9-17-1980]
A. The fees for each response shall be the actual itemized expense
incurred by the City including but not limited to:
1. Mileage;
2. Depreciation on equipment;
3. Equipment expense for damage or destruction;
4. The total man hours itemized by name and amount per hour with
total amount shown.
B. The minimum charge or fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
SECTION 9-37 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-39
1:194
ARTICLE III
Fire Zone Limits; Rules and Regulations
SECTION 9-40. Fire Zone Limits. [Ord. No. 79-26, § 1, 9-4-1979]
All that part of the City of Lexington comprised within the following
described boundaries shall be known as the fire limits of said City.
Commencing at the junction of Main Street with Highland Ave, thence east
along Main Street to Eighth; thence south with Eighth Street to Franklin
Avenue, thence east along Franklin Avenue to Ninth Street; thence south
along Ninth Street to the alley south of Franklin Avenue; thence east along
said alley to Thirteenth Street; thence north along Thirteenth Street across
Main Street to the east end of the alley in block number twenty-eight
(28) thence west with said alley to Ninth Street; thence in a northwesterly
direction along the alley north of Broadway to Highland Avenue; thence
along Highland Avenue to the place of beginning.
SECTION 9-41. Structures Prohibited. [Ord. No. 72-26, § 2,
9-4-1979]
Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, build, place or
move on, or cause to be constructed, built, placed or moved on, any edifice,
building, structure or shed, the outer walls of which are in whole made of
wood, within that part of the City of Lexington embraced within the fire
limits as described in the preceding Section.
SECTION 9-42. Non-Compliance a Misdemeanor. [Ord. No. 79-26,
§ 3, 9-4-1979]
Any person who shall construct, build, place or move on, or suffer any
wooden building to be constructed, built, placed, or moved on, within
the fire limits of the City of Lexington, contrary to the provisions of the
preceding Sections, shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), and a like fine for every week he shall continue
in the violation of said Sections.
SECTION 9-43. Building Taken Down or Removed; When. [Ord. No.
79-26, § 4, 9-4-1979]
Whenever any wooden building shall be constructed, built, place or moved
on, within the fire limits of this City contrary to the provisions of this Article,
it shall be the duty of the Mayor to issue an order requiring the owner,
occupant, person in charge of building thereof, to cause such building to
be taken down or removed outside the fire limits. If the person so notified
shall refuse or neglect for the space of ten (10) days to comply with the
requirements of the order issued by the Mayor, as herein provided, then the
Mayor shall cause such building to be taken down or removed beyond said
fire limits, and the expense incident thereto may be recovered of the owner
of such building by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 9-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-44
1:195
SECTION 9-44. Stoves, Furnaces, Etc; Regulations. [Ord. No. 79-26,
§ 5, 9-4-1979]
No person shall set up or use a stove or furnace the top or any side of
which shall be within two (2) feet of any part of the woodwork of the wall or
partition of any building without protecting such woodwork with a metallic
or other incombustible covering, so as to effectually prevent the same from
taking fire from such stove or furnace; and every stove or furnace so set
up shall be placed on a platform of brick or sheet iron, or incombustible
substance, extending at least four (4) inches in every direction beyond the
part of the lower plate which fronts the door of the stove or furnace. And
whenever in the opinion of the City Marshal, any stove or furnace is in
such condition from any cause whatsoever, as to endanger the firing of
the building in which it is situated, or any adjoining building or property,
or any building or property in the vicinity, he shall give the owner or
occupant of the premises notice to change the construction of such stove
or furnace, so as to avoid, as far as practicable, all such dangers. And if
the construction of such stove or furnace renders it impracticable to avoid
such danger, then the notice aforesaid shall require the owner or occupant
of the premises to pull down the stove, furnace, pipe, flue or chimney; and
if the party notified shall neglect or refuse to comply with the notice of the
City Marshall for the space of twenty-four (24) hours, the Marshall shall
forthwith enter complaint, in the corporate name of the City, against such
person for violation of this Article.
SECTION 9-45. Stovepipes and Flues; Construction and
Maintenance. [Ord. No. 79-26, §§ 6-7, 9-4-1979]
SECTION 9-46. Fireworks — Discharge and Sale Unlawful — When.
[Ord. No. 91-6 §§ 1-6, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 92-19 §§ 1-6, 7-13-1992;
Ord. No. 2011-31 § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2018-18, 5-31-2018]
A. No person shall permit a stovepipe to project or pass through the roof,
walls or windows of any building, nor shall any person owning or
occupying a house in the City of Lexington permit a stovepipe to run
through any wooden wall or partition, unless the same shall enter a
brick or stone flue and is at least four (4) inches distant from any
woodwork. All stovepipes shall enter into stone or brick chimneys or
flues and all chimneys or flues shall be built of brick, stone or other
fireproof material, and shall be smoothly plastered inside from top to
bottom with metal asbestos double jacketed flue.
B. The owner or agent of any owner of any house, store, shop or other
building within this Fire Zone shall cause the flues or chimneys thereof
to be swept or burned out as often as may be necessary to keep the
same clean. Provided that the chimneys and flues shall be burned out
only in the daytime and when rain is falling, or when the roof is covered
with snow.
SECTION 9-44 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-46
1:196
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store, sell or
offer for sale fireworks of any type within the City limits; provided,
however, notwithstanding any ordinance or Fire Code provision to the
contrary, sale of fireworks shall be permitted by local, non-profit,
religious or community service organizations within the City limits for a
period from 10:00 A.M. on the 20th day of June of each year and ending
at 12:00 Midnight on the fifth day of July of each year.
B. Any such local, non-profit, religious or community service organization
desiring to sell or offer for sale permitted fireworks within the City
limits shall make written application to the City Clerk and pay a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) dollars.
C. All permits issued are personal to the applicant and non-transferable.
The sale of fireworks or operation of a facility for the sale of fireworks
by someone other than the license holder shall void the permit and
cause forfeiture of the permit fee.
D. At no time shall an aerial “fireworks” commonly known or described as
“bottle rockets” be sold or discharged within the Lexington City limits,
nor shall any fireworks prohibited under the laws of the State of
Missouri be sold within City limits.
E. All applications must contain the name of the applicant, in addition to a
detailed description of the proposed location and the provisions to be
taken pursuant to fire protection. The site location is limited to property
which is zoned for commercial or industrial use and the actual stand,
tent or facility shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any
temporary or permanent building. The stand, tent or facility shall be
inspected by the City Fire Inspector and/or Fire Chief prior to opening
subject to the International Fire Codes. At each entrance of each place
of sale of fireworks, a sign shall be posted setting forth the dates and
times when fireworks may be fired.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any fireworks,
including pyrotechnic devices, in such a manner that the explosion of
same will be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person
or property; provided, further, that it shall be unlawful for the person to
shoot or detonate fireworks of any nature within the City limits except
from July 1st through to 12:00 Midnight on July 5th of each year, and
special events.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to detonate any fireworks:
1. On any municipally owned property without specific permission of
the City Council;
2. On private property without specific permission of the property
owner;
3. Within an area designated as a hospital or school zone;
SECTION 9-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-46
1:197
4. Within one hundred (100) feet of any premises providing for the
sale of gasoline, or any other appreciable quantity of an otherwise
explosive combustible material.
H. The shooting or detonating of fireworks is allowed at other times and on
other dates than the times and dates specified above for special events
where a professional pyro technician is used to put on a fireworks
display. The applicant must obtain prior written approval from the Fire
Department and provide said approval to the City at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the special event. The City may issue a permit for
detonating fireworks at the special event at least seven (7) days prior to
the special event date. If the City denies the permit, the applicant may
request approval from the City Council.
I. No person shall throw, cast or hurl any fireworks, torpedoes or
combustible materials from any automobile while being driven and
operated within the corporate limits of the City of Lexington.
J. It shall be at the discretion of the Police Chief, Fire Chief and City
Administrator jointly to decide to ban the discharge of all fireworks in
emergency or fire hazard situations.
K. It shall be unlawful to attempt to sell or to sell at retail any fireworks to
children under the age of thirteen (13) years except when such child is
in the presence of a parent or guardian.
L. Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this Section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable under Section 1-8
of the Lexington Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 9-46 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9-46
1:198
Chapter 9A
FLOOD HAZARD CONTROL
*Editor's Note — Ord. No. 94-14, adopted June 14, 1994 repealed chapter
9A and Ord. No. 94-15 adopted June 14, 1994 enacted new provisions as
set out herein. The previous Ch. 9A derived from Ord. No. 78-4 §§ 2 — 12,
adopted February 7, 1978. Subsequently ord. no. 2010-37, adopted
November 9, 2010, repealed ch. 9A and enacted new provisions set out
herein. Former ch. 9A derived from ord. no. 94-15 §§ 1 — 14, 16 — 19,
6-14-1994.
SECTION 9-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9-46
1:199

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Purposes
SECTION 9A-1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art.
1(A), 11-9-2010]
The legislature of the State of Missouri has in Section 77.260, RSMo.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain
management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Lexington, Missouri
ordains as follows.
SECTION 9A-2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 1(B),
11-9-2010]
A. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of the City of Lexington, Missouri are subject to
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. General Causes of the Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by:
1. The cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain
causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and
2. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods,
hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
C. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard engineering
method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of
interrelated steps.
1. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as
its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the
depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this Chapter is
representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this
Chapter. It is in the general order of a flood which could be
expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any
one (1) year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's
FIS, and illustrative materials dated November 26,2010, as
amended, and any future revisions thereto.
2. Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
SECTION 9A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-2
1:201
SECTION 9A-3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 1(C),
11-9-2010]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare; to minimize those losses described in Article I, Section
9A-2(A); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44
CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this Chapter to:
3. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point.
4. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood
height.
5. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base
flood.
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights
or velocities;
2. Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve
such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction; and
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended
development purposes due to the flood hazard.
SECTION 9A-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-3
1:202
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
SECTION 9A-4. Lands to Which Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2010-37
Art. 2(A), 11-9-2010]
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
Lexington, Missouri identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and
AE Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Lafayette County,
Missouri on map panels 29107C0059C, 29107C0067C, 29107C0078C, and
29107C0100C dated November 26, 2010, as amended, and any future
revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this Chapter, no development
shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development
permit granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative
under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the
designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and
maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the
community, and as specifically noted in Article IV.
SECTION 9A-5. Floodplain Administrator. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art.
2(B), 11-9-2010]
The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the Floodplain
Administrator under this Chapter.
SECTION 9A-6. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 2(C),
11-9-2010]
No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this
community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable
regulations.
SECTION 9A-7. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2010-37 Art. 2(D), 11-9-2010]
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
SECTION 9A-8. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 2(E),
11-9-2010]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the Governing Body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State Statutes.
SECTION 9A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-9
1:203
SECTION 9A-9. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No.
2010-37 Art. 2(F), 11-9-2010]
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or
the flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does
not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
This Chapter shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Lexington,
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result
from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
SECTION 9A-10. Severability. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 2(G),
11-9-2010]
If any Section, clause, provision, or portion of this Chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 9A-9 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-10
1:204
ARTICLE III
Administration
SECTION 9A-11. Floodplain Development Permit (Required). [Ord.
No. 2010-37 Art. 3(A), 11-9-2010]
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, in the areas described in Article II, Section 9A-4.
No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any
development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done
without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each
structure or other development.
SECTION 9A-12. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. [Ord. No.
2010-37 Art. 3(B), 11-9-2010]
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 9A-13. Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 3(C), 11-9-2010]
Duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure
that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain
development permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;
2. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for
proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local law;
3. Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine
whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;
4. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
5. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (MO SEMA) to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
6. Assure that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be
maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse;
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures;
SECTION 9A-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-13
1:205
SECTION 9A-14. Application for Floodplain Development Permit.
[Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 3(D), 11-9-2010]
To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an
application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain
development permit application shall:
8. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential
structures have been floodproofed;
9. When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Building Inspector shall require certification
from a registered professional engineer or architect.
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or
work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of
the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or
floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Inspector;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction;
and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
SECTION 9A-13 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-14
1:206
ARTICLE IV
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
SECTION 9A-15. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 4(A),
11-9-2010]
A. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered
or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the conditions of this
Section are satisfied.
B. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are subject to
inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is
not provided. Development within unnumbered A Zones is subject to all
provisions of this Chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is not
available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from
Federal, State, or other sources.
C. Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted
within any numbered A Zone or AE Zone on the FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one (1) foot at any point within the community.
D. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements,
prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other
developments shall require:
1. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
3. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
4. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
5. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to
avoid impairment or contamination; and
SECTION 9A-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-15
1:207
6. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within
special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
a. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
b. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
c. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
d. All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or
fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such
proposals base flood elevation data.
E. Storage, Material, and Equipment.
1. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited.
2. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time
available after a flood warning.
F. Agricultural Structures. Structures used solely for agricultural
purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage,
drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of
livestock, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided
there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the
structure is of single-wall design; there is no permanent retail,
wholesale, or manufacturing use included in the structure; a variance
has been granted from the floodplain management requirements of this
Chapter; and a floodplain development permit has been issued.
G. Accessory Structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited
storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of
limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet may be
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human
habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall
design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain
management requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain
development permit has been issued.
SECTION 9A-15 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-16
1:208
SECTION 9A-16. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 4(B),
11-9-2010]
In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones,
where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Article
IV, Section 9A-15(B), the following provisions are required:
SECTION 9A-17. Manufactured Homes. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 4(C),
11-9-2010]
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above base
flood elevation.
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Article III,
Section 9A-13(9).
3. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that
fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement
and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided; and
b. The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one (1) foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's FIRM shall be
required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
SECTION 9A-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-17
1:209
SECTION 9A-18. Floodway. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 4(D), 11-9-2010]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article II,
Section 9A-4 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry
debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply:
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
B. Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM on sites:
1. Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result
of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
C. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of Article IV,
Section 9A-17(B) of this Chapter, be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot above
the base flood level; or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be
securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on
the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be
designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development, within
the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated
SECTION 9A-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-18
1:210
SECTION 9A-19. Recreational Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 4(E),
11-9-2010]
Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered
and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's FIRM either.
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
3. If Article IV, Section 9A-18(2) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of Article IV.
4. In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently
available from Federal, State, or other sources as set forth in Article IV,
Section 9A-15(B).
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes of this Chapter.39
39.A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only be quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
SECTION 9A-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-19
1:211

ARTICLE V
Floodplain Management Variance Procedures
SECTION 9A-20. Establishment of Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 2010-37
Art. 5(A), 11-9-2010]
The City Council as established by the City of Lexington shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management
requirements of this Chapter.
SECTION 9A-21. Responsibility of Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 2010-37
Art. 5(B), 11-9-2010]
Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for
a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the
Building Inspector, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development
permit or variance directly to the City Council as defined in Article V, the
City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building
Inspector in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
SECTION 9A-22. Further Appeals. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 5(C),
11-9-2010]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council or any taxpayer
may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Lafayette County as
provided in Section 89.110, RSMo.
SECTION 9A-23. Floodplain Management Variance Criteria. [Ord.
No. 2010-37 Art. 5(D), 11-9-2010]
In passing upon such applications for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other Sections of this Chapter, and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for
the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
SECTION 9A-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-23
1:213
SECTION 9A-24. Conditions for Approving Floodplain Management
Variances. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 5(E), 11-9-2010]
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
Floodplain Management Program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and
bridges.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subsections (B) through (F) below have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of
historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will
not preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
F. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a
community official that:
SECTION 9A-23 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-24
1:214
SECTION 9A-25. Conditions for Approving Variances for
Agricultural Structures. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 5(F), 11-9-2010]
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record
of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
A. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Article V, Sections
9A-22 and 9A-23 of this Chapter.
B. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the
threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
1. All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this Chapter shall
demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive
floodplain areas and no other alternate location outside of the
special flood hazard area exists for the agricultural structure.
Residential structures, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered
agricultural structures.
2. Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
3. For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Article IV, Section
9A-15(D)(2) of this Chapter.
4. The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in
accordance with Article IV, Section 9A-15(D)(1) of this Chapter. All
of the building's structural components must be capable of
resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
5. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is
SECTION 9A-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-25
1:215
SECTION 9A-26. Conditions for Approving Variances for Accessory
Structures. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 5(G), 11-9-2010]
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Article IV, Section 9A-15(D)(4) of this Chapter.
6. The agricultural structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood,
contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in accordance with Article IV, Section 9A-16(3) of this
Chapter.
7. The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Article IV,
Section 9A-18(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
agricultural structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.
8. Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected
from any flood damage.
9. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the agricultural structures.
10. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature
of a community official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with
the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
11. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the community and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
A. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Article V, Sections
9A-22 and 9A-23 of this Chapter.
B. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the
threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
SECTION 9A-25 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-26
1:216
included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
1. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
2. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Article IV, Section
9A-15(D)(2) of this Chapter.
3. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with Article IV, Section 9A-15(D)(1) of this Chapter. All
of the building's structural components must be capable of
resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
4. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Article IV, Section 9A-15(D)(4) of this Chapter.
5. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood,
contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in accordance with Article IV, Section 9A-16(A)(3) of
this Chapter.
6. The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Article IV,
Section 9A-18(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.
7. Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from
any flood damage.
8. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the accessory structures.
9. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature
of a community official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
SECTION 9A-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-26
1:217
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with
the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
10. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the community and registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
SECTION 9A-26 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-26
1:218
ARTICLE VI
Penalties for Violation
SECTION 9A-27. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 6, 11-9-2010]
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Lexington or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
SECTION 9A-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-27
1:219

ARTICLE VII
Amendments
SECTION 9A-28. Amendments. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 7, 11-9-2010]
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973, provided however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Lexington News, City of Lexington. At least twenty (20) days shall
elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A
copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this
Chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) regulations.
SECTION 9A-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-28
1:221

ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
SECTION 9A-29. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-37 Art. 8, 11-9-2010]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "BASE FLOOD".
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "APPURTENANT STRUCTURE".
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "RISK PREMIUM RATES".
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and livestock.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.
APPEAL — A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "STRUCTURE".
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OR CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The
official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement
and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof which has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the
areas within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
SECTION 9A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-29
1:223
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY OR PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of
inland and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in
any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
SECTION 9A-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-29
1:224
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "FLOODING").
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, or structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
1.
SECTION 9A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-29
1:225
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE OR FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
4.
SECTION 9A-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-29
1:226
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — Also known as an "eligible community",
means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of
flood insurance.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and
local governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least fifty-one percent (51%) of
the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
4.
SECTION 9A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-29
1:227
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD".
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and
AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first (1st) placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first (1st) alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State Government
or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by State Statute
at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure", for insurance
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. The term includes Repetitive Loss
buildings (see definition).
For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when
the first (1st) repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences.
The term does not apply to:
SECTION 9A-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-29
1:228
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place within a ten (10)
year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the building. For
the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first (1st)
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
3. Any improvement to a building.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized
as repetitive loss.
3.
SECTION 9A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 9A-29
1:229
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.
SECTION 9A-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 9A-29
1:230
Chapter 10
FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2000-16 § 1, adopted on August 15, 2000, repealed
this entire ch. 11 enacting the new provisions set out herein. Former ch.
11 derived from ord. no. 74-22 §§ 1 — 8, 10, 12-18-1974; ord. no. 75-22 § 1,
1-2-1976; ord. no. 77-16 § 1, 10-4-1977; ord. no. 82-8 SW §§ 2 — 3, 3-2-1982;
ord. no. 83-08 §§ 1, 3 — 4, 5-3-1983; ord. no. 84-01 § 1, 1-10-1984; ord. no.
87-0018 § 2, 11-3-1987; ord. no. 88-13 §§ 2, 4, 6-28-1988.
SECTION 11-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord.
No. 2000-16 § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have
the meanings indicated below:
APPROVED INCINERATOR — An incinerator which complies with all
current regulations of the responsible local and State air pollution control
agencies.
BULKY WASTE — Non-putrescent solid wastes consisting of combustible
and/or non-combustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial,
industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishments which are either too
large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste
transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors with the equipment
available therefor. Waste may include furniture, appliances, building
materials, carpet, remodeling debris, and similar disposable items. It does
not include tires, yard waste, concrete, or other similar materials.
CITY — The City of Lexington, Missouri.
COLLECTION — Removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the
transportation vehicle.
COMPOSTABLE MATERIALS — Leaves, grass, yard trimmings, tree limbs
of less than four (4) inches in diameter, and other organic yard materials.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL — Any and all stores, shops, businesses
or buildings used exclusively for retail trade or wholesale trade, sale,
display, offices, warehouses, religious gatherings, rendering of personal,
professional or business service, light manufacturing, assembly or
fabrication and any sale of goods, property, wares or services and any other
unit not specifically described and included in the definition of "residential"
below.
CONTRACTOR — The solid waste hauler selected by the City to collect solid
waste and bulky waste for disposal, and recyclables for recycling.
SECTION 9A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-1
1:231
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures.
DIRECTOR — The City Administrator as Director of the Solid Waste
Management Program of the City, or his authorized representative
approved by Council in his absence.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A container supplied by the
contractor. Such container shall be a ninety-gallon poly-cart for solid waste
disposal and a minimum thirty-gallon poly-cart for recycling materials.
DISPOSAL SITE — A refuse depository for the processing or final disposal
of refuse, including, but not limited to, sanitary landfills, transfer stations,
incinerators, and waste processing separation centers licensed, permitted
or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescent animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooling, serving or consumption of food and
including food containers.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Waste designated as hazardous by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate State agency,
including, but not limited to: pathological wastes, explosive wastes,
pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive materials.
MULTIPLE-HOUSING FACILITY — A housing facility containing more than
four (4) attached dwelling units under one (1) roof.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved
real property, either as owner or as a tenant.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, or organization of any kind, or their legal representative, agent
or assigns.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are
modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
RECYCLABLES — Waste materials that can be reused, including, but not
limited to, aluminum and steel cans, newsprint, corrugated cardboard;
chipboard boxes (i.e., cereal boxes, prepared food boxes), plastic
containers: 1) PET or PETE: bottle-type containers used for carbonated and
non-carbonated drinks, such as soft drink, liquor, juice, water and sports
drink bottles; 2) PET or PETE: containers with a screw-neck lid for food,
housecleaning products and personal car products, i.e., peanut butter jars,
salad dressing, cooking oil, mouthwash, shampoo, window cleaners and
dishwashing detergent bottles; 3) HDPE: natural or translucent bottle-type
SECTION 11-1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 11-1
1:232
containers, such as milk jugs, juice bottles, water bottles, etc.; 4) HDPE:
mixed colored or opaque bottle-type containers such as detergent bottles,
bleach bottles, fabric softener bottles, shampoo bottles and dishwashing
detergent bottles.
REFUSE — Solid waste.
RESIDENTIAL — Any home, house, living or dwelling unit designed to be
occupied by one (1) or more families living independently or attached at the
side or sides, including auto or trailer courts, mobile home parks, and any
other living unit, including multiple-family housing units with fewer than
five (5) dwelling units, such as apartment complexes or buildings; however,
exclusive of campgrounds, hotels, motels, or other transient overnight
business accommodation units.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded material, including waste
material, whether solid or in semi-solid state, including, but not limited to,
garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, mechanical tools, utensils or other
metals, or any part of such item described above, of every kind, shape,
material or description and/or any other kind of special wastes, industrial
wastes or demolition wastes, construction wastes, or other building salvage
materials.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Receptacle used by any person to store
solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections; means a
container supplied by the contractor. Such container shall be a ninety-gallon
poly-cart for solid waste disposal and a minimum thirty-gallon poly-cart for
recycling materials and shall comply with all other specifications required
under Chapter 11 of the City's Code of Ordinances.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The process of discarding or getting rid of
unwanted material, in particular the final deposition of solid waste by man.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire solid waste system of storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of
its production until the time of its collection.
Residential solid waste. Any and all solid waste resulting from the
maintenance and operation of dwelling units, excluding multiplehousing
facilities with more than four (4) dwellings units.
1.
Commercial solid waste. Any and all solid waste resulting from the
operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural
establishment and including multiple-housing facilities with more than
four (4) dwelling units. This definition shall include all stores, shops,
businesses or buildings used for retail trade or wholesale trade, sale,
display, offices, warehouses, religious gatherings, rendering of personal
and professional services, light manufacturing, assembly or fabrication
and any sale of goods, property, wares or services and any other unit
not specifically described and included in the definition of "residential"
listed above.
2.
SECTION 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-1
1:233
TRANSPORTATION — The transporting of solid waste from the place of
collection or processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste
disposal area.
YARD WASTES — Grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings.
SECTION 11-2. Solid Waste Storage. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
SECTION 11-3. Collection of Solid Waste. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
A. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall
place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers,
except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid
waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times.
B. "Solid waste container" means a container supplied by the contractor.
Such container shall be a ninety-gallon poly-cart for solid waste
disposal and a minimum thirty-gallon poly-cart for recycling materials.
C. Storage.
1. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the
residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be
stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have been
granted written permission from the City to use public property for
such purposes. The storage site shall be well-drained; fully
accessible to collection equipment, public health and personnel
and fire inspection personnel. The container must be removed from
curb by 11:59 P.M. on the day of collection and placed in the most
inconspicuous location as possible, which may include side of
residence, garage or porch. Other placement may be acceptable
with approval of the Director of the Program.
2. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers as
approved and/or required by the Director per Section 11-7. The
containers shall be waterproof, leak-proof and shall be covered at
all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the
contents thereof.
D. Solid waste containers which are not approved of will be collected
together with their contents and disposed of.
A. The City shall, at its discretion, contract with a contractor to provide
solid waste collection, removal and disposal of all residential solid
waste as defined in this Chapter.
B. All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided
by the contractor shall be collected. All solid waste collected shall, upon
SECTION 11-1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 11-3
1:234
SECTION 11-4. Transportation of Solid Waste. [Ord. No. 2000-16
§ 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
being loaded into transportation equipment, become the property of the
contractor.
C. Every person requiring residential solid waste collection must notify
City Hall to initiate solid waste collection at his or her address.
Additionally, every residential customer must notify City Hall thirty (30)
days prior to termination date that said collection service is to be
discontinued. In the event services are not needed for a period of thirty
(30) days or more, then the process recited in this Subsection shall
apply.
D. Solid waste containers as required by this Chapter for the storage of
other residential solid waste shall be placed at the curb or alley for
collection. Any solid waste containers, or other solid waste permitted by
this Chapter to be placed at the curb or alley for collection, shall not be
so placed until the regularly scheduled collection day. Containers may
be placed at collection area after 6:00 P.M. preceding collection day.
E. Bulky rubbish shall be collected by request to the Director. The Director
shall establish the procedure for collecting bulky rubbish.
F. The solid waste contractor is hereby authorized to enter upon private
property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required
by this Chapter. The contractor shall not enter dwelling units or other
residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid
waste. Commercial solid waste may be removed from within the
commercial establishments upon written request of the owner and
approval by the Director.
G. The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of solid
waste within the City. All residential solid waste, other than bulky
rubbish, shall be collected at least once weekly. The City and the
contractor shall provide twice annually City-wide trash pickup for the
purposes of collecting bulky rubbish. All commercial solid waste shall
be collected once weekly and shall be collected at such lesser intervals
as may by fixed by the Director upon a determination that such lesser
intervals are necessary for the preservation of the health and/or safety
of the public.
H. The solid waste contractor, operating under contract with the City, shall
be responsible for the collection of solid waste from the point of
collection to the transportation vehicle, provided that the solid waste
was stored in compliance with Section 11-2(C) and (D) of this Chapter.
Any spillage or blowing litter caused as a result of the duties of the solid
waste collector shall be collected and placed in the transportation
vehicle by the solid waste collector.
SECTION 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-4
1:235
SECTION 11-5. Disposal of Solid Waste. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
SECTION 11-6. Permits. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No.
2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
A. All vehicles and equipment used in the provision of collection and
removal service shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition, free of excessive noise, odor or emissions. The vehicles must
contain the solid waste so that no material is spilled, leaked or blown
from the vehicle during its transit to the appropriate disposal site as
approved by the City of Lexington. All vehicles to be used for
transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight
bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or
shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to
secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be secured
whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste or, as an alternate, the
entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed, with only loading hoppers
exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers. No
advertising other than the name of the contractor shall be permitted on
the vehicles.
B. Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavating activities; however,
all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material
being transported shall spill upon the public right-of-way.
C. Transportation and disposal of demolition and construction wastes shall
be in accordance with Sections 11-5 and 11-6.
A. Solid waste shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area
approved by the City and complying with all requirements of the
Missouri Division of Health and Missouri Department of Natural
Resources.
B. The Director may classify certain wastes as hazardous wastes which
will require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner
acceptable to the Director and which will meet all local, State and
Federal regulations.
A. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the
City without first obtaining an annual permit therefor from the City;
provided, however, that this provision shall not be deemed to apply to
employees of the holder of any such permit.
B. No such permit shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor,
in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain
with the Director evidence of satisfactory workers' compensation
insurance, including employer's liability insurance, complying with
SECTION 11-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 11-6
1:236
State requirements, public liability insurance policy, covering all
operations of such applicant pertaining to such business and all
vehicles operated in the conduct thereof, in the amount of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each person injured or killed,
and in the amount of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
in the event of injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any
single accident, and in the amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for damage to property. Such policy may be written
to allow the first five hundred dollars ($500.00) of liability damage to
property to be deductible. Should any such policy be canceled, the
Director shall be notified of such cancellation by the insurance carrier
in writing not less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
such cancellation, and provisions to that effect shall be incorporated
in such policy, which shall also place upon the company writing such
policy the duty to give such notice. A certificate evidencing insurance
coverage in this Subsection shall be provided by the contractor to
the City. The City shall be named as an additional named insured
for all coverage's except the workers' compensation coverage, and an
endorsement of same shall be submitted with said certificate.
C. Each applicant for any such permit shall state in his application
therefor:
1. The nature of the permit desired, as to collect, transport, process
or dispose of solid waste or any combination thereof;
2. The characteristics of solid waste or any combination thereof;
3. The characteristics of solid waste to be collected, transported,
processed or disposed of;
4. The number of solid waste transportation vehicles to be operated
thereunder;
5. The precise location or locations of solid waste processing or
disposal facilities to be used;
6. Boundaries of the collection area; and
7. Such other information as required by the Director.
D. If the application shows that the applicant will collect, transport,
process or dispose of solid wastes without hazard to the public health or
damage to the environment and in conformity with the laws of the State
of Missouri and this Chapter, the Director shall issue the permit
authorized by this Chapter. The permit shall be issued for a period of
one (1) year, and each applicant shall pay therefor a fee as authorized
and set forth in Chapter 13, License and Business Regulations, for each
solid waste processing or disposal facility and each transportation
vehicle to be used. If, in the opinion of the Director, modifications can
be made to the application regarding the service, equipment or mode of
operation so as to bring the application within the intent of this
SECTION 11-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-6
1:237
Chapter, the Director shall notify the applicant, in writing, setting forth
the modification to be made and the time in which it shall be done.
E. If the applicant does not make the modifications pursuant to the notice
in Subsection (D) within the time limit specified therein, or if the
application does not clearly show that the collection, transportation,
processing or disposal of solid wastes will create no public health
hazard or be without harmful effects on the environment, the
application shall be denied and the applicant notified by the Director, in
writing, stating the reason for such denial. Nothing in this Section shall
prejudice the right of the applicant to reapply after the rejection of his
application, provided that all aspects of the reapplication comply with
the provision of this Chapter.
F. The annual permit may be renewed simply upon payment of the fee or
fees as designated herein if the business has not been modified and
upon review by the Director to ascertain that all requirements are being
currently met. If modification has been made, the applicant shall
reapply for a permit as set forth in Subsections (B) and (C) of this
Section. No permits authorized by this Chapter shall be transferable
from person to person or to any other business unit.
G. In order to ensure compliance with the laws of this State, this Chapter
and the rules and regulations authorized herein, the Director is
authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the
City of Lexington. No inspection shall be made in any residential unit
unless authorized by the occupant or by due process of law. In all
instances where such inspections reveal violation of this Chapter, the
rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the
State of Missouri, the Director shall issue notice for each such violation
stating therein the violation or violations found, the time and date and
the corrective measure to be taken, together with the time in which
such corrections shall be made.
H. In all cases, when the corrective measures have not been taken within
the time specified, the Director shall suspend or revoke the permit or
permits involved in the violation; however, in those cases where an
extension of time will permit correction and there is no public health
hazard created by the delay, one (1) extension of time not to exceed the
original time period may be given.
I. All motor vehicles operating under any permit required by this Chapter
shall display the number or numbers on each side in colors which
contrast with that of the vehicle, such numbers to be clearly legible and
not less than three (3) inches high. Each permit for processing or
disposal facilities shall be prominently displayed at the facility.
J. Each permit shall state the precise authority and type of business
granted by the City.
SECTION 11-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 11-7
1:238
SECTION 11-7. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
A. The Director shall make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and
necessary rules and regulations, governing, but not limited to:
1. Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid
waste containers;
2. Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size and shape thereof;
3. Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any;
4. Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste
containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size
limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste
containers;
5. Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers;
6. Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste
containers;
7. Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid
waste;
8. Collection points of solid waste containers;
9. Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste;
10. Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof;
11. Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof;
12. Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing and/
or disposal facilities;
13. Handling of special wastes, such as toxic wastes, sludge, ashes,
agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils,
greases, etc.
B. The City Clerk or such other City official who is responsible for
preparing utility and other service charge billings for the City is hereby
authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection and/or
disposal service charges, as hereinafter provided for.
C. A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated
under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
of the City.
SECTION 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-8
1:239
SECTION 11-8. Collection of Recyclables. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
SECTION 11-9. Disposal of Recyclables Generally. [Ord. No.
2000-16 § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
Recyclables shall not, in any event, be deposited in any landfill, be burned in
any incinerator or be deposited or distributed in any way or manner which
is contrary to then-applicable law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation;
provided, however, that the restrictions hereinabove shall not apply to any
recyclables which are deposited in a landfill or burned pursuant to specific
prior written approval granted by the City. Residents shall take such action
as is reasonable under the circumstances to determine that recyclables are
not disposed of contrary to the provisions of this Section.
SECTION 11-10. Prohibited Practices. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
A. The City may designate and require the contractor to provide a central
collection site for discarding of recyclables. Such collection shall be
done in compliance with all other applicable ordinances of the City now
or hereafter in effect. Said collection shall be on terms and conditions
set out in the contract between the City and contractor.
B. The collection of recyclables at curbside by any private hauler not
authorized by the City is expressly prohibited.
C. Neither the foregoing provisions of this Section nor any other
provisions of this Chapter shall prevent any resident from discarding
that resident's recyclables by personally delivering them to a
recyclables plant, manufacturer or other vendor, but the provisions of
Section 11-9 of this Chapter shall be complied with by such resident.
A. Trash collection is mandatory for every residential and commercial
property within the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own;
2. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and
transportation equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the
lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such
equipment or collectors shall be those of the City or those of a solid
waste collection agency operating under contract with the City;
3. Residents of the City may burn weeds, grass and other plant life
from gardens and areas being used as gardens and further be
allowed to burn leaves, brush and tree clippings, provided that
such burning shall not endanger the life or property of the
community; all burning must be in compliance with both the City's
Fire Prevention Code and all applicable State laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, regulations promulgated by the
SECTION 11-8 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 11-10
1:240
SECTION 11-11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord.
No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any lawful
rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day in which a violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation.
SECTION 11-12. Performance Bond. [Ord. No. 2000-16 § 1,
8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2013-23 § 1, 7-23-2013]
Any contractor who shall collect, transport, process or dispose of solid
waste under contract with the City of Lexington shall furnish the City and
maintain during the term of the contract a performance bond or letter
of credit acceptable to City in a penal sum of a minimum of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) with good and sufficient surety acceptable
to the City and conditioned upon the contractor performing his duties and
obligations provided for in his contract.
Chapter 12
HEALTH
Cross References — Powers of city council relative to quarantine and
condemnation, § 2-248; Animals and fowl, § 5-1 et seq.; Rabies control,
§ 5-63 et seq.; Garbage and trash, § 11-1 et seq.; Nuisances, § 18-89 et seq.;
Weeds, § 26-13 et seq.; Water and sewers, § 28-1 et seq.
State Law References — Public health generally, RSMo. § 71.680 et seq.;
Health and welfare generally RSMo. Ch. 96.
State's Department of Natural Resources and the State Air
Conservation Commission.
4. Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the City and the Missouri Division of Health and
State's Department of Natural Resources;
5. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or
disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the City
without a permit from the City, or operate under an expired permit,
or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked;
6. Fail to participate in the weekly residential or commercial trash
collection provided by contractor;
7. Combine residential solid waste and commercial solid waste into
one (1) solid waste container.
SECTION 11-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 11-12
1:241

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 12-1. Office of Health Officer Created; Appointment;
Duties.
There is hereby created the office of Health Officer. The Health Officer shall
be appointed annually by the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may
be required of him by this Code or other ordinances of the City.
SECTION 12-2. Board of Health Created; Composition.
There is hereby created a Board of Health which shall be composed of the
Mayor, City Clerk and City Marshal.
SECTION 12-3. through SECTION 12-13. (Reserved)
SECTION 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 12-3
1:243

ARTICLE II
Hospital Board of Trustees40
SECTION 12-14. Created; Composition; Appointment of Members.
[Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-47 § A, 11-24-2009; Ord. No.
2014-08 § 1, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2015-07 § 1, 3-10-2015]
There is hereby created a City Hospital Board of Trustees, which shall be
composed of nine (9) members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council. Five (5) members of the Board shall be citizens
of the City, and all members shall be citizens of Lafayette County, Missouri.
SECTION 12-15. Terms of Members. [Ord. of 10-25-1949, §§ 1,2;
Ord. No. 2009-47 § A, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08 § 1, 4-22-2014;
Ord. No. 2015-07 § 1, 3-10-2015]
Members of the Hospital Board of Trustees shall serve for a period of four
(4) years from the date of appointment and approval thereof by the City
Council, except for the members appointed to terms beginning in 2015
who shall serve for the period for which each member is appointed. For
members appointed to terms beginning in 2015, three (3) such members
shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) such members shall
be appointed for a term of two (2) years, two (2) such members shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years and, two (2) such members shall be
appointed for a term of four (4) years from the date of appointment.
SECTION 12-16. (Reserved)41
SECTION 12-17. Vacancies. [Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 1,3]
Vacancies on the Hospital Board of Trustees shall be filled in the same
manner as regular appointments. Such appointees shall serve the
remainder of the term of the member whose position was vacated.
SECTION 12-18. Compensation of Members. [Ord. of 10-25-1949,
§ 11]
The members of the Hospital Board of Trustees shall serve without
compensation, except such compensation as may hereafter be provided by
ordinance.
SECTION 12-19. Organizational Meeting; Selection of Officers.
[Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 4]
Within ten (10) days after the appointment by the Mayor and confirmation
by the City Council of the first Hospital Board of Trustees, the members
40.State Law Reference — Board of hospital trustees, RSMo. § 96.160 et seq.
41.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2009-47, adopted November 24, 2009, repealed section 12-16
"political affiliation of members" in its entirety. Former section 12-16 derived from ord. of
10-25-1949 § 2. This section has been reserved for the city's future use.
SECTION 12-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 12-19
1:245
thereof shall meet and organize, by electing one (1) of their members
President and one (1) Secretary and such other officers as they deem
necessary.
SECTION 12-20. Adoption of By-Laws, Rules and Regulations for
Management of City Hospital. [Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 5]
The Hospital Board of Trustees shall make and adopt such by-laws, rules
and regulations for the management of the City Hospital, and the admission
and discharge of patients, as they may deem expedient.
SECTION 12-21. Control Over Expenditure of Hospital Funds. [Ord.
of 10-25-1949, § 6]
The Hospital Board of Trustees shall control the expenditures of all monies
collected to the credit of the Hospital Fund and for equipping and operating
the City Hospital.
SECTION 12-22. Deposit of Funds; Drawing on Funds. [Ord. of
10-25-1949, § 7]
All monies collected from taxes, donations and from any other source for
hospital purposes shall be deposited in the City Treasury to the credit of the
Hospital Fund, and drawn upon by the vouchers of the proper officers of the
Hospital Board of Trustees.
SECTION 12-23. Employment of Hospital Personnel. [Ord. of
10-25-1949, § 8; Ord. No. 2009-47 § A, 11-24-2009]
The Hospital Board of Trustees shall employ such help, professional and
otherwise, as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of Sections
96.150 to 96.220, RSMo., and all such assistants and employees shall serve
at the pleasure of the Hospital Board of Trustees.
SECTION 12-24. Board to Act as Trustees When Bequests and
Donations are Made to Hospital; Power to Take Title to Property.
[Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 10]
Any person making a bequest or donation to the City Hospital shall have
the right to vest the title to real or personal property in the Hospital Board
of Trustees and all such bequests or donations shall be held and controlled
by the Hospital Board of Trustees as special trustees of such bequests or
donations.
SECTION 12-25. Annual Report. [Ord. of 10-25-1949, § 9; Ord. of
9-19-1972, § 2]
The Hospital Board of Trustees shall make, on or before the second Monday
in June of each year, a detailed itemized report, in writing, showing the
receipts of all funds and expenditures for the preceding twelve (12) months,
SECTION 12-19 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 12-25
1:246
which report shall include each donation, the name of the donor and the
date and amount of each donation.
SECTION 12-26. Compliance with Section 501(C)(3) of Internal
Revenue Code. [Ord. No. 81-13 §§ 1-5, 11-3-1981]
SECTION 12-27. (Reserved)42
SECTION 12-28. through SECTION 12-29. (Reserved)
A. The purpose and intent of the City Council in enacting this Section is to
facilitate compliance by the Board of Trustees and Administration of the
Municipal Hospital with the terms, covenants, regulations and
conditions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code so that the
Municipal Hospital employees may purchase tax sheltered annuities.
B. No part of the net earnings of the hospital shall inure to the benefit of,
or be distributed to, members of the Board of Trustees, officers or other
private persons, except that the Board of Trustees shall be authorized
to pay reasonable compensation for services rendered.
C. No substantial part of the activities of the hospital shall be the carrying
on of lobbying or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and the
hospital shall not participate in any political campaign on behalf of any
candidate for public office or carry on any other activity not permitted
by organization exempt from Federal Income Tax under Section 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
D. Should it become necessary for the dissolution of the hospital, the
Board of Trustees shall, after making provision for payment of all
liabilities, determine that the assets of the hospital shall be distributed
to the City of Lexington and that said assets shall be used exclusively
for public purposes.
E. This Section is passed at the instance and request of the Internal
Revenue Code and does not change the present laws or ordinances of
the City of Lexington but merely clarifies the prescriptions and
proscriptions of our Hospital Ordinance.
42.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2009-47, adopted November 24, 2009, repealed section 12-27
"lease of hospital suspends board of trustees" in its entirety. This section has been
reserved for the city's future use.
SECTION 12-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 12-28
1:247

ARTICLE III
Ambulance Services
SECTION 12-30. Established — Service. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 1,
3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2015-26 § 1, 10-13-2015]
Ambulance service for the City of Lexington is hereby affirmed, to serve
an area which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the R-V
Lexington School District.
SECTION 12-31. Ambulance Service Billings. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 1,
3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2001-48 § 1, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 2015-26 § 1,
10-13-2015]
SECTION 12-32. Powers and Duties of Fire Department To Provide
Ambulance Services. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 1, 10-13-2015]
The Fire Department shall serve as the primary response and transport
ambulance service for all emergency medical services and ground
ambulance transport within the City of Lexington and R-V Lexington School
District as set forth in regulations approved in Lexington City Code. No
other ambulance service shall operate within the City except for exemptions
as set forth in the Department Standard Operating Guidelines without
approval by the Fire Chief or designated personnel. It shall be the duty
of the Fire Department to oversee, manage, and operate the ambulance/
transport component and special events coverage of the prehospital
emergency medical services system to provide quality advanced life support
single-tier service to all inhabitants of the City of Lexington and R-V
Lexington School District.
SECTION 12-33. through SECTION 12-39. (Reserved)
A. The City of Lexington or its designated agent shall collect such
necessary fees or charges for ambulance services as authorized and
required by the City Council.
B. Medical or mental health records maintained by the City of Lexington of
individuals provided emergency medical services or transport, or
obtained in the course of emergency medical service activities, shall be
deemed closed records.
C. The medical records obtained through these ambulance reports shall be
retained for a minimum of seven (7) years with the City of Lexington.
D. An additional billing amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00)
shall be assigned to all patient billings for patients that do not reside in
the R-5 School District or areas that are not under contract with the
City of Lexington.
SECTION 12-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 12-33
1:249

ARTICLE IV
Health And Wellness Board
SECTION 12-40. Membership. [Ord. No. 2016-07 § 1, 3-22-2016]
SECTION 12-41. Compensation Of Members. [Ord. No. 2016-07 § 1,
3-22-2016]
All citizen members of the Health and Wellness Board shall serve without
compensation.
SECTION 12-42. Removal Of Members. [Ord. No. 2016-07 § 1,
3-22-2016]
The City Council may remove any citizen member of the Health and
Wellness Board for cause, stated in writing.
SECTION 12-43. Duties And Powers. [Ord. No. 2016-07 § 1,
3-22-2016]
The Board will take the necessary actions to promote Health and Wellness
Programs in the City of Lexington. The Board shall be in charge of handling
all correspondence with the citizens, handling all correspondence with City
Council relative to the Health and Wellness Programs, coordinate with
HCA Midwest Division on programs recommended to the City Council for
implementation and prepare estimates for each project for City Council
approval. The monies may be accumulated, i.e., does not require being
expended the year of donation.
A. The Board shall be composed of five (5) members that are citizens of the
City of Lexington. Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council for a term of three (3) years, the
original appointments to the Board to be made for the following terms:
One (1) member appointed for a term of one (1) year.
Two (2) members appointed for a term of two (2) years.
Two (2) members appointed for a term of three (3) years.
B. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years.
Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired
term of any member whose office becomes vacant. The Board shall elect
a Chairman and an Acting Chairman from its membership who shall
serve for a term of office of one (1) year.
SECTION 12-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 12-43
1:251
Chapter 13
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Cross Reference — As to enhanced enterprise zone, § 25-66.
Cross References — Duty of mayor to sign licenses, § 2-107; Duty of city
clerk to prepare blank licenses, issue licenses and account for license
taxes and fees, § 2-134; License for sale of alcoholic beverages, § 4-21
et seq.; License for dogs, § 5-31; Regulation of sale of cigarettes, § 7-1
et seq.; License for private garbage and refuse collectors, § 11-6; Motor
vehicle licenses, § 15-49 et seq.; Building inspector/code enforcement
officer — authorized to enforce ch. 13, § 2-209.
State Law Reference — Authority to impose license taxes on certain
businesses, RSMo. § 94.110; Issuance of licenses, RSMo. § 94.120.
SECTION 12-43 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 12-43
1:252
ARTICLE I
General Business Regulations
SECTION 13-1. "Merchant" Defined. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 5]
MERCHANT — As used in this Chapter shall include every person engaged
in the selling of goods, wares and merchandise, of any kind, at any stand
or place occupied for the purpose within the City, and the term "merchant"
shall include but shall not be limited to all merchants, commission
merchants, grocers, druggists, jewelers, butchers and like businesses,
confectioners, lumber dealers, building material dealers, wood and coal
dealers, ice dealers and oil dealers, whether selling at wholesale or retail,
and like dealers, blacksmiths, plumbers, tinners selling goods, wares,
merchandise, supplies and fixtures, dealers in electrical goods and radios,
department stores, mills, feed stores and elevators selling at retail, and
like businesses engaged in selling goods, wares and merchandise, and
garages and machines shops selling goods, wares and merchandise, parts
and accessories, except as may be otherwise provided in this Chapter.
SECTION 13-2. License Required. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or through agents,
officers, servants or employees, to exercise, carry on or engage in any of
the occupations, trades, businesses, agencies or vocations enumerated in
Sections 13-3 and 13-4 within the corporate limits of the City, without first
taking out and having a license therefor.
SECTION 13-3. Administrative Fee for Issuance of License. [Ord. of
5-11-1971 § 3; Ord. No. 2004-05 § 1, 3-9-2004]
Every merchant doing business within the City (not excluded by Statute)
must annually obtain an occupation license and pay an administrative fee
in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) per license obtained. This
administration fee shall be in addition to any occupational license tax
imposed by Section 13-4.
SECTION 13-4. Occupational License Tax Levied.43 [Ord. of
5-11-1971 § 2; Ord. No. 2004-05 § 1, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 2005-38 § 1,
11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 3-28-2006]
1. Abstracters, abstract agencies: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
2. Architect, professional engineer: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year if
office maintained within the municipality.
3. Auctioneer: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year or three dollars ($3.00)
per day if office maintained within the municipality.
43.Cross References — Fees for license to sell alcoholic beverages, § 4-22; Licensing and
registration fee for sale of cigarettes, § 7-2.
SECTION 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-4
1:253
4. Automobile accessories, dealers or agents: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per
year. Including trailers, tractors and wagons.
5. Automobile, trailer, tractor dealers or agents: Fifty dollars (50.00) per
year or three dollars ($3.00) per day.
6. Bakers: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
7. Bakery trucks, retail: Based out of the City, fifty dollars ($50.00) per
year.
8. Banks, savings and loan associations: Sixty dollars ($60.00) per year.
9. Barbers and barbershops: For one (1) operator, ten dollars ($10.00) per
year; for each additional operator, five dollars ($5.00) per year.
10. Beauty parlors, hairdressers, hair dressing shops: For one (1) operator,
ten dollars ($10.00) per year; for each additional operator, five dollars
($5.00) per year.
11. Billiards or pool halls: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
12. Blacksmiths, farriers, welders: Mobile or stationary, twenty dollars
($20.00) per year or ten dollars ($10.00) per day.
13. Bowling alleys, tenpin alleys, ball alleys: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year.
14. Bulk oil stations, gas companies, propane, butane stations, agents or
dealers: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
15. Cafes, restaurants: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
16. Cement, brick, sidewalk, concrete contractors, dealer and agents:
Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
17. Delivery trucks: Business resident of City, thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year; non-resident of City, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
18. Druggist: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
19. Employment offices and agencies: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
20. Flour mills: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
21. Florists: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
22. Foundries: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year.
23. General, bridge, stone, street, plumbing, electrical, and building
contractors (outside the City): one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year,
plus one hundred ($100.00) for each subcontractor working for or
under contract with the general contractor, whether by the hour, day,
week, month or year. Including roofers, carpenters, floor layers,
plumbers, general repair, insulators, electricians, heating and cooling
SECTION 13-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-4
1:254
contractors and cabinet makers. Before obtaining an occupational
license, electrical contractors must take and pass a City electrician's
exam (for residential work only) or show proof of their valid Missouri
electrical contactor's license. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § I, 3-10-2015]
24. General, bridge, stone, street, plumbing, electrical, and building
contractors (inside the City): twenty dollars ($20.00) per year. Including
roofers, carpenters, floor layers, plumbers, general repair, insulators,
electricians, heating and cooling contractors and cabinet makers.
Before obtaining an occupational license, electrical contractors must
take and pass a City electrician's exam (for residential work only) or
show proof of their valid Missouri electrical contractor's license. [Ord.
No. 2015-05 § I, 3-10-2015]
25. Grocers, wholesale butchers and butchers: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year.
26. Hawker, peddler, pawnbrokers or huckster: Resident of City, thirty
dollars ($30.00) per year.
27. Hawker, itinerant merchant, peddler, transient merchant or solicitor:
Non-resident, ten dollars ($10.00) per day. Magazine and book
peddlers, fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.
28. Health schools, masseur, physical culture: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year.
29. Hotels, motels, rooming houses, boarding houses, bed and breakfasts:
Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
30. Ice cream parlors, ice cream manufacturers and dealers: Thirty dollars
($30.00) per year.
31. Ice dealers, ice plants, ice plant agencies, ice trucks: Thirty dollars
($30.00) per year.
32. Insurance agent or broker: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year if office
maintained within the municipality.
33. Junk dealers, auto salvage, auto wrecking: With permanent place of
business and salvage yards, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
34. Land surveyor: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year if office maintained
within the municipality.
35. Laundries: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
36. Laundry agency, dry cleaning and tailors: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year; with own plant located in City, twenty dollars ($20.00) per year.
37. Laundry trucks: Outside City, twenty dollars ($20.00) per year per unit.
38. Loan and finance companies: Sixty dollars ($60.00) per year.
SECTION 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-4
1:255
39. Loan agents, collection agencies: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
40. Lunch, soft drink and ice cream stands, peanut and popcorn stand, food
vendors: Non-resident of City, fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit per year.
41. Lumber and wood dealers, loggers: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
42. Lung testers, muscle developers, fluoroscopic, telescopic views: Five
dollars ($5.00) per day, including all kinds of striking machines.
43. Machine shop, auto repair and body shops: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per
year.
44. Manufacturing agents: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
45. Mercantile agents: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year. The term
"mercantile agent", as herein used, shall be deemed to include any
person having a place of business in the City where orders for the sale
and delivery of merchandise are taken or any person who shall go from
place to place in the City and shall take orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise for future delivery, either by himself or some
other person.
46. Merchant of all kinds: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
47. Milk distributors: Resident of City, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; nonresident,
fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
48. Monument dealers and agencies: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
49. Moving picture shows, theatrical, concerts or other exhibitions:
Resident of City, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; non-resident of City,
fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. When not held in a public building,
charging admission or where goods are sold, seven dollars ($7.00) per
day; however charitable, religious or educational or home talent shall
be exempt.
50. Newspaper office, job printing plant: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
51. Nursery stock agents: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
52. Outdoor advertising: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
53. Painting, plastering contractors: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year or
ten dollars ($10.00) per job.
54. Photographers: Resident of City, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; nonresident,
ten dollars ($10.00) per day.
55. Piano/organ dealers and agents: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
56. Produce and poultry dealers: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
57. Real estate agent or broker: Consisting of not more than the owner and
two (2) salesmen, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; for each additional
SECTION 13-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-4
1:256
SECTION 13-5. License Taxes Not in Lieu of Ad Valorem Taxes.
[Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 6]
The license taxes provided for in this Article shall not be in lieu of any ad
valorem tax, but such ad valorem tax shall be paid in addition to any license
tax.
salesman or agent, five dollars ($5.00) per year if office maintained
within the municipality.
58. Sand plants: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
59. Sewer contractors, septic tank cleaner, itinerant plumber: Thirty
dollars ($30.00) per year or ten dollars ($10.00) per job.
60. Sewing machine agents: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
61. Shoe cobbler/repair shops: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year.
62. Shooting, pistol galleries, archery range: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per
year, provided that no pistol or gun of more than twenty-two
hundredths (.22) caliber shall be used in any such gallery.
63. Skating rink, miniature golf courses, museums, amusement parks:
Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year and no license shall be issued for less
than one (1) year.
64. Stands: Of all kinds, not herein otherwise named, three dollars ($3.00)
per day.
65. Stockyards, sale barns, horse/cattle dealer, kennels: Thirty dollars
($30.00) per year.
66. Storage warehouses and units: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
67. Tavern: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
68. Taxicab, buggies, carriages, wagons, buses: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per
year.
69. Transfer businesses, trucks, moving vans: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per
year.
70. Undertakers and funeral homes: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
71. Utility companies: Of every kind (gas, electric, water, phone, cable)
shall pay a fee of five percent (5%) of total gross receipts, but not less
than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per year.
72. Veterinarian: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year if office maintained within
the municipality.
SECTION 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-6
1:257
SECTION 13-6. License Taxes to be Paid in Advance; Issuance of
License. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 7]
All license taxes shall be paid in advance to the City Collector, upon
exhibition of whose receipt the City Clerk shall execute and deliver a license
to the person entitled thereto, and the City Clerk shall charge the City
Collector with the amount of such license.
SECTION 13-7. Licenses not to be Transferred or Assigned. [Ord. of
5-11-1971, § 8]
No license granted by the City shall be assigned or transferred.
SECTION 13-8. Separate Licenses Required When More Than One
Business is Conducted. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 8]
No license granted to conduct or transact, or carry on any business shall
authorize the licensee to blend with such business, any other business for
which a separate license might be required, but in such a case a separate
and appropriate license shall be taken out.
SECTION 13-9. Licensed Business to be Operated Only on Licensed
Premises.
No person to whom a license is issued may carry on the business named
therein at any other location than the one named in or endorsed on said
license.
SECTION 13-10. Term of Licenses; Pro-Rating Tax. [Ord. of
5-11-1971, § 9]
All annual licenses shall begin on the first day of July of each year and
whenever any person shall make application for a license after said date,
the amount of the license tax shall be pro-rated for the remainder of the
license year, except during the last three (3) months of the license year, in
which case the fee shall be one-quarter (1/4) of the regular fee.
SECTION 13-11. Licenses to be Issued in Name of City; Required
Signatures, Seal. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 10]
All licenses shall be issued in the name of the City and shall be signed by
the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, countersigned by the City Collector
and sealed with the Corporate Seal of the City.
SECTION 13-12. Posting License. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 13]
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises for such
business at all times.
SECTION 13-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-13
1:258
SECTION 13-13. Revocation of Licenses and Permits. [Ord. of
5-11-1971, § 12]
Any license or permit may be revoked by the Mayor at any time during the
life of such license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee
of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City relating to
the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the
premises occupied. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
SECTION 13-14. Procedure When Person is Found Operating
Without a License. [Ord. of 5-11-1971, § 11]
When any person, either directly or through agents, officers, servants or
employees shall be found to exercise, carry on or engage in any trade,
business, agency or vocation within the City, without first obtaining a
license therefor, it shall be the duty of the City Marshal and every Policeman
of the City, upon being notified thereof to inquire into the matter and if
satisfied that it is true, to give information thereof to the Municipal Judge
and thereupon the Municipal Judge shall issue his warrant and cause the
offender to be arrested and brought before him to answer such complaint,
as in cases of misdemeanors.
SECTION 13-15. City Taxes Must be Paid Before License Issued.
[Ord. No. 91-3 § 1, 5-14-1991]
No person, corporation, firm or other individual or entity whosoever,
hereafter collectively "licensee", shall be issued a business or occupational
license as referenced in this Chapter without having first paid all City taxes
or fees owned to the city of Lexington in connection with any premises
owned or occupied by such licensee, and being fully current regarding the
payment thereof on the date an application for such license is submitted to
the City.
SECTION 13-16. Revocation of License in the Event of Delinquent
Taxes. [Ord. No. 91-3 § 2, 5-14-1991]
Any such license issued by the City under this Chapter is subject to
revocation in the form and manner prescribed in Section 13-13 of this
Chapter in the event a delinquency in the payment of required City taxes
or fees accrues against either the licensee holding said license or premises
occupied by the licensee, and the licensee fails to fully pay and satisfy the
accrued delinquency with ten (10) days of the receipt of written notice
thereof from the City Clerk.
SECTION 13-17. Evidence of Workers' Compensation Prior to
License Issuance. [Ord. No. 93-20 § 1, 9-28-1993]
No license required under the provisions of this Section shall be issued by
the City to any person until such person produces a copy of a certificate
of insurance for Workers' Compensation coverage if the applicant for the
license is required to cover his liability under Chapter 287, RSMo. It is
SECTION 13-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-17
1:259
further made a violation of this Section to provide fraudulent information to
the City.
SECTION 13-18. through SECTION 13-19. (Reserved)
SECTION 13-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-18
1:260
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)44
SECTION 13-20. through SECTION 13-30. (Reserved)
44.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2002-10 § 1, adopted March 19, 2002, repealed this article II,
"Farmer's Market" and sections 13-20 — 13-23 in their entirety. Former sections
13-20 — 13-23 derived from ord. no. 86-114 §§ 1 — 4, 4-8-1986. At the editor's discretion
we have left these sections reserved for the city's future use.
SECTION 13-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-20
1:261

ARTICLE III
Adult Businesses — Licensing and Regulation45
SECTION 13-31. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 1, 1-8-2002]
For the purposes of this Article and unless the content plainly requires
otherwise, the following definitions are adopted.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any business enterprise:
That has as a regular and substantial business purpose the sale, display
or rental of goods that are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities or that emphasize matters depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
1.
That has one (1) of the following as a regular and substantial business
purposes:
The providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on
performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or
display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or
a.
The providing of services that provide specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits or allow
participation in specified sexual activities ancillary to other
pursuits.
b.
2.
The definition of "adult business" also includes, but is not limited to, any
and all of the following as defined herein:
Businesses that offer the following described goods for sale or rent:
Adult Retail Establishments: An establishment which as a
regular and substantial business purpose offers for sale or rent
any one (1) or more of the following: instruments, devices, gifts
or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or clothing that graphically depicts
specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or
rented in an adult bookstore as defined herein.
(1)
Adult Bookstore: An establishment which as a regular and
substantial business purpose offers for sale or rent books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs,
slides, films or videotapes which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(2)
a.
3.
45.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2002-03, adopted January 8, 2002, superseded this article III
"Adult Business" and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former article III derived
from ord. no. 95-29 §§ 1 — 7, 11-28-1995.
SECTION 13-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-31
1:263
Adult Media Outlet: An establishment that has as a regular
and substantial business purpose the rental, sale or offering for
viewing off the premises or other use of any adult media.
(3)
Adult News Rack: Any coin- or card-operated device that offers
for sale by dispensing printed material which is distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(4)
Adult Newsstand: A freestanding structure, vehicle or booth
which as a regular and substantial business purpose offers
for sale books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(5)
Businesses that provide the following entertainment:
Adult Entertainment Business: Any enterprise to which the
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and where
providing adult entertainment, as defined herein, is a regular
and substantial portion of its business.
(1)
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An establishment containing a
room with seats facing a screen or projection areas where a
regular and substantial portion of its business is the exhibition
to customers of films, videotapes or motion pictures which are
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
to the customers and which are distinguished by or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(2)
Adult Theater: An establishment located in an enclosed
building where a regular and substantial portion of its business
is providing the live performance of activities relating to
specified sexual activities or exhibition of specified anatomical
areas or live performers for observation by customers and
patrons.
(3)
Adult Entertainment Cabaret: An establishment where a
regular and substantial portion of its business is providing
adult entertainment which features strippers, male or female
impersonators, go-go dancers or live performances; or material
which is primarily characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(4)
Adult Entertainment Studio: Includes the terms rap studio,
exotic dance studio, sensitivity studio or encounter studio and
means an establishment whose premises is physically arranged
as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls
(5)
b.
SECTION 13-31 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-31
1:264
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any live exhibition, performance, display or
dance of any type including, but not limited to, talking singing, reading,
listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food,
beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of clothing
or any service offered for amusement on a premises where such exhibition,
performance, display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the
sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers or patrons or if the
entertainment involves a person who is nude or in such attire, costume
or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human genitals, pubic
region, vulva, pubic hair, buttocks, female breast or breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or nipple or the human male
genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
separate from the common areas of the premises and where
a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing
entertainment which features materials or live performances
characterized by an emphasis on or features materials relating
to specified sexual activities or the exhibition of specified
anatomical areas.
Adult Encounter Parlor: An establishment where a regular and
substantial portion of its business is the provision of premises
where customers congregate, associate or consort with
employees and/or performers or private contractors who
display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such
customers with the intent of providing sexual gratification or
stimulation to such customers.
(6)
Body Painting Studio: An establishment where a regular and
substantial portion of its business is the maintaining, operating
or offering for compensation the applying of paint or other
substance to or on the human body by any means of
application, technique or process when the subject's body is
displaying for the customer's view specified anatomical areas.
(7)
Businesses that provide the following described services:
Bathhouse: An enterprise where a regular and substantial
portion of its business is offering baths with other persons
present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas.
(1)
Adult Motel: An enterprise where a regular and substantial
portion of its business is offering public accommodations for
consideration for the purpose of viewing closed circuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and rents room accommodations for
less than six (6) hours at a time.
(2)
c.
SECTION 13-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-31
1:265
CONTAGIOUS AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Those diseases which
are set out in the Code of State Regulations established by the State of
Missouri.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and
independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly
related to the operation of an adult business.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides adult entertainment within an
adult entertainment business as defined in this Section, whether or not a
fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.
MANAGER — Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge
of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity at an adult
business.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult
business.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, martial community, joint venture, governmental
entity or other entity or group of persons however organized.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area generally visible to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots
and automobiles whether moving or not.
SERVER — Any person who serves food or drink at an adult business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Sexual conduct, being actual or
simulated, acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical
contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a
person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the breast
of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any
latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SUBSTANTIAL BUSINESS PURPOSE —
Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
buttock; or female breast or breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola encircling the nipple or any combination of the
foregoing, or
1.
Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
2.
Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the gross floor space is devoted
to that purpose; or
1.
Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the retail floor space is devoted
to that purpose; or
2.
Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the gross sales of the business
are derived from that purpose.
3.
SECTION 13-31 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-32
1:266
SECTION 13-32. License Required for Adult Business. [Ord. No.
2002-03 § 2, 1-8-2002]
SECTION 13-33. License Required for Managers, Servers and
Entertainers. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 3, 1-8-2002]
It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager
at an adult business without first obtaining a license to do so from the City
or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business after
such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended.
SECTION 13-34. License, Classification and Fees. [Ord. No. 2002-03
§ 4, 1-8-2002]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult
business in the City unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has
obtained an adult business license from the City or to operate such
business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the City.
B. It is unlawful for any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator
or owner to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment
directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult business.
C. It shall be prima facia evidence that any adult business that fails to have
posted an adult business license, in the manner required by this Article,
has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facia
evidence that any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or
owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in an adult
business, in which an adult business license is not posted, in the
manner required by this Chapter, had knowledge that such business
was not licensed.
D. Any business enterprise that sells or rents goods that are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities or that emphasize
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and that excludes minors by virtue of age
from all or any part of the business premises shall be deemed to have
consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business
premises by appropriate City Officials and inspection by those officials
of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of
determining whether such business enterprise is an adult business as
defined in this Section. This entry and inspection shall take place during
hours when such adult business is open to the public, unless otherwise
requested by the adult business, and shall not unreasonably interfere
with the conduct of such business.
A. The license year for all fees required under this Article shall be from
each July first (1st) through June thirtieth (30th). The application for a
license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this
Article by certified or cashier's check or money order; and no
application shall be considered complete until each fee is paid.
SECTION 13-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-34
1:267
SECTION 13-35. License Limited to One Identifiable Type of Adult
Use. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 5, 1-8-2002]
All adult business licenses shall be issued only fox the one (1) adult business
use listed on the application. Any change in the type of adult use shall
invalidate the adult business license.
SECTION 13-36. License Application. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 6,
1-8-2002]
B. All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nonrefundable
and non-transferable.
C. The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows:
1. Adult business license fee is one thousand dollars ($1000.00) per
year;
2. Manager's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year;
3. Entertainer's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year;
4. Server's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
A. Adult Business License. All persons desiring to secure a license to
operate an adult business under the provisions of this Article shall make
a notarized application with the City Clerk. All applications sell be
submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct or operate
the adult business. All applications shall be submitted on a form
supplied by the City Clerk and shall require the following information:
1. The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation,
date and place of birth and Social Security number of the applicant.
2. The name of the adult business, a description of the type of
business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name
of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be
located.
3. The names, residence addresses, Social Security numbers and
dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and
if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all
corporate officers and directors and stockholders who own ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation.
4. The residence addresses of the applicant or of all partners or of all
corporate officers and directors for the five (5) years immediately
prior to the date of application.
5. A description of the adult business history of the applicant or of the
partnership and all partners or of the corporation and all corporate
officers and directors.
SECTION 13-34 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-36
1:268
6. A statement from the applicant or from all partners or from all such
corporate officers and directors, whether any such person or entity,
in previously operating in this or another City, County or State, has
had a business license of any type revoked or suspended and, if so,
the reason therefor and the activity or occupation subjected to such
action, suspension or revocation.
7. A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the
applicant or of all partners or of all corporate officers and directors
for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
8. A statement from the applicant or from each partner or from each
corporate officer and director that each such person has not been
convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of or
diverted from prosecution on:
a. Any felony within five (5) years immediately preceding the
application, or
b. A misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately
preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor
involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or
pornography and related offenses as defined in the Missouri
Criminal Code or involved controlled substances or illegal
drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Missouri
Controlled Substances Act or other Statutes of the State of
Missouri or ordinances of the City.
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each
partner and each corporate officer and director has not been
convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from
prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two
(2) years immediately preceding the application where such
municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses,
indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled
substances or illegal drugs or narcotics.
9. On applications requesting a license to operate a bathhouse or
body painting studio, the applicant shall provide for each person
working on the premises a health certificate from a duly licensed
Missouri physician stating that within ninety (90) days prior
thereto, the applicant and all other persons working on the
premises have been examined and found free of any contagious or
communicable disease as defined herein.
10. A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the Police
Department, of the applicant or of all partners if the applicant is a
partnership or of all such corporate officers and directors if the
applicant is a corporation.
SECTION 13-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-36
1:269
11. If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of registration
issued by the Missouri Secretary of State.
12. A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal
knowledge of the information contained in the application and that
the information contained therein is true and correct and that the a
applicant has read the provisions of this Article regulating adult
businesses. Failure to provide the information and documentation
required by this Subsection shall constitute an incomplete
application which shall not be processed.
B. Manager, Server Or Entertainer License. All persons desiring to secure
a license under the provisions of this Article to be a manager, server or
entertainer shall make a notarized application with the City Clerk. All
applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to
be a manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted
on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require the following
information:
1. The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date
and place of birth, Social Security number, and any stage names or
nicknames used in entertaining or at the business.
2. The name and address of each adult business where the applicant
intends to work as a manager, server or entertainer and an intent to
hire statement from an adult business that is licensed or that has
applied for a license, under the provisions of this Article, indicating
the adult business intends to hire the applicant to manage, serve or
entertain on the premises. Failure to provide an intent to hire
statement shall not invalidate the application.
3. A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been
convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or
diverted from prosecution on:
a. A felony within five (5) years immediately preceding the
application, or
b. A misdemeanor within, two (2) years immediately preceding
the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved
sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution,
indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography and
related offenses as defined in the Missouri Criminal Code or
involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics
offenses as defined in the Missouri Controlled Substances Act
or other Statutes of the State of Missouri or ordinances of the
City.
SECTION 13-36 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-36
1:270
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not
been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted
from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within
two (2) yews immediately preceding the application where
such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses,
indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled
substances or illegal drugs or narcotics.
4. A full set of fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant to be
taken by the Public Safety Department.
5. The applicant shall present to the City Clerk who shall copy
documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen
(18) years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the
following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
a. A valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by any State
bearing this applicant's photograph and date of birth;
b. A State-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth;
c. An official and valid passport issued by the United States of
America;
d. An immigration card issued by the United States of America;
e. Any other form of picture identification issued by a
governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the City Clerk;
or
f. Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the City
Clerk.
Failure to provide the information required by this Subsection
shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be
processed.
C. Facilities Necessary. No adult business license to conduct a bathhouse
or body painting studio shall be issued unless an inspection by the
Director, Lafayette County Health Department or his/her authorized
representative reveals that the premises the applicant intends to
conduct business from complies with each of the following minimum
requirements:
1. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant
paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors
shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All
equipment used in the business's operation shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal
use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered.
Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one (1)
SECTION 13-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-36
1:271
patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets provided
that such paper is changed for every patron. No service or practice
shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area
within any permitted establishment which is fitted with a door
capable of being locked.
2. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
(5) or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the
premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be
provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each
twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the
premises at any one (1) time. Urinals may be substituted for water
closets after one (1) water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
3. Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule.
Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a
dispenser and with sanitary towels.
The Director, Lafayette County Health Department or his/her
representative shall certify that the proposed business
establishment complies with all of the requirements of this Article
and shall give or send such certification to the City Clerk. Provided
however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to
eliminate other requirements of Statute or ordinance concerning
the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized
inspection thereof. The appropriate City Official may recommend
the issuance of a license contingent upon the compliance with any
requirements in this Section.
D. Application Processing.
1. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult business,
manager, server or entertainer license, the City Clerk shall
immediately transmit one (1) copy of the application to the Police
Department for investigation of the application. In addition, the
City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the Building
Official.
2. It shall be the duty of the Police Chief or his/her designee to
investigate such application to determine whether the information
contained in the application is accurate and whether the applicant
is qualified to be issued the license applied for. The Police Chief
shall report the results of the investigation to the City Clerk not
later than ten (10) working days from the date the application is
received by the City Clerk.
3. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to determine whether the
structure where the adult business will be conducted complies with
the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health,
SECTION 13-36 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-36
1:272
SECTION 13-37. Examination of Application, Issuance of License,
Disapproval. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 7, 1-8-2002]
SECTION 13-38. License — Ineligibility and Disqualification. [Ord.
No. 2002-03 § 8, 1-8-2002]
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to:
zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances
of the City. The Building Official shall report the results of the
investigation to the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days
from the date the application is received by the City Clerk.
4. Upon receipt of the reports from the Police Chief and Building
Official, the City Clerk shall consider the license application for an
adult business, manager, server or entertainer which shall be
approved or disapproved within forty-five (45) days from the date.
A. If the application for an adult business, manager, server or entertainer
license is in proper form and accompanied by the appropriate license
fee, the City Clerk shall examine the applications and after such
examination, the City Clerk shall, if the applicant is qualified, approve a
license as provided for by law, provided a license shall not be approved
to any person ineligible pursuant to Section 13-38.
B. The record of the City Clerk shall show the action taken on the
application and if the license is granted, the City Clerk shall issue the
proper license. The license shall state that it is not transferable to other
persons or entities and the calendar year for which it is issued. The
license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the place of
business that is licensed or where the licensee is working.
C. If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be
immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the applicant's
last known address and the notification shall state the basis for such
disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license
application may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law.
1. An adult business applicant if one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist:
a. The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any school, church, public park, licensed child care center or
licensed child care home. Measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's
business to the nearest point on the property line of such school,
church, public park, licensed day care center or licensed child care
home.
b. The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any other adult business for which there is a license issued.
SECTION 13-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-38
1:273
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the
property line of the applicant's business to the nearest point on the
property line of such other adult business.
c. The applicant's premises is located within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of any residentially zoned property. Measurements shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the
applicant's business to the nearest point on the property line of the
residentially zoned property.
d. In the case of an application for an adult business license for a
business use defined in Section 13-31(A) Subsection (3)(b) of the
definition of "ADULT BUSINESS" or Section 13-31(A) Subsection
(3)(c) of the definition of "ADULT BUSINESS" described as adult
entertainment business, adult motion picture theater, adult
entertainment cabaret, adult entertainment studio, adult encounter
parlor, body painting studio, bath house or adult motel, the
applicant's premises is located within three hundred (300) feet of
any residentially zoned property. Measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's
business to the nearest point on the property line of the
residentially zoned property.
e. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on
the application.
f. The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application.
g. The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with
or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building
code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City,
provided that upon a showing that the premises meets said
requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the
application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the City Clerk.
h. The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction, or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in Section
13-36 of this Article during the time period set forth in said Section.
i. The applicant has had an adult business or comparable license
revoked or suspended in this or any other City during the past five
(5) years.
j. If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bathhouse or
body painting studio and has not produced a health certificate as
required herein for all persons working on the premises.
SECTION 13-38 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-38
1:274
SECTION 13-39. Standards of Conduct. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 9,
1-8-2002]
The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult business
licensees, their employees and all managers, servers and entertainers and
patrons of adult businesses while on or about the premises of the business:
2. An applicant for a manager, server or entertainer if one (1) or more of
the following conditions exist:
a. The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not
have or is ineligible to receive an adult business license for any of
the reasons stated in Subsection (1) above;
b. The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction, or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in Section
13-36 of this Article during the time period set forth in said Section;
c. The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on
the application;
d. The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application;
e. The applicant has had a manager, server, entertainer or
comparable license revoked or suspended in this or any other City
during the past five (5) years.
1. Identification cards. All or any manager, server or entertainer issued a
license by the City under the provisions of this Article shall, at all times
when working in an establishment subject to the provisions of this
Article, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the
City bearing the permit number, the employee's physical description
and a photograph of such employee. Such identification cards shall be
laminated to prevent alteration.
2. Age restriction. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older shall
be permitted on the premises of any adult business.
3. Exterior observation and display. No adult business will be conducted in
any manner that permits the observation or display of performers,
servers or entertainers engaged in an erotic depiction or dance or any
material or persons, caricatures, animals or any portion thereof
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or any books, cards,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, slides,
films, motion pictures or videotapes which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from
any exterior source including, but not limited to, by display, decoration,
sign, show window or other opening.
SECTION 13-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-39
1:275
4. Nudity prohibited. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron
in an adult business, other than a licensed bathhouse, shall appear
nude, unclothed, in less than opaque attire or in any fashion that
exposes to view any specified anatomical area.
5. Certain acts prohibited.
a. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron shall perform
any specified sexual activities as defined herein, wear or use any
device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified
anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to
perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities as defined
herein or participate in any act of prostitution.
b. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron of an adult
business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified
anatomical area of another person or knowingly permit another
person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of
such manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron, whether
such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or
exposed.
c. No manager, employee, server or entertainer of an adult business
shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business while such
person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to
expose to view any specified anatomical area.
d. No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any patron or customer for any act prohibited by this
Article and no entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity
from any customer for any entertainment except as follows:
(1) While such entertainer is on the stage or platform, a customer
or patron may place such payment or gratuity into a box affixed
to the stage, or
(2) While such entertainer is not on the stage or platform and is
clothed so as to not expose to view any specified anatomical
area, a customer or patron may either place such payment or
gratuity into the entertainer's hand or under a leg garter worn
by such entertainer at least four (4) inches below the bottom of
the pubic region.
e. No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the
premises of an adult premises shall:
(1) Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages to
be brought upon or consumed on the premises (unless
otherwise permitted pursuant to the City Code);
SECTION 13-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-39
1:276
(2) Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or
consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or
narcotic on the premises;
(3) Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age to be in or upon the premises;
(4) Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or
patronizing prostitution on the premises; or
(5) Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this Article or any
other City ordinance provision or State law.
6. Signs required. All adult businesses shall have conspicuously displayed
in the common area at the principal entrance to the premises a sign, on
which uppercase letters shall be at least two (2) inches high and
lowercase letters at least one (1) inch high, which shall read as follows:
This Adult Business is Regulated and Licensed by The City of
Lexington Entertainers Are:
* Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct or
prostitution on the premises or to fondle, caress or touch the
breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron
or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron or other
entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region,
buttocks or genitals of said entertainer.
* Not permitted to be nude, unclothed or in less than opaque attire,
costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the
breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
region, buttocks and/or genitals.
* Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from
any customer for entertainment, except as follows:
- While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing such payment
or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage, or
- While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either placing
such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand or under
the entertainer's leg garter.
Customers Are:
* Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time.
* Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region,
buttocks or genitals of any employee, server or entertainer or
engage in solicitation for prostitution.
7. Lighting required. The premises of all adult businesses shall be
equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination
of not less than one (1) foot-candle as measured at the floor level and
SECTION 13-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-39
1:277
SECTION 13-40. License — Posting or Display. [Ord. No. 2002-03
§ 10, 1-8-2002]
SECTION 13-41. Manager on Premises. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 11,
1-8-2002]
such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customers or
patron is present in or on the premises.
8. Closed booths or rooms prohibited. The premises of all adult businesses
shall be physically arranged in such manner that the entire interior
portions of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a
common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or
obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction
whatsoever.
9. Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult
businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Separate dressing
rooms and restrooms for men and women shall at all times be
maintained and kept in a sanitary condition.
10. Hours of operation. No adult business maybe open or in use between
the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M. on any day other than a Sunday
when the business may not be open between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and
12:00 Noon.
A. Every person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under
this Article as an adult business shall post such license in a conspicuous
place and manner on the adult business premises.
B. Every person holding a server, manager or entertainer license shall
post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult business
premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by City
authorities responsible for enforcement of this Article.
A. A manager shall be on duty at any adult business at all times the
premises is open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall
be prominently posted during business hours.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person
who provides adult entertainment or works as a server within the
premises possesses a current and valid adult entertainer's license or an
adult entertainment server's license and that such licenses are
prominently posted.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the manager to insure persons under the
age of eighteen (18) do not enter upon the premises.
SECTION 13-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-42
1:278
SECTION 13-42. Inspector and Inspections. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 12,
1-8-2002]
All adult businesses shall permit representatives of the Police Department
or any other City Official acting in their official capacity to inspect the
premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all
applicable regulations and laws.
SECTION 13-43. Suspension, Revocation or Non-Renewal —
License. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 13, 1-8-2002]
Whenever the City Clerk has information that:
1. The owner or operator of an adult business or a holder of a manager,
server or entertainer license has violated or knowingly allowed or
permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this Article;
2. There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this Article that
have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of
an adult business knew or should have known that such violations were
committed;
3. The adult business license or the manager, server or entertainer license
was obtained through false statements in the application for such
license or renewal thereof;
4. The adult business licensee or the manager, server or entertainer
licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the
application for such license or renewal thereof;
5. The owner or operator or any partner or any corporate officer or
director holding an adult business license has become disqualified from
having a license by a conviction as provided in Section 13-38;
6. The holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has become
disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in Section
13-38;
then the City Clerk shall make this information known to the Lexington
City Council which upon five (5) days' written notice to the person
holding the license shall conduct a public hearing to determine
whether the license should be suspended or revoked. The Lexington
City Council may pass a resolution setting forth the procedures for
the conduct of such hearings. Based on the evidence produced at the
hearing, the Lexington City Council may take any of the following
actions:
a. Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days.
b. Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year.
c. Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of
up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of the
SECTION 13-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-43
1:279
SECTION 13-44. Renewal. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 14, 1-8-2002]
SECTION 13-45. Judicial Review — Stay of Enforcement of Orders.
[Ord. No. 2002-03 § 15, 1-8-2002]
Following the entry of an order by the Lexington City Council suspending
or revoking a license issued pursuant to this Article or the City Clerk
disapproving the renewal application for a license, such licensee or
applicant may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. The
Lexington City Council may stay enforcement of such order for a period of
time not to exceed thirty (30) days pending the filing and/or final disposition
of proceedings for judicial review.
SECTION 13-46. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 16, 1-8-2002]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Article. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by incarceration
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
incarceration. Each day's violation of or failure, refusal or neglect to comply
with any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
SECTION 13-47. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2002-03 § 17, 1-8-2002]
The City Clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be
necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his/her office and
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article.
Article occur during the period of probation. If a further violation
does occur and after a hearing the additional violation is
determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked
for the remainder of the license year.
A. A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on
application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on
June thirtieth (30th) of each calendar year and renewal applications for
such licenses shall be submitted between June fifteenth (15th) and June
thirtieth (30th).
B. Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a
license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be renewed by
issuance of a new license in the manner provided in this Article.
C. If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time
provided in Subsection (A) of this Article, the expiration of such license
shall not be affected and a new application shall be required.
SECTION 13-43 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-47
1:280
ARTICLE IV
Parades
SECTION 13-48. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1, 7-9-2002]
For the purposes of this Article and unless the content plainly requires
otherwise, the following definitions are adopted.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the City.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this Article.
SECTION 13-49. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1, 7-9-2002]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police.
SECTION 13-50. Permit Application. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
A. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police not less than thirty (30) days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade on forms provided by such
officer.
B. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
4. The date when the parade is to be conducted.
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
6. The approximate number of entries that will constitute such
parade.
7. The hours when such parade and assembly will start and terminate.
8. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
SECTION 13-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-50
1:281
SECTION 13-51. Standards of Issuance. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
SECTION 13-52. Notice of Permit Rejection. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
If the Chief of Police disapproves the permit application, he shall mail to the
applicant within ten (10) days after the date upon which the application was
filed a notice of his action. The Chief of Police, in denying an application
for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the
parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the
applicant.
SECTION 13-53. Contents of Permit. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
9. Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
C. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefore and with the
written approval of the Mayor, shall have the authority to consider any
application hereunder which is filed less than thirty (30) days before the
date of such parade is proposed to be conducted.
1. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
2. The concentration of entries of the parade will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and Police protection of or ambulance service to areas
contiguous to such assembly areas and parade route.
3. The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
person or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
4. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay en route.
5. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit.
A. Date of parade.
B. Starting time.
C. The portions of the streets to be traveled or occupied by the parade.
SECTION 13-50 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 13-53
1:282
SECTION 13-54. Possession of Permit. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall
carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
SECTION 13-55. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1,
7-9-2002]
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth.
SECTION 13-56. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1, 7-9-2002]
This Article shall not apply to:
SECTION 13-57. Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 2002-26 § 1, 7-9-2002]
Parade permit fee shall be one dollar ($1.00). Both parade permit fee and
the Police Officer fees shall be paid at the time of application for a parade
permit.
D. Starting and termination locations.
E. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this Article.
1. Funeral processions.
2. Students going to and from school classes, participating in education
activities and any extra curricular activity providing such conduct is
under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
3. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
SECTION 13-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 13-57
1:283
Chapter 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 14-1. Mobile Home Park Regulations. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art.
III § 10, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 93-24 § 1, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 2003-02
§ 1, 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 2007-41 § 1, 11-13-2007]
A. Definition. As used in this Section, the following term shall have the
following definition:
MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME — A factory-built structure or
structures which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more
in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, contains three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet,
equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to
be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a
permanent foundation. The phrase "without a permanent foundation"
indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the
manufactured mobile home placed thereon may be moved from time to
time at the convenience of the owner.
B. Within the City a single-wide mobile home may be permitted only in an
approved mobile home park. A double-wide mobile home or factorybuilt
housing may be permitted in an approved mobile home park, the
owner must attach the mobile home to a permanent foundation
complying with the City's building codes and destroy or modify the
vehicular frame rendering it impractical to reconvert the real property,
thus creating a mobile home or double-wide home that meets the
requirements of Section 29-30.1(B).
A mobile home may also be permitted for the purposes of temporary
relief from a local disaster, such as fire, wind or flood damage, provided
such mobile home shall be removed from the premises within one (1)
year of its original placement; provided further, upon application to the
Building Official and for good cause shown, the one (1) year period may
be extended an additional thirty (30) days.
It shall be unlawful to park or locate any type of mobile home on
any public street, road, highway or alley, or on any lot residential,
commercial or industrial zoned lot, except when in complete conformity
with the ordinances of the City. [Ord. No. 2015-22 § I, 8-11-2015]
C. One (1) or more mobile homes or trailers may be used as a temporary
office or other non-residential structure on the site of a construction
project, provided such structure is removed upon completion of the
project. Mobile structures may be used also as temporary classroom
facilities in connection with public schools or private schools with
equivalent curriculum. A mobile home or trailer may be used as a
temporary commercial structure on land already zoned for commercial
SECTION 13-57 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 14-1
1:284
purpose the structure will be used for, provided that such use may
be only for a period of sixty (60) days or less, and provided that the
structure is removed on or before that period ends, and provided that
such structure is not placed back on the same property for at least one
hundred eighty (180) days.
D. For the purposes of occupancy, mobile homes and trailers shall be
located only in approved mobile home parks. Mobile home parks are
permitted only upon review by the Planning Commission. Before the
location of a mobile home park can be approved, the following
conditions must be met.
1. Mobile home park requirements.
a. Area. The area of the mobile home park shall be a minimum of
two (2) acres, and the park shall have a minimum of five (5)
mobile home spaces available at first occupancy.
b. Density. The maximum number of units allowed per acre of
land shall be determined by the minimum acre per unit
required for multi-family dwellings in an "R-3" District, subject
to yard and other setback requirements.
c. Utilities. The mobile home park and all occupied units located
therein must be connected to the municipal water and
sewerage system.
d. Access and parking. Paved, privately maintained roadways
must be provided for access to individual units and other
facilities located within the park. All common parking areas
shall also be paved, including parking spaces located on
individual mobile home spaces. The paving of mobile home
park streets shall conform to the specifications contained in
the Lexington Subdivision Regulations.
e. Yards and setbacks. All mobile units and permanent structures
must meet yard and setback requirements of principal
structures in the "R-3" District.
f. Other permitted uses. Service buildings, recreation buildings,
and other areas or structures providing laundry, sanitation,
and managerial facilities are permitted subject to the approval
of the Planning Commission. Such facilities shall serve only the
park in which it is located. No such facility shall have direct
access to a public street but shall be served by the privately
maintained roadway.
g. Buffer. A fence or densely planted buffer strip consisting of
trees, shrubs, and other plantings at least five (5) feet in
height, may be required by the Planning Commission along all
rear and side property lines of the park.
SECTION 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 14-1
1:285
2. Mobile home space requirements.
a. Access. Each space shall have access to a paved interior
roadway which shall conform to the specifications provided by
the Lexington Subdivision Regulations for minor residential
streets. No space shall have direct access to a collector street
or thoroughfare.
b. Clearance. Each space shall be designed so that at least thirty
(30) feet of clearance will be maintained between units and
other structures located in the park.
c. Setbacks. Mobile homes shall be located so that a twenty-five
(25) foot setback is maintained from the centerline of the
private interior roadway.
d. Utilities. Each space shall have hook-up facilities for water,
sewer, electricity, gas and telephone services. All occupied
mobile homes shall have and use sanitary facilities contained
wholly within the mobile home.
e. Parking. At least one (1) of the two (2) required parking spaces
shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home space.
3. Application procedure for approval of a mobile home park by the
Planning Commission.
a. Preliminary plan. A preliminary plan drawn to a scale of not
less than 1 inch = 200 feet nor more than 1 inch = 50 feet may
be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to application
for approval. The sketch plan shall include among other things:
(1) Location of drives and parking areas,
(2) Location of mobile home,
(3) Location and sizes of service buildings and other service
areas,
(4) Location of all utility lines,
(5) Location of all parking spaces.
b. The owner or developer may discuss the proposed mobile
home park plan with the Zoning Administrator, and members
of the Planning Commission to determine if the proposal meets
the requirements and the intent of this Chapter.
c. Final plan. Applications to the Planning Commission for
approval to construct, alter, or enlarge a mobile home park
shall be accompanied by a plan for the park prepared by a
professional engineer, architect or city planner, drawn to a
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200)
SECTION 14-1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 14-1
1:286
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Cross References — Motor vehicles prohibited in landing area of municipal
airport, § 3-5; Railroads, § 22-1 et seq.; Vehicles for hire, § 27-1 et seq.
feet nor more than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. The plan
shall show the following:
(1) Location of all mobile home spaces;
(2) Location of all utility lines and service facilities, drives,
parking areas, walks, and access to a public street; and
(3) Property lines of the park and owners of both the park and
all adjacent properties.
Where a park is to be developed in sections, the plan
shall show that part which is to be developed initially.
No approval shall be given for the initial establishment of
any section of a mobile home park with less than five (5)
spaces.
d. Utility connections. All required improvements shall be
completed before connections may be made with municipal
utilities.
SECTION 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 14-1
1:287

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 15-1. Model Traffic Ordinance Adopted.46 [Ord. of
10-20-1970, § 1]
The Model Traffic Ordinance, being Chapter 300 of the Revised Statutes of
Missouri is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as if set out at length
herein.
SECTION 15-2. Driving with Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.47
[Ord. of 10-20-1970, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-61 § 1, 11-13-2001]
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle when the person has eighthundredths
of one percent (0.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in his
blood. As used in this Section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood
shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters
of blood and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood,
breath, saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic
contents of a person's blood under this Section, the test shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 577.020 to
577.041, RSMo.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for not more than ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Evidence of prior convictions shall be heard and determined by the trial
court out of the hearing of the jury prior to the submission of the case to
the jury, and the court shall enter its findings thereon.
D. Any person convicted of an intoxication-related offense shall have a
judgment entered against that person in favor of the Spinal Cord Injury
Fund in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
1. Judgments collected pursuant to this Section shall be paid into the
State Treasury to the credit of the Spinal Cord Injury Fund created
in Section 304.027, RSMo. Any Court Clerk receiving funds
pursuant to judgments entered pursuant to this Section shall
collect and disburse such amounts as provided in Sections 488.010
to 488.020, RSMo.
2. As used in this Section, an "intoxication-related traffic offense" is
driving while intoxicated, driving with excessive blood alcohol
content, or driving under the influence of drugs.
46.State Law Reference — Authority of city to adopt model traffic ordinance by reference,
RSMo. § 300.600.
47.State Law Reference — Similar provisions, RSMo. § 577.012. State Law
Reference — Similar provisions, RSMo. §§ 304.027, 577.023.
SECTION 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-3
1:289
SECTION 15-3. Signaling Devices. [Ord. No. 72-12, § 3, 7-5-1972]
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn, directed forward, or
whistle in good working order, capable or emitting a sound adequate in
quantity and volume to give warning of the approach of such vehicle to
other users of the streets and thoroughfares and to pedestrians. Such
signaling device shall be used for warning purposes only and shall not
be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no other sound-producing
signaling device shall be used at any time.
SECTION 15-4. Mufflers and Muffler Cutouts. [Ord. No. 72-12, § 3,
7-5-1972]
SECTION 15-5. Sirens, Whistles Prohibited; Exception. [Ord. of
10-4-1943, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use upon any motor vehicle operated
within the City what is commonly known as a siren or whistle, except that
the same may be used on motor vehicles operated for ambulance purposes
or by officers on police, fire or other official duty.
SECTION 15-6. Vehicles to be Operated on Right Side of Roadway;
Exceptions. [Ord. No. 72-32, § 1, 1-2-1973]
All motor vehicles driven upon the public streets, thoroughfares and
alleyways of the City of sufficient width, shall be operated or driven upon
the right half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway, or to the right
hand side of the center line on those roadways which are divided into traffic
lanes, except as follows:
A. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall be driven in such
a manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be
made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other parts, or by any
improperly loaded cargo.
B. The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached
mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum
possible exhaust noise as completely as is done in modern gas engine
passenger motor vehicles. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe
between the motor and the muffler or any motor vehicle shall be
completely closed and disconnected from its operating lever, and shall
be so arranged that it cannot automatically open or be opened or
operated while such vehicle is in motion.
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is lawfully
making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of Section 304.014
through 304.026, RSMo., or traffic regulations thereunder or of the
ordinances of the City;
SECTION 15-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-6
1:290
SECTION 15-7. Operation and Parking of Vehicles in City Parks.
[Ord. of 2-7-1938, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any automobile or motor
vehicles within the City parks to operate the same therein, except upon the
roads or driveways maintained for motor vehicle travel within such parks.
No person shall park or leave standing an automobile or other motor vehicle
within any public park in the City in any driveway or on the grass or sod
in such parks, but shall park or leave standing such vehicles only on the
ground designated for parking purposes.
SECTION 15-8. Reimbursement of Cost for Alcohol and Drug-
Related Offenses.48 [Ord. No. 94-10 § I, 5-24-1994]
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
4. Upon a roadway designated by markings or signs for one-way traffic.
A. Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the
provisions of Section 15-2 (alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses), the
court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law,
order the person to reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs
associated with such arrest.
B. Such costs shall include the reasonable costs of making the arrest,
including the cost of any chemical tests to determine the alcohol or
drug content of the person's blood, and the cost of processing,
charging, booking and holding such person in custody.
C. Law enforcement authorities may establish a schedule of such costs for
submission to the court; however, the court may order the costs
reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive given the
circumstances of the case or for good cause shown.
D. These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the Municipal
Court and shall be collected by the Court in the same manner as other
costs and fees are collected and remitted to the City Treasurer.
E. The City Treasurer shall retain these fees in a separate fund known as
the "DWI/Drug Enforcement Fund". Monies within the DWI/Drug
Enforcement Fund shall be appropriated by the City Council to law
enforcement authorities from such fund in amounts equal to those costs
so incurred and shall be specifically used to enhance and support the
enforcement and prosecution of alcohol- and drug-related traffic laws
within the City.
48.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 577.048, RSMo.
SECTION 15-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-9
1:291
SECTION 15-9. Registration of Vehicles, Required.49 [Ord. No.
83-16, § 5, 11-1-1983]
Every owner of a motor vehicle or trailer, which shall be operated or driven
upon the streets, thoroughfares or alleyways of this City, shall annually
file in the Office of the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri, an
application for registration on a blank to be furnished by the Director of
Revenue of the State of Missouri for that purpose containing the following
information:
SECTION 15-10. License Plate Required. [Ord. No. 83-16, § 6,
11-1-1983]
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated upon any street, thoroughfare
or alleyway of this City unless it shall have displayed thereon the license
plate or set of license plates issued by the Director of Revenue of the
State of Missouri. Such display of license plates shall and must comply with
Section 301.130, RSMo.
SECTION 15-11. Driving Without Operator's or Chauffeur's License,
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 83-16, § 7, 11-1-1983]
Any person whose operator's or chauffeur's license and driving privilege as
a resident or non-resident has been canceled, suspended or revoked under
the provisions of Chapter 302, RSMo., or of Chapter 577, RSMo., or Chapter
544, RSMo., and who thereafter drives any motor vehicle upon the highways
of this City while such license and privilege is canceled, suspended or
revoked, and before an official reinstatement notice or termination notice is
issued by the Director, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
may be punished under the general penalty Section 1-8 of the ordinances of
Lexington, Missouri.
1. A brief description of the motor vehicle to be registered, including the
name of the manufacturer, the manufacturer's or other identifying
number and character, and amount of motive power, stated in figures of
horsepower; and
2. The name, residence and business address of the owner of such motor
vehicle; and
3. The gross weight of the vehicle and the desired load in pounds if the
vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle or trailer; and
4. If such motor vehicle be a specially constructed or reconstructed motor
vehicle, the application shall so state and the owner shall furnish the
Director of Revenue such additional information as he shall require.
49.State Law Reference — For similar state law, see RSMo. § 301.020.
SECTION 15-9 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-12
1:292
SECTION 15-12. Penalty. [Ord. No. 83-16, § 8, 11-1-1983]
Any violation of the requirements or prohibitions of Section 15-9 through
15-11 shall be declared to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction, the
defendant or person so violating shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
which is punishable under the general penalty section of these ordinances,
Section 1-8.
SECTION 15-13. Driving and Parking — Emergency Snow Routes.
[Ord. No. 88-23, 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 93-31 §§ I — II, 12-28-1993;
Ord. No. 95-28 § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1, 2-13-2007]
A. The following streets and thoroughfares shall be designated as
Emergency Snow Routes during inclement weather of snow, sleet,
freezing rain or ice: Highland Avenue, Main Street (M-224) from
Highland Avenue to 13th Street, Franklin Avenue from 9th Street to
13th Street, South Street from 12th Street to 13th Street, Aull Lane,
Business Highway 13, 16th Street, 17th Street, 20th Street, 24th Street
from Main Street to Highway 24, Broadway from Highland Avenue to
Main Street and John Shea Drive. All Emergency Snow Routes shall be
implemented in the manner described in the following Sections:
1. Phase I, Driving Emergency. Whenever inclement weather causes a
slippery or hazardous condition which might lead to serious traffic
congestion, the Mayor or other designated City representative,
may declare a "Driving Emergency"; and until such emergency is
terminated no person shall park or operate a motor vehicle on any
street in such manner or in such condition as to allow or permit
such vehicle to become stalled by reason of the fact that the driving
wheels of such vehicle are not equipped with tire chains or snow
tires. Failure to comply with this provision, shall result in the
operator of said vehicle being deemed in violation of this Section.
2. Phase II, Snow Routes Parking Emergency. Whenever snow has
accumulated, or it is probable that snow will accumulate to such a
depth that snow removal operations will be required, the Mayor or
other designated City Official may declare a "Snow Routes Parking
Emergency"; and until such emergency is terminated, no vehicles
shall be parked on any streets designated by appropriate signage
acknowledging said street as an emergency snow route. All
vehicles parked on such streets must be removed within two (2)
hours after declaration of emergency or be considered in violation
of this Section.
3. Phase III, Downtown Business District Parking Emergency.
Whenever snow has accumulated, or it is probable that snow will
accumulate to such a depth that snow removal operations will be
required, the Mayor or other designated City Official may declare a
"Downtown Business District Parking Emergency"; and until such
emergency is terminated no vehicles shall be parked on any
Emergency Snow Route street located in the downtown business
SECTION 15-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-13
1:293
SECTION 15-14. Financial Responsibility Required. [Ord. No. 95-13
§ 1, 6-27-1995]
district. All vehicles parked on such streets must be removed within
two (2) hours after declaration of emergency or be considered in
violation of this Section.
4. Authority of Police to Remove Vehicles. In the event any vehicles
are parked on the streets, alongside the streets, on the hard
surface of the street or on the shoulders of the street, or any
portion of the vehicle extends upon the traveled area of said street,
during a Driving Emergency, Snow Route Parking Emergency, or
Downtown Business District Parking Emergency the officers of the
Police Department shall have the authority to have said vehicles
moved by towing or other provisions.
B. Any person in violation of the provisions of this Section shall be subject
to a fine as provided in Section 1-8 of this Code. Additionally, the
defendant or person so violating these provisions shall also be
responsible for any expense incurred for towing, removing, and storage
of said vehicle.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle registered in this State,
whether owned by such operator or by another, upon the streets, alleys
or highways of this City, unless such operator, or the owner of the
vehicle, maintains financial responsibility which covers the operation of
that vehicle by such operator.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle registered in this State,
whether owned by such operator or by another, upon the streets, alleys
or highways of this City, unless such operator, exhibits proof of financial
responsibility upon demand of a Police Officer, which proofs covers the
operation of that vehicle by such operator.
C. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability occurring after the
effective date of proof of such financial responsibility, arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle, in the amount of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or
death of one (1) person in any one (1) accident, and subject to said limit
for one (1) person, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
because of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any
one (1) accident, and in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in
any one (1) accident.
D. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. An insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle insurer
or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for selfinsurance,
as provided by Section 303.024, RSMo. A motor vehicle
SECTION 15-13 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-14
1:294
SECTION 15-15. School Buses, Drivers to Stop for. [Ord. No. 95-09
§ 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 2005-05 § 1, 2-8-2005]
insurance policy, a receipt which contains the name and address
of the insurer, the name and address of the named insured, the
policy number, the effective dates of the policy and a description
by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five (5) digits of the
vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if the insurance
policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles, shall be satisfactory
evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of Missouri of a cash deposit as
provided by Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond filed with the Director of Revenue of the State of
Missouri as provided by Section 303.230, RSMo.
E. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of the motor vehicle shall exhibit the
proof of financial responsibility on the demand of any Police Officer who
lawfully stops such operator while that officer is engaged in the
performance of the duties of his office.
F. Failure of any person who operates a motor vehicle on the streets,
alleys or highways of this City to exhibit proof of financial responsibility
on the demand of any Police Officer who lawfully stops such person
shall be prima facie evidence that such person, or that the owner of the
vehicle, does not maintain financial responsibility as required by this
Section.
G. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or may be imprisoned in the Lafayette County Jail for not
more than ninety (90) days, or both fine and imprisonment together
with Court costs therein.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a roadway and upon meeting or overtaking
from any direction any school bus which is stopped on the roadway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and whose
driver has given the signal to stop by activating the mechanical and
electrical signaling device, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such
school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion
or until signaled by its driver to proceed.
B. If any vehicle is witnessed by a Peace Officer or the driver of a school
bus to have violated the provisions of this Section, and the identity of
the operator is not otherwise apparent, it shall be a rebuttable
SECTION 15-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-15
1:295
SECTION 15-16. Seat Belts and Child Restraint Devices. [Ord. No.
95-12 § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 98-39 § I, 12-8-1998; Ord. No.
2006-47 § 1, 11-14-2006]
presumption that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered
committed the violation.
C. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or may be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than
ninety (90) days, or both fined and imprisoned together with court cost
therein.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, each driver and front seat
passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in this City shall wear a properly
adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal National Highway,
Transportation Act requirements, except that a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall be protected as required in Subsection (B)(5) of
this Section.
B. With respect to Subsection (A) of this Section:
1. No person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to
determine compliance with Subsection (A) of this Section.
2. The provisions of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not be
applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have
a seat belt fastened about his or her body or to any person
employed by the United States Postal Service while performing
duties for that Federal agency which requires the operator to
service postal boxes from their vehicles or which require frequent
entry into and exit from their vehicles.
3. As used in Subsections (A) of this Section, the term "passenger car"
means every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons
or less and used for the transportation of persons; except that, the
term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized
bicycles, motortricycles and trucks with a gross weight of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds or more.
4. Each driver who violates the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) in amount. All other provisions of law and court
rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs may be
imposed if court costs have been assessed on any other charge
arising out of the same occurrence.
5. Every person transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16)
years on the streets or highways of this City shall be responsible for
transporting such child as follows:
SECTION 15-15 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-16
1:296
SECTION 15-17. Driver's License Required to Operate Motorized
Vehicle. [Ord. No. 99-53 § 1, 1-11-2000]
a. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system
appropriate for that child.
b. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of
age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system
appropriate for that child.
c. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8)
years of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less
than eighty (80) pounds and who are also less than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger
restraint system or booster seat appropriate for that child.
d. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four
(4) feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle
safety belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
e. Children eight (8) years of age but less than sixteen (16) years
of age, regardless of weight or height, shall be secured by a
vehicle safety belt or restraint system appropriate for that
child.
f. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a
booster seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor
vehicle while wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the
motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and
shoulder belt for booster seat installation.
g. When transporting children in the immediate family when
there are more children than there are seating positions in the
enclosed area of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able
to be restrained by a child safety restraint device appropriate
for the child shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the
motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a
front seat area. The driver transporting children referred to in
this Subsection is not in violation of this Section.
Any person who violates this Subsection shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) and court costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any City street in this City unless he has a
valid driver's license.
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any street of this City
unless such person has a valid license that shows he has
SECTION 15-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-17
1:297
SECTION 15-18. Vehicle Equipment Statutes Adopted. [Ord. No.
99-56 § 1, 2-8-2000]
SECTION 15-18.1. Applicability of Rules of the Road. [Ord. No.
99-55 § 1, 2-8-2000]
successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the laws of the State
of Missouri.
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or a motortricycle
owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street by
any person whose license does not indicate that the person has
passed the examination for the operation of a motorcycle or
motortricycle or has been issued as instruction permit therefor.
4. Authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or
under his control to be driven upon any street in this City by any
person who is not properly licensed to do so under the laws of the
State of Missouri.
5. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his possession,
any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been
canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered.
6. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license or
permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the use
thereof.
7. Fail to carry one's instruction permit or license while operating a
motor vehicle and to fail to display said license or permit upon
demand of any Police Officer for inspection.
B. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
penalized as set out in Section 1-8.
A. All vehicles shall be equipped, and the equipment shall be so used, as is
provided by Chapter 307 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, and such
Chapter is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety and made a part
of this Title as fully as if set out at length herein.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the
City or County Jail not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
A. The local officials of this City recognize as applicable to all highways,
streets or alleys within the corporate limits Sections 304.014 to
304.026 inclusive, Revised Statutes of Missouri (Rules of the Road), and
all Police Officers are hereby ordered to enforce such provisions,
SECTION 15-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-18.1
1:298
SECTION 15-18.2. Passengers in Truck Beds. [Ord. No. 2006-47 § 2,
11-14-2006]
No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.,
with a license gross weight of less than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds
when such truck is operated within the corporate limits of this City when
any person under eighteen (18) years of age is riding in the unenclosed
bed of such truck. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall ride
in the unenclosed bed of such truck when the truck is in operation. Any
person who operates a truck with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds in violation of this Section shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus
court costs. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
regulation or regulations in like manner and effect and in the same
manner as the provisions, regulation and regulations of this Title.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the
City or County jail not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the employee's
duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck is
being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is authorized
by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged or
such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will prevent the
person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is being
operated solely for the purposes of participating in a special event and
it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed bed due to the
lack of available seating. "Special event", for the purposes of this
Section, is a specific social activity of a definable duration which is
participated in by the person riding in the unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is being
operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to, or ensuring
the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is the
only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the family of
the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is insufficient room in
SECTION 15-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-18.2
1:299
the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate all passengers in such
truck. For the purposes of this Subsection the term "family" shall mean
any persons related within the first degree of consanguinity.
SECTION 15-18.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-18.2
1:300
ARTICLE II
Parking
SECTION 15-19. Definitions. [Ord. No. 79-4 § 1, 2-6-1979]
For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
PARKING ZONES — Portions of streets described and established by the
City Council as zones within which the parking of motor vehicles shall
be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of a Parking Control
Officer.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street between the regularly established
curblines.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines and the
adjacent property lines.
STREET — Every way set apart for public travel except alleyways.
VEHICLE — Any device, or component thereof, in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or pulled upon a highway, street
or waterway, including, but not limited to, travel trailer, camper, motor
home/coach, trailers of all kinds, trucks of all sizes, cars, buses, boats, and
off-road vehicles. Devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks are not deemed to be a vehicle.[Ord. No. 2015-01
§ II, 1-13-2015]
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL MOTOR — A motor vehicle designed or regularly
used for carrying freight and merchandise, or more than eight passengers
but not including vanpools or shuttle buses.[Ord. No. 2015-01 § II,
1-13-2015]
VEHICLE, MOTOR — A conveyance propelled by motor power.[Ord. No.
2015-01 § II, 1-13-2015]
SECTION 15-20. Lines Designating Parking Space; Parking Within
Space. [Ord. No. 79-4 § 3, 2-6-1979]
Those areas so designated by the City Council as above set out, the Mayor
shall have or cause to have lines or markings painted upon the curb or
street adjacent to each parking zone or area, designating the parking space,
and each vehicle parked shall park within such lines or markings. It shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or markings, or to
park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space
designated by such lines or markings.
SECTION 15-21. Parking Zone Time Limit. [Ord. No. 79-4 § 4,
2-6-1979; Ord. No. 94-08 § 1, 5-10-1994]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in his name, operated, or controlled by him to be upon
any street within a parking zone or area longer than two (2) continuous
SECTION 15-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-21
1:301
hours (one hundred twenty (120) consecutive minutes) between the hours
of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. on Monday through Friday, legal holidays,
excepted.
SECTION 15-22. Police Department to Enforce Division. [Ord. No.
79-4 § 5, 2-6-1979; Ord. No. 2008-23 § 1, 7-22-2008]
It shall be the duty of Police Department of the City to enforce the terms
and provisions of this Article. It shall be the duty of the Police Department
to enforce illegal parking as posted if not specifically covered under this
Article.
SECTION 15-23. Parking Unlicensed Vehicles; Parking for Over
Seventy-Two Hours; Towing Vehicles in Violation. [Ord. of
2-10-1965, §§ 1-3]
SECTION 15-24. Parking Prohibited Between 2:00 A.M. and 5:00
A.M. on Certain Streets. [Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1, 2-13-2007]
That parking shall be and is herewith prohibited on Main Street from
Highland Avenue to 13th Street, Broadway from Highland Avenue to Main
Street, Franklin Avenue from 9th Street to 13th Street, any State Highway,
a City side Street between 9th Street and 13th Street on Main Street and
Franklin Avenue from 2:00 A.M. until 5:00 A.M. of each day for the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 15-25. Violations. [Ord. No. 79-4 § 6, 2-6-1979]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle which is
not licensed by the State on the streets of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any motor vehicle on
any street in the City for a continuous period of over seventy-two (72)
hours.
C. The City Marshal is hereby directed to cause any motor vehicle parked
in violation of this Section to be towed from the streets of the City. The
costs of the towing of the vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner
thereof, or the person violating this Section.
A. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or
stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed in this Article, the
officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may
take any other information displayed on the vehicle. A Uniform Traffic
Ticket may then be issued to the owner of the vehicle to answer the
charge against him within five (5) days during the hours and at a place
specified in and upon the traffic ticket.
B. Such violations shall be considered misdemeanors and are punishable
under Section 1-8 of this Code. The City Council may establish the fine
SECTION 15-21 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-25
1:302
SECTION 15-26. Parking within Fifteen Feet of Stop Sign. [Ord. No.
2006-44 §§ 1 — 2, 10-10-2006]
SECTION 15-27. Parking in a Zoned Residential District. [Ord. No.
2006-45 § 1, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-01 § III, 1-13-2105]
No school buses, campers, camper-trailers, recreational vehicles,
commercial vehicles, tractors, trailers, tractor-trailers, or trucks that
exceed one (1) ton rated capacity shall be parked at the curb or on the
street in a zoned Residential District unless specifically authorized by onsite
signage or by Chapter 29, Zoning, Section 29-30, of the Lexington City
Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 15-28. Parking Large Trucks In The City’s Public Works
Parking Lot. [Ord. No. 2019-06, 2-12-2019]
upon conviction or plea of guilty for the first (1st), second (2nd), and
third (3rd) offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers, within
fifteen (15) feet upon the approach of any flashing signal, stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway within the City
limits of Lexington, Missouri.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) or more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or may be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or both fine and
imprisonment together with court cost therein.
A. Large trucks, also known as “commercial vehicles,” may be permitted
to park in the Public Works parking lot of the City of Lexington (“City
lot”), located on 24th Street, pursuant to the following guidelines and
conditions:
1. In order to be eligible to park in the City lot, a truck must be rated
in excess of one-ton capacity; additionally, it must be designed or
regularly used for carrying freight and merchandise, or for
transporting more than eight (8) passengers at one time (not
including vanpools or shuttle busses).
2. Parking in the City lot will be available only to truck drivers who
are residents of the City of Lexington (“City”).
3. Any resident desiring to park a truck in the City lot will be required
to purchase a monthly parking permit from the City at a cost of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. Alternatively, residents may
purchase a one-year permit for two hundred dollars ($200.00). All
SECTION 15-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-28
1:303
SECTION 15-29. through SECTION 15-48. (Reserved)
permits must be purchased at Lexington City Hall, 919 Franklin
Avenue, Lexington.
4. Drivers who park in the City lot will have an assigned parking spot
and must display parking stickers on the front windshield of their
trucks.
5. The number of parking permits to be issued at any given time will
be limited due to the availability of parking spaces. Periodically,
parking may be temporarily prohibited due to specific City events
or commitments.
6. Trucks parking in the City lot are prohibited from storing
hazardous materials or other substances that might be considered
dangerous in nature. Any truck that the City has reason to believe
may contain hazardous or other dangerous materials must be
inspected and approved by the Lexington Fire Department before
being permitted to park in the City lot.
7. The City shall not be liable for any damage or vandalism to any
truck that occurs during the time the truck is parked on the City lot.
The driver of any truck that causes any damage to the City lot or
any vehicles or property therein, will be responsible to adequately
repair the damage.
8. Trucks from the Lexington MFA Plant will be permitted to continue
to park in the City lot as they currently do at no additional cost, as
this will be a continuation of a previously approved agreement
between MFA and the City. This permission may be revoked at any
time by a majority vote of the City Council.
9. Any trucks parked in the City lot for a time period of more than four
(4) hours without a sticker will be subject to being ticketed and
towed in accordance with Section 15-25 Violations. Such violations
shall be considered misdemeanors and are punishable under
Section 1-8 of this Code.
B. Should any section, sentence or clause of this Section be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the remaining sections, sentences or clauses.
SECTION 15-28 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-29
1:304
ARTICLE III
Vehicle License
SECTION 15-49. Definition. [Ord. of 7-21-1970, § 2; Ord. No.
2008-29 § 1, 10-14-2008]
MOTOR VEHICLE — As used in this Article shall include, but not be limited
to, trucks, automobiles and motorcycles.
SECTION 15-50. Required. [Ord. No. 83-16, §§ 1-4,8, 11-1-1983]
SECTION 15-51. Applicant to File Statement; Contents. [Ord. of
7-21-1970, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-29 § 2, 10-14-2008]
The applicant shall, on a form prepared and furnished for that purpose,
file in the office of County Assessor a statement containing the name and
address of the owner of the motor vehicle, a description of the make, model
and year of the motor vehicle to be licensed.
SECTION 15-52. License Fee. [Ord. of 7-21-1970, § 5; Ord. No.
73-17, § 1, 9-4-1973; Ord. No. 94-09 § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No.
2008-29 § 3, 10-14-2008]
The annual fee for a City license required by this Article shall be five dollars
($5.00) for each motor vehicle.
SECTION 15-53. When License is to be Obtained. [Ord. of
7-21-1970, § 8; Ord. No. 2006-32 § 1, 7-11-2006]
All City licenses issued for motor vehicles shall be issued as of January first
(1st) of each year. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of
each year. All persons acquiring a motor vehicle are required to purchase a
license within thirty (30) days of the acquisition of the motor vehicle.
SECTION 15-54. through SECTION 15-60. (Reserved)50
A. Every resident of the City of Lexington who shall own or operate a
motor vehicle upon the streets, thoroughfares and alleyways of the City,
shall, prior to the operation of said vehicle upon said streets,
thoroughfares or alleyways of the City, obtain both a valid City License
and valid State Licenses for each such motor vehicle.
B. Penalty. Any violation of this Section is a misdemeanor punishable
under the Section 1-8 of these ordinances.
50.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2008-29 § 5, adopted October 14, 2008, repealed sections 15-54
"delinquency penalty", 15-55 "grace period for new residents", 15-56 "licenses from other
municipalities", 15-57 "payment of personal property taxes required prior to issuance",
15-58 "assignment of registration numbers, issuance of decal", 15-59 "affixing decal to
vehicle", 15-60 "vehicle without decal properly affixed deemed unlicensed", 15-62
"replacement decal when new vehicle is purchased; fee" and 15-63 "records to be kept by
city clerk" in their entirety. Sections derived from ord. no. 2006-32 § 1, 7-11-2006; ord. no.
of 7-21-1970, §§ 1, 3 — 4, 7.
SECTION 15-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-61
1:305
SECTION 15-61. License to Expire Upon Sale of Vehicle. [Ord. of
7-21-1970, § 6; Ord. No. 2008-29 § 4, 10-14-2008]
Upon the sale of any motor vehicle licensed in accordance with this Article,
the license shall immediately expire upon the sale of the vehicle.
SECTION 15-62. through SECTION 15-70. (Reserved)
SECTION 15-61 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-62
1:306
ARTICLE IV
Speed Regulations
SECTION 15-71. City Speed Limit. [Ord. No. 74-13 § 1, 7-16-1974]
No person shall operate any vehicle on any street within the City at a
greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless signs are erected
designating another speed.
SECTION 15-72. Maximum Speed Limit. [Ord. No. 74-13 § 2,
7-16-1974]
Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit
established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of
such posted limit.
SECTION 15-73. Must Drive Carefully and Prudently. [Ord. No.
74-13 § 3, 7-16-1974]
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets of the City shall
operate or drive the same in a careful and prudent manner, and in the
exercise of the highest degree of care, and at a rate of speed so as not to
endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person, taking
into consideration the time of day, the amount of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, the condition of the street or highway, the atmospheric conditions
and the location with reference to intersecting streets or highways, curves,
residences, or schools.
SECTION 15-74. Driving too Slowly. [Ord. No. 74-13 § 4, 7-16-1974]
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow rate of speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except
when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law. Peace Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions
to drivers, and in the event of apparent wilful disobedience to this Section
and refusal to comply with the direction of any officer in accordance
herewith, the continued slow operation of a vehicle by a driver shall be a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 15-75. Speed Meter Results Acceptable as Evidence. [Ord.
No. 74-13 § 5, 7-16-1974]
The use of, and results determined by any speed meter, machine or
mechanism which seeks to reduce the error of manual operation to a
minimum, shall be acceptable as evidence where driving in excess of posted
speed limits is the cause of action; provided, however, that the use thereof
shall not be construed to exclude any competent evidence secured by any
other manner or means.
SECTION 15-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-76
1:307
SECTION 15-76. Timing of Traffic Signals. [Ord. No. 74-13 § 6,
7-16-1974]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
SECTION 15-77. Speed Limit Signs to be Erected. [Ord. No. 74-13
§ 7, 7-16-1974]
That the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs and giving notice
of the maximum legal speed limit as herein provided. The authority herein
granted by the posting of maximum legal speed limit by the City Traffic
Engineer is, however, subject to specific speed limits as may be set by
ordinance by the City Council of the City of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 15-78. through SECTION 15-85. (Reserved)
SECTION 15-76 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-78
1:308
ARTICLE V
Accessible Parking
SECTION 15-86. Accessible Parking — Generally. [Ord. No. 92-14
§§ 1-6, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 2012-34 § I, 11-13-2012]
SECTION 15-87. through SECTION 15-93. (Reserved)
A. The City Council does hereby adopt the procedures and enforcement
prescribed by Section 301.143, RSMo., and International Code Council
Standard ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003, and subsequent versions, pertaining
to the designation of parking spaces for the physically disabled.
B. The following parking spaces are hereby designated as reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles displaying distinguishing license plates or
placards issued pursuant to Section 301.142, RSMo., or a "disabled
veteran" license plate issued pursuant to Section 301.071, RSMo., or a
distinguishing plate or card designated for physically disabled persons
issued by another State:
1. Parking spaces on public streets and public parking lots as may be
reserved and designated as "accessible" parking upon the approval
of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. New or restriped parking lots — designated car and van parking spaces
and access aisles shall comply with then current versions of
International Code Council Standard ICC/ANSI A1171.1-2003 and
Section 301.143.2, RSMo.
D. A sign upon which is inscribed the international symbol of accessibility
in white on a blue background and may also include any appropriate
wording to indicate that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard shall be
posted immediately adjacent to and readily visible from each
designated parking space. All signage for the designated space shall
comply with Section 301.143, RSMo. Beginning August 28, 2011, all
new signs erected under this Section shall not contain the words
"Handicap Parking" or "Handicapped Parking" (Section 301.143.9,
RSMo.).
E. Any person who shall park a vehicle without the required distinguishing
license plate or placard in a designated "accessible" car and van
parking space shall be in violation of this Section and shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under Section 1-8 of the City Code
of Ordinances and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00).
SECTION 15-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-87
1:309

ARTICLE VI
Vehicle Noise Control
SECTION 15-94. Title and Purpose. [Ord. No. 92-28 § 1, 2-9-1993]
This Article shall be known as the "Vehicle Noise Control Ordinance" and its
purpose shall be to control and regulate the noise of motor vehicles.
SECTION 15-95. Loud Sound Amplification Systems Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 92-28 § 2, 2-9-1993]
A. No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of
any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the
sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the
vehicle.
B. "Sound Amplification System" means any radio, tape player, compact
disc player, loud speaker, or other electronic device used for the
amplification of sound.
C. "Plainly Audible" means any sound produced by a sound amplification
system from within the vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a distance
of fifty (50) feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by auditory
senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be
discernible and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle
may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley,
parking lot, or driveway.
D. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this Section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
1. The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition.
2. The system was in an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle.
3. The system or vehicle was owned and operated by the City of
Lexington or a gas, electric, communications or refuse company.
4. The system or vehicle was used for the purpose of giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting
music to any person or assemblages of persons in compliance with
ordinances of the City of Lexington.
5. The system or vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such
as parades, fireworks, sports events, musical productions and other
activities which have the approval of the City Administrator/Mayor.
SECTION 15-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-96
1:311
SECTION 15-96. Penalty. [Ord. No. 92-28 § 3, 2-9-1993]
Any person, individual, partnership, corporation or association who violates
any of the provisions of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, shall be punished as follows:
1. For a first offense, a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
2. For a second and subsequent offense in a calendar year, a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment of not more than ninety (90)
days.
3. Each day any violation hereof is found to exist or continues to exist shall
be a separate offense and punishable as such hereunder.
SECTION 15-96 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-96
1:312
ARTICLE VII
Regulations of All-Terrain Vehicles, Utility Vehicles, Motorized
Bicycles and Golf Carts
SECTION 15-97. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2008-24 § 1, 9-9-2008; Ord.
No. 2008-24A §§ 1 — 2, 10-14-2008]
Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Section:
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
BICYCLE — A non-motorized vehicle consisting of a metal frame on two (2)
wheels and having handlebars and a seat.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway, there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad stations, stores and public
buildings, which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on
one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the
roadway.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property which bears the name of the
owner or business prominently and permanently displayed on the side
thereof.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK — That part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.
GOLF CART — Any motorized or electric vehicle designed to be used
for transporting persons and equipment while playing golf and designed
primarily for off-street/road use. Golf carts are typically sixty (60) inches or
less in width and travel on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires.
SECTION 15-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-97
1:313
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels
in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or a vehicle which
has an enclosure surrounding all the riders. This definition includes minimotorcycles
or pocket bikes.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE/MOPEDS/SCOOTERS — Any two-wheeled or threewheeled
device having an automatic transmission and a motor with a
cylinder capacity of not more than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which
produces less than three (3) gross brake horsepower and is capable of
propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than thirty (30) miles
per hour on level ground.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be current
use in the City.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway",
as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
UTILITY VEHICLES — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway purposes which is sixty-three (63) inches or
less in width, has an unladen dry weight of one thousand nine hundred
(1,900) pounds or less, travels on four (4) or six (6) wheels and is used
primarily for agricultural, landscaping, lawn care or maintenance purposes.
This definition shall not pertain to riding lawnmowers.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting motorized bicycles
and devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
SECTION 15-98. All-Terrain and Utility Vehicles — Operation—
Exceptions — Prohibited Uses — Penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-24 § 2,
9-9-2008; Ord. No. 2008-24A §§ 1, 3, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 2015-13
§ I, 4-28-2015]
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility vehicle, as
defined in this Chapter, upon the streets and highways of this City,
except as follows:
SECTION 15-97 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-98
1:314
1. All-terrain or utility vehicles owned and operated by a
governmental entity for official use;
2. All-terrain or utility vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or
industrial on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and
sunset on the day of operation; or
3. All-terrain or utility vehicles whose operators carry a special permit
issued by this City pursuant to this Chapter, and affixed to the
vehicle. These permits shall be issued annually by the City. The fee
for said permit shall be set by the City Council annually.
B. A person operating an all-terrain or utility vehicle on a street or
highway pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a
valid driver's license issued by a State authorizing such person to
operate a motor vehicle, but shall not be required to have passed an
examination for the operation of a motorcycle. The operator of an allterrain
or utility vehicle is required to obey all the same traffic laws as
an operator of a motor vehicle. No person shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle unless it has a valid title with the Department of Revenue.
C. No person shall operate an all-terrain, utility vehicle or off-road vehicle,
as defined in Section 301.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this
City, except that off-road vehicle may be operated within waterways
which flow within the boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle
operator owns, or has permission to be upon, or for the purpose of
fording such stream or river of the State at such road crossings as are
customary or part of the highway system. The operator of an all-terrain,
utility vehicle or off-road vehicle is required to obey all the same traffic
laws and signage rules as an operator of a motor vehicle.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain or utility vehicle, as defined in
this Chapter, on a street or highway:
1. In excess of the posted speed limit;
2. In any careless or imprudent manner so as to endanger a person or
property of another;
3. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
4. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle;
5. Without liability insurance coverage in such amounts and under
such terms that shall comply with the provision of Sections 303.010
through 303.044, RSMo., which said coverage, terms and
requirements shall also cover and apply to said individual's
operation of an all-terrain or utility vehicle;
6. With a passenger or rider, unless said vehicle is designed for
passengers or riders, and is equipped with proper seat belt
equipment for each passenger.
SECTION 15-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-98
1:315
SECTION 15-99. Motorized Bicycles, Mopeds and Scooters —
Operation — Exceptions — Prohibited Uses — Penalty. [Ord. No.
2008-24 § 3, 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 2008-24A §§ 1, 4, 10-14-2008]
E. Every all-terrain and utility vehicle operated on a street or highway
within the City shall have the following equipment:
1. A bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven (7) feet
above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle
safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than
thirty (30) square inches and shall be dayglow in color;
2. A lighted headlamp and tail lamp which shall be in operation at any
time in which an all-terrain or utility vehicle is being operated on
any street or highway;
3. A braking system maintained in good operating condition; and
4. An adequate muffler system in good working condition, and a
United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester.
A. A person operating a motorized bicycle, moped or scooter on a street or
highway shall:
1. Have a valid driver's license issued by a State authorizing such
person to operate a motor vehicle, but shall not be required to have
passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle;
2. Have a special permit issued by this City pursuant to this Chapter
and affixed to the vehicle. These permits shall be issued annually by
the City. The fee for said permit shall be set by the City Council
annually.
3. Be required to obey all the same traffic laws and signage rules as
an operator of a motor vehicle.
B. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle, moped or scooter:
1. Without a valid driver's license;
2. In excess of the posted speed limit;
3. In any careless or imprudent manner so as to endanger a person or
property of another;
4. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
5. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates a motorized bicycle, moped or scooter;
6. Without adequate and appropriate insurance coverage;
SECTION 15-98 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-99
1:316
SECTION 15-100. Golf Carts — Operation — Exceptions —
Prohibited Uses — Penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-24 § 4, 9-9-2008; Ord.
No. 2008-24A §§ 1, 5, 10-14-2008]
7. With a passenger or rider, unless said vehicle is designed for
passengers or riders; provided however, that in no event shall the
operator allow more than one (1) passenger or rider;
8. During the period from 6:30 P.M. to 6:30 A.M. unless the vehicle is
equipped with a front-facing lamp on the front and a rear-facing red
reflector, at least two (2) square inches in reflective surface area or
a rear-facing red lamp, pursuant to Section 307.185, RSMo.;
9. Unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS,
Regulation VESC-17, approved July, 1997, as promulgated by the
Vehicle Equipment Safety Commission.
A. No person shall operate a golf cart, as defined in this Chapter, upon the
streets and highways of this City, except as follow:
1. Golf carts owned and operated by a governmental entity for official
use;
2. Golf carts whose operators carry a special permit issued by this
City pursuant to this Chapter and affixed to the left rear fender of
the vehicle. These permits shall be issued annually by the City. The
fee for said permit shall be set by the City Council annually.
B. No person shall operate a golf cart on City streets or highways:
1. Unless the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age and have a
valid driver's license;
2. In excess of the posted speed limit;
3. Without a bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven (7)
feet above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The
bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not
less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be dayglow in color;
4. In any careless or imprudent manner so as to endanger a person or
property of another;
5. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
6. Without adequate and appropriate insurance coverage;
7. With a passenger or rider, unless said vehicle is designed for
passengers or riders; provided however, that in no event shall the
operator allow more than one (1) passenger or rider;
8. During the period from 6:30 P.M. to 6:30 A.M. unless the vehicle is
equipped with two (2) headlamps mounted at the same level on
SECTION 15-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 15-100
1:317
SECTION 15-101. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-24 § 5, 9-9-2008; Ord. No.
2008-24A § 6, 10-14-2008]
Any violation of the requirements or prohibitions of this Article shall be
declared to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction, the person so violating
shall be punished under Section 1-8 of the Lexington Municipal Code.
Additionally, the court may require suspension of the special permit,
prohibiting operation of the vehicle within the City limits.
each side of the front of the vehicle and two (2) rear lamps, red
in color, mounted at the same level on each side of the rear of the
vehicle.
C. The operator of a golf cart is required to obey all the same traffic laws
and signage rules as an operator of a motor vehicle.
SECTION 15-100 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 15-101
1:318
Schedule I
SPEED LIMITS
Table I-A. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2012-06 § I, 2-14-2012]
Every person operating a motor vehicle upon the streets of the City of
Lexington, Missouri, shall operate the same in a careful and prudent
manner, exercising the highest degree of care in the operation thereof and
shall operate such vehicle at a speed so as to not endanger life or limb
or property, and shall operate said vehicle at a speed not in excess of 25
mph on all streets in the City of Lexington, Missouri, except at the following
locations where the speed limit shall be as follows:
Location, Speed Limit
Schedule II
A. Within the City limits: 25 mph (unless otherwise posted).
B. School Zones: 20 mph.
* 20th Street and South Street to 20th Street and Poplar Avenue —
both directions (when amber light is flashing).
* 24th Street at Aulls Lane to the intersection of 24th Street and U.S.
24 Highway — both directions.
* 24th Street and Aulls Lane to Polge Lane and Aulls Lane — both
directions.
C. U.S. 24 Highway: 60 mph — both directions.
D. Missouri Highway 13: 25, 35 and 45 mph — both directions:
* South City limits to U.S. 24 Highway overpass — 45 mph.
* U.S. 24 Highway to Tremont Avenue — 35 mph.
* Tremont Avenue throughout the City — 25 mph (unless otherwise
posted).
E. Missouri Highway 224 East: 25, 35 and 45 mph — both directions:
* Martin Lane to U.S. Highway 24 — 45 mph.
* 21st Street to Martin Lane — 35 mph.
* Throughout the City — 25 mph (unless otherwise posted).
F. Missouri Highway M-224 West: 25 and 35 mph — both directions. [Ord.
No. 2015-01 §IV, 1-13-2105]
* Highland Avenue to west City limits — 35 mph.
* Throughout the City — 25 mph (unless otherwise posted)
SECTION 15-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS Table I-A
1:319
STOP SIGNS
Table II-A. Stop Signs.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 300.270, RSMo. and when
signs are erected giving notice thereof drivers of vehicles shall stop at each
of the following intersections:
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
88-21, § 2 North M-13 South Street
2001-13 § 1 South M-13 South Street
East South Street M-13
West South Street M-13
East Washington
Street
27th Terrace
South 27th St. South St.
West Washington St. 26th St.
West Heather Ln. Glenn Dr.
East Heather Ln. 26th St.
East Hillside Dr. 26th St.
North Glenn Dr. Hillside Dr.
East Washington St. 25th St.
West Washington St. 24th St.
East Washington St. 24th St.
West Washington St. 23rd St.
East Washington St. 23rd St.
East Monroe St. 24th St.
South 23rd St. Monroe St.
West Monroe St. 20th St.
West Jefferson St. 20th St.
East Poplar St. 20th St.
East Oneida St. 20th St.
East Oneida St. 18th St.
West Oneida St. 18th St.
West Oneida St. Amelia St.
West Bloom St. Amelia St.
East Bloom St. 18th St.
Table I-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE Table II-A
1:320
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
West Bloom St. 18th St.
North 21st St. Jefferson St.
North 22nd St. Jefferson St.
East Jefferson St. 23rd St.
West Jefferson St. 23rd St.
North 23rd St. Madison St.
South 23rd St. Madison St.
East Madison St. 23rd St.
West Madison St. 23rd St.
East Madison St. 23rd St. Terr.
North 22nd St. Madison St.
South 22nd St. Madison St.
North 21st St. Madison St.
South 21st St. Madison St.
West Madison St. 20th St.
West Garfield St. 20th St.
North 21st St. Garfield St.
South 21st St. Garfield St.
West Garfield St. 20th St.
North 22nd St. Garfield St.
South 22nd St. Garfield St.
East Garfield St. 23rd St.
East McKinley St. 23rd St.
North 22nd St. McKinley St.
South 22nd St. McKinley St.
North 21st St. McKinley St.
South 21st St. McKinley St.
West McKinley St. 20th St.
South 19th St. Bloom St.
East Bloom St. 20th St.
West Ash St. 24th St.
West Oak St. 23rd St.
North 21st St. Washington Ave.
North 20th St. Washington Ave.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
1:321
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
North 19th St. Washington Ave.
North 18th St. Washington Ave.
West Washington Ave. 17th St.
West Taylor St. 17th St.
South Alley (Taylor St.) Taylor St.
North 18th St. Taylor St.
North 19th St. Taylor St.
South 18th St. State St.
West State St. 17th St.
West Forest Ave. 17th St.
South 18th St. Forest Ave.
East Clearview Dr. Roderick Ln.
South Roderick Ln. Forest Ave.
North Forest Ln. Forest Ave.
South Marion Ln. Forest Ave.
North Co. Club Terr. Forest Ave.
West Aull Ln. 20th St.
South 21st St. Aull Ln.
South 22nd St. Aull Ln.
North Polge Ln. Aull Ln.
South 23rd St. Aull Ln.
South 23rd St. Terr. Aull Ln.
East Aull Ln. 24th St.
South 24th St. Near 24 Highway
West 20th St. M-13
West Ussery Dr. M-13
West Park Plaza Ussery Dr.
West Poplar St. 18th St.
East Marshall Rd. M-13
East Gilead Rupe Rd. M-13
East E.B. Off Ramp M-13
West W.B. Off Ramp M-13
East Lexington Inn Dr. M-13
West Berkley M-13
Table II-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE Table II-A
1:322
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
South Winthrop Dr. Berkley
North Oakdale Dr. Berkley
East Roncelli Rd. M-13
East Sleepyhollow Dr. M-13
East Francis St. M-13
East Trement M-13
East S.W. Blvd. M-13
North 17th St. M-224
South 17th St. M-224
North 16th St. M-224
South 16th St. M-224
North 15th St. M-224
South 15th (school lot) M-224
North 14th St. M-224
North M-13 Franklin Ave.
South M-13 Franklin Ave.
East Franklin Ave. M-13
West Franklin Ave. M-13
North 14th St. Franklin Ave.
South 14th St. Franklin Ave.
North 15th St. Franklin Ave.
South 15th St. Franklin Ave.
North 16th St. Franklin Ave.
South 16th St. Franklin Ave.
North 17th St. Franklin Ave.
South 17th St. Franklin Ave.
North Co. Club Terr. Hickory Street
2 Swim pool gates Lake Rd.
West Lake Rd. Co. Club Rd.
South Co. Club Rd. Forest Ave.
East Lafayette St. 16th St.
West Lafayette St. 16th St.
East Lafayette St. 17th St.
East Reed Ln. 16th St.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
1:323
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
East State St. 17th St.
South End Hospital Lot State St.
North End Hospital Lot 15th St.
North 21st St. Franklin Ave.
South 21st St. Franklin Ave.
North 22nd St. Franklin Ave.
South 23rd St. Franklin Ave.
North 23rd St. Franklin Ave.
North 24th St. Franklin Ave.
South 24th St. Franklin Ave.
East Franklin Ave. Dover Rd.
West Franklin Ave. Dover Rd.
North 26th St. Franklin Ave.
South 26th St. Franklin Ave.
North 28th St. Franklin Ave.
East Franklin Ave. 30th St.
South 28th St. South St.
North 26th St. South St.
South 26th St. South St.
West South St. Dover Rd.
North 25th St. South St.
North 24th St. South St.
South 24th St. South St.
North 23rd St. South St.
South 23rd St. South St.
North 22nd St. South St.
South 22nd St. South St.
North 20th St. South St.
South 20th St. South St.
West South St. 20th St.
East South St. 20th St.
North 19th St. South St.
South 19th St. South St.
North 18th St. South St.
Table II-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE Table II-A
1:324
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
South 18th St. South St.
South 17th St. South St.
North Amelia St. South St.
South 16th St. South St.
North 15th St. South St.
South 15th St. South St.
South 14th St. South St.
North 30th St. M-224
South Martin Ln. M-224
North 26th St. M-224
South Murphy Rd. M-224
North Dover Rd. M-224
South 25th St. M-224
South 24th St. M-224
North 24th St. M-224
South 23rd St. M-224
North 23rd St. M-224
South 21st St. M-224
North 21st St. M-224
South 20th St. M-224
North 20th St. M-224
South 19th St. M-224
North 19th St. M-224
South 18th St. M-224
North 18th St. M-224
North 18th St. Franklin Ave.
South 18th St. Franklin Ave.
East Franklin Ave. 18th St.
West Franklin Ave. 18th St.
North 19th St. Franklin Ave.
South 19th St. Franklin Ave.
North 20th St. Franklin Ave.
South 20th St. Franklin Ave.
East Franklin Ave. 20th St.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
1:325
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
West Franklin Ave. 20th St.
North 12th St. South St.
South 12th St. South St.
North 11th St. South St.
South 11th St. South St.
West South St. 10th St.
East South St. 9th St.
West South St. 8th St.
North 12th St. Franklin Ave.
South 12th St. Franklin Ave.
North 11th St. Franklin Ave.
South 11th St. Franklin Ave.
North 10th St. Franklin Ave.
North 10th St. M-224
North 12th St. M-224
East Delaware M-13 Extension
East Howard 10th St.
North Highland 10th St.
East Bluff St. Highland
East Maple Highland
West 9th St. Highland
East Orange St. Highland
North 9th St. Franklin Ave.
South 9th St. Franklin Ave.
North 8th St. Franklin Ave.
South 8th St. Franklin Ave.
South 7th St. Franklin Ave.
West Franklin Ave. Highland
North Highland Franklin Ave.
South Highland Franklin Ave.
West 6th St. Highland
North Branch 6th St.
North Plumb 6th St.
West 5th St. Highland
Table II-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE Table II-A
1:326
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
West Winter Highland
West Rock Highland
South Highland M-224
East Ice Highland
North 7th St. Franklin Ave.
East Ice Highland
West Main St. Highland
North 9th St. M-224
South 9th St. M-224
North Highland Broadway
South 12th St. M-224
South 10th St. M-224
96-29, § 1
2001-12 § 1
North/South 20th St. The school crosswalk
in front of Leslie Bell
Elementary so long as
the light is flashing.
North/South 20th St. The school crosswalk
in front of Leslie Bell
Elementary so long as
the rollout stop sign is
placed in crosswalk.
2001-12, § 1 East South Street 12th Street
East South Street 10th Street
West South Street 9th Street
South 10th Street Franklin Ave.
East Rock Street Highland Ave.
South Highland Ave. Broadway
North Mill Street Highland Ave.
South Jones Lane Highland Ave.
East Poplar Street 18th Street
East Poplar Street Amelia Street
East South Street 24th Street
West South Street 24th Street
East 23rd Street Grant Street
East High Drive 13 Highway
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
1:327
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must stop at
Street Intersection
East Sleepy Hollow
Apts.
13 Highway
West Reed Lane 15th Street
North 27th St. Terr. South Street
East Oak Street 25th Street
East Oak Street 24th Street
West Oak Street 24th Street
South Sunset Drive Roncelli Road
South Ichabod Lane Roncelli Road
South Crane Lane Roncelli Road
East Little Lane Highway 13
East Summit Camp
Rd.
Route O
East Summit Camp
Rd.
Highway 13
West Highway 13 Summit Camp Rd.
West Davis Drive Highway 13
West Brooke Drive Highway 13
North Route O Highway 13
South Goodloe Orchard
Rd.
M-224
North Hicklin Road Highway 24
East Stephens Lane Martin Lane
South Golf Road Hickory
East Hickory Pool View Rd.
East/West Aull Lane 23rd Street
East Ash Street 25th Street
South Ball Park Lot Ash Street
East Grant Street 24th Street
North Forest Ave. Co. Club Rd.
2007-03, § 1 East/West Franklin Avenue South 24th Street and
Franklin Avenue
Schedule III
YIELD SIGNS
Table II-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE Table III-A
1:328
Table III-A. Yield Signs.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 300.270, RSMo. and when
signs are erected giving notice thereof drivers of vehicles approaching a
yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the cross
walk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no cross
walk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway.
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must Yield at
Street Intersection
88-21, § 3 East Main St. M-224
2001-12 § 1 West M-224 13 and Broadway
East State St. 16th St.
West State St. 16th St.
West Monroe 24th St.
2001-12 § 1 South 22nd Street Washington Street
West 24th Street Pool View Rd.
East Park Rd. Pool View Rd.
South Pool View Rd. South Side of Bridge
2005-06 § 1 South Pool view Drive Hickory Street
Schedule IV
ONE-WAY STREETS
Editor's Note-Ord. no. 2005-21 § 1, adopted June 14, 2005, repealed ch.
15, schedule IV in its entirety. Former schedule IV derived from ord. no.
2001-42. Subsequently, ord. no. 2005-43 § 1, adopted November 22, 2005,
set out the provisions herein.
Table IV-A. One-Way Streets. [Ord. No. 2005-43 § 1, 11-22-2005]
Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must Stop at
Street Intersection
North 11th Street Franklin Avenue to Main
Street
Schedule V
NO PARKING
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table V-A
1:329
Table V-A. No Parking Signs. [Ord. No. 2016-23 § I, 10-25-2016]
In accordance with the provision of Section 300 — 400, RSMo., (1)(i)(2)
and (3)(b) and when signs are erected giving notice therefore, vehicle(s)
whether occupied or not should not be parked in front of a public or private
driveway. And at any place where official signs prohibit parking.
Ord. No.
Direction of
Traffic Movement
Name of Street
Travelled On
Must Not Park as
Designated by
Signs
2016-23 North and South
Side
Dover Road Between 24th
Street and Mo. 224
2016-23 East and West Side Dover Road Between 24th
Street and Mo. 224
2019-01 East Side S. 14th Street Between Main
Street and Franklin
Avenue
Chapter 16
MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM
Cross Reference — Auditorium committee established, § 2-249.
SECTION 16-1. Agreement. [Ord. No. 2014-23 § 1, 9-23-201451]
The City of Lexington and LAA agree that LAA is hereby permitted to
renovate, operate and maintain the Lexington Municipal Auditorium during
the term of this agreement and any renewals and that LAA accepts
possession of the premises as is, and the obligations associated therewith,
in return for such income as may be generated from the operation of LMA.
The City, in approving this agreement, acknowledges that this agreement is
granted in the public interest in consideration of the undertakings of LAA
herein expressed to preserve LMA and its historical significance, to improve
and maintain the same, which the City cannot afford, and to dedicate its use
to strictly public, charitable and municipal purposes.
SECTION 16-2. Term. [Ord. No. 2014-23 § 1, 9-23-2014]
The term of this agreement will be automatically renewing one-year periods
unless and until the agreement is terminated by either party, not to exceed
in any event a total of ninety-nine (99) years from the effective date.
SECTION 16-3. Other Provisions. [Ord. No. 2014-23 § 1, 9-23-2014]
Other provisions are as documented in the agreement dated October 9,
2013, under Ordinance No. 2013-31.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 16, Municipal
Auditorium, adopted by the Ord. of 4-11-1950 and Ord. No. 72-13, as amended.
Table V-A LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 16-3
1:330
Chapter 17
MUNICIPAL COURT
Cross Reference — When municipal judge may issue oaths and affirmations,
§ 2-62; Police and prisoners, § 20-1 et seq.
State Law Reference — Courts in third class cities, RSMo. § 98.320.
SECTION 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 16-3
1:331

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 17-1. Organization.52 [Ord. No. 94-35 § 1, 2-14-1995]
SECTION 17-1.1. Time of Regular Sessions. [Ord. No. 2014-26 § I,
11-25-2014]
The Lexington Municipal Court shall convene in regular session on the third
Thursday of each month, commencing at 4:00 P.M., starting February 2015.
SECTION 17-2. Qualifications.53 [Ord. No. 94-35 § 2, 2-14-1995]
A. A court is hereby established in the City of Lexington to be known as the
Municipal Court of the City of Lexington.
B. The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of the Council by a majority vote.
C. The City Council shall, by ordinance set the compensation for the
Municipal Judge, which shall not be dependent in any way upon the
number of trials, guilty verdicts or amount of fines imposed or
collected.
D. The Municipal Judge shall be under the Administrative Supervisor of
the Circuit Judge, and Municipal Judge, and the Municipal Court shall
be a Division of the Circuit Court. The Municipal Division shall be
subject to the Rules of the Circuit Court not inconsistent with the Rules
of the Supreme Court.
E. The Municipal Court is governed by Ch. 479, RSMo., and any ordinance
in conflict therewith is declared void.
A. The Municipal Judge must be a resident of the State of Missouri but
need not be a resident of the City or of the Judicial Circuit Court in
which the City is located.
B. The Municipal Judge must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and
no person may serve as Municipal Judge who has reached the age of
seventy (70).
C. The Municipal Judge must be licensed to practice law in the State of
Missouri and must be of good moral character.
D. The Municipal Judge shall hold no other office in the City of Lexington.
52.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 479.020, RSMo.
53.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 479.020, RSMo.
SECTION 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 17-3
1:333
SECTION 17-3. Duties and Powers of Municipal Judge. [RSMo.
§ 479.070]
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He shall keep a
docket in which he shall enter every case commenced before him and the
proceeding therein and he shall keep such other records as required. Such
docket and records shall be records of the Circuit Court. The Municipal
Judge shall deliver said docket and records and all books and papers
pertaining to his office to his successor in office or to the Presiding Judge of
the Circuit Court. The Municipal Judge shall have the power to administer
oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and judgments made
by him, and may fine or imprison for contempt committed before such Judge
while holding court, in the same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit
Judge.
SECTION 17-4. Absence of Judge, Procedure.54 [Ord. No. 94-12 § I,
5-24-1994]
If the Municipal Judge is absent, sick or disqualified from acting or
performing his duties, the Mayor shall request the presiding Judge of the
Circuit Court to designate a special Municipal Judge, who must be
competent and eligible to act as a Municipal Judge until the absence or
disqualification of the regular Judge shall cease.
SECTION 17-5. Fines and Costs, Where Paid, Deposited. [RSMo.
§ 479.240]
When a fine is assessed for violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the
discretion of the judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may
deem appropriate.
SECTION 17-6. Prosecutions Based on Information Only,
Proceedings. [RSMo. § 479.090]
All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be instituted
by information and may be based upon a complaint. Proceedings shall
be in accordance with the Supreme Court rules governing practice and
procedure in proceedings before Municipal Judges.
SECTION 17-7. Warrants, How Issued and Executed. [RSMo.
§ 479.100]
All warrants issued by a Municipal Judge hearing violations of municipal
ordinances, shall be directed to the City Marshal, or any other Police Officer
of the City, or to the Sheriff of the County. The warrants shall be executed
by the Marshal, Police Officer or Sheriff at any place within the limits of the
County, and not elsewhere, unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner
54.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 479.230, RSMo.
SECTION 17-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 17-7
1:334
provided for warrants in criminal cases, and, when so endorsed, shall be
served in other Counties, as provided for in warrants in criminal cases.
SECTION 17-8. Arrest Without Warrants, Procedure. [RSMo.
§ 479.110]
The City Marshal, or other Police Officer of the City shall, without a warrant,
make arrests of any person who commits any offense in his presence, but
such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the Judge
hearing violations of municipal ordinances.
SECTION 17-9. City to Designate Attorney to Prosecute Violations
— Duties. [RSMo. § 479.120]
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the City to prosecute the
violations of the City's ordinances before the Municipal Judge hearing the
violations of that City'sordinances. The salary or fees of the attorney and his
necessary expenses incurred in such prosecutions shall be paid by the City.
SECTION 17-10. Trial By Jury, When. [RSMo. § 479.130]
Any person charged with the violation of a municipal ordinance of the City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury, as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Judge.
SECTION 17-11. Judge to be Trier of Fact, When. [RSMo. § 479.140]
In any trial for the violation of a municipal ordinance, all issues of fact shall
be tried by the judge except where trial by jury is authorized by law and the
defendant or his attorney requests a trial by jury.
SECTION 17-12. Trial By Jury, Certification for Assignment. [RSMo.
§ 479.150]
A defendant accused of a violation of a municipal ordinance has a right to
a trial by jury and demands such trial by jury, the Municipal Judge shall
certify the case for assignment to the Circuit Court in the manner provided
in Subsection (2) of Section 517.520, RSMo.
SECTION 17-13. Witnesses How Summoned, Fees. [RSMo.
§ 479.160]
A. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial, and to
enforce their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of
witnesses shall be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before
Associate Circuit Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case.
B. When a trial shall be continued by a Municipal Judge it shall not be
necessary to summon any witnesses who may be present at the
continuance; but the Municipal Judge shall orally notify such witnesses
SECTION 17-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 17-13
1:335
SECTION 17-14. Municipal Judge Without Jurisdiction, When,
Procedure. [RSMo. § 479.170]
If, in the progress of any trial before a Municipal Judge, it shall appear
to the Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense
against the criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him as
Municipal Judge, he shall immediately stop all further proceedings before
him as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made before some
Associate Circuit Judge within the County.
SECTION 17-15. Commitment in County Jail, When — Duty of
Sheriff. [RSMo. § 479.190]
If a City has no suitable and safe place of confinement, the defendant may
be committed to the County Jail by the Judge, and it shall be the duty of the
Sheriff, is space for the prisoner is available in the County Jail, upon receipt
of a warrant of commitment from the judge to receive and safety keep such
prisoner until discharged by due process of law. The City shall pay the board
of such prisoner at the same rate as may now hereafter be allowed by law
to such Sheriff for the keeping of other prisoners in his custody.
SECTION 17-16. Parole or Probation, When Granted. [RSMo.
§ 479.190]
Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his
judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person
who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before said
Judge.
SECTION 17-17. Appeals, Trial De Novo. [RSMo. § 479.200]
In any case tried before the Municipal Judge who is not licensed to practice
law in this State, the defendant, upon a finding of guilty or a plea of guilty,
shall have a right to trial de novo, before a Circuit Judge or an Associate
Circuit Judge.
SECTION 17-18. Recognizances and Forfeitures. [RSMo. § 479.210]
In case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge hearing in a municipal ordinance violation case, the same shall be
deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause the same to be prosecuted
against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the name of the
municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before a Circuit
Judge or Associate Circuit Judge, and in the event of cases caused to
be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge, such shall be on the transcript of
the proceedings before the Municipal Judge. All monies recovered in such
as either party may require to attend before him on the day set for trial
to testify in the case, and enter the names of such witnesses on his
docket, which oral notice shall be valid as a summons.
SECTION 17-13 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 17-18
1:336
actions shall be paid over to the Municipal Treasury to the General Revenue
Fund of the Municipality.
SECTION 17-19. Disqualifications of Judge, When, Procedure.
[RSMo. § 479.220]
The Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he is in
any way interested, or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or
the Prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the City, as the case
may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest or
prejudice, neither the defendant nor the City shall be entitled to file more
than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same case.
SECTION 17-20. Fines, Installments Allowed.
When a fine is assessed for violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the
discretion of the Judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may
deem appropriate.
SECTION 17-21. Municipal Ordinances, Evidence of, Judicial Notice
of. [RSMo. § 479.250]
In the trial of municipal ordinance violation cases, a copy of a municipal
ordinance which is certified by the Clerk of the municipality shall constitute
prima facie evidence of such ordinance. If such certified copy is on file
with the Clerk serving the Judge hearing a case and readily available
for inspection by the parties, the Judge may take judicial notice of such
ordinance without further proof.
SECTION 17-22. Court Costs, Filing Fees.55 [RSMo. § 479.260; Ord.
No. 94-36 § 1, 2-14-1995; Ord. No. 94-43 §§ 1 — 2, 3-28-1995; Ord.
No. 95-14 § 1, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 99-50 § 1, 12-14-1999; Ord. No.
2002-41 § 1, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2005-46 § 1, 12-13-2005]
A. The City, by ordinance, may provide for court cost in an amount not to
exceed twelve dollars ($12.00) per case for each Municipal Judge, and
in the event a defendant pleads guilty or is found guilty, the Judge may
assess costs against the defendant except in those cases where the
defendant is found by the Judge to be indigent and unable to pay the
costs. One dollar ($1.00) of such Court cost shall be deposited into the
Judicial Education Fund, established and administered by the Municipal
Court, for the judicial education and training of the Clerks of the
Municipal Court. Any Judicial Education Fund balance that exceeds one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each Court employee
shall be turned over quarterly to the General Revenue Fund of the
Municipal Treasurer.
55.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 479.260, RSMo.
SECTION 17-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 17-22
1:337
SECTION 17-23. Failure to Appear — Forfeiture of Recognizance.
[Ord. No. 93-34 § 1, 1-25-1994]
B. Costs for the training of Police Officers shall be assessed in the amount
of three dollars ($3.00) in all cases, except those for non-moving traffic
violations, violations of fish and game regulations or in any proceeding
wherein the proceeding has been dismissed by the Court. Two dollars
($2.00) of such fees collected shall be deposited monthly to the
Treasurer of the City to be used locally for training Law Enforcement
Officers. One dollar ($1.00) of such fees collected shall be deposited
into the Peace Officer Standard and Training Commission Fund to be
used statewide for training Law Enforcement Officers.
C. Costs for the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund shall be assessed in
the amount of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) in all cases, except those
for non-moving traffic violations or where the proceeding has been
dismissed by the Court.
D. Costs for County shelter for victims of domestic violence shall be
assessed two dollars ($2.00) in all cases and disbursed to the County
once a month.
E. No fees for a Judge, City Attorney or Prosecutor shall be assessed as
cost in a municipal ordinance violation case.
F. A municipal ordinate violation case, when there is an application for
trial de novo, an additional fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be
assessed as Court costs and collected by the Municipal Court Clerk.
G. Costs authorized in this Section are in addition to service costs, witness
fees, recoupment of funds and jail costs which may otherwise be
authorized to be assessed, but are in lieu of other Court or Judge cost or
fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for a defendant to neglect to appear for trial or
judgment or upon any other occasion when his presence may be
lawfully required before the presiding Municipal Judge according to the
condition of his recognizance. If a defendant so neglects to appear, the
presiding Municipal Judge must enter the default upon his record and
the recognizance shall thereupon be adjudged forfeited.
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection (A), the presiding Municipal
Judge may direct the issuance of a warrant for the arrest of any resident
of this State, or any non-resident upon whom process may be served in
this State, who fails to appear and answer a traffic ticket or summons
lawfully served upon him and against whom an information or
complaint has been filed by the City Prosecutor or City Attorney. Such
warrant may be directed to any Peace Officer of the State and may be
executed in any County in this State. If the warrant is not executed
within thirty (30) days after issue, the court shall then place the case in
SECTION 17-22 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 17-23
1:338
SECTION 17-24. Alternative Community Service. [Ord. No. 93-33
§ 1, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. 93-41 § 1, 2-22-1994]
SECTION 17-25. City Administrator to Designate Work and
Discharge. [Ord. No. 93-33 § 2, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. 93-41 § 2,
2-22-1994]
In all cases when defendant is required to work out the whole or any
part of the fine and costs imposed, the City Administrator shall designate
the kind of work required of the defendant, and it shall be such labor
as his or her health will permit, not exceeding eight (8) hours per day.
On performance of the required labor, the defendant shall be discharged
from custody by the City Administrator, who shall make the return on the
execution of such facts, specifying therein the kind of employment and the
days of work completed. Such waiver shall be done at the direction, and
under the supervision, of the City Administrator, or such other person as the
Administrator may appoint.
an inactive file or docket subject to being reopened if thereafter the
defendant appears or such warrant is executed.
C. If a defendant is not a resident of this State or is not a resident of the
County in which the alleged offense was committed or of any adjoining
County in this State and fails to appear or answer a traffic ticket or
summons lawfully served upon him and upon which a complaint or
information has been filed within thirty (30) days after the return date
of the ticket or summons, the court shall mail a notice to the defendant
at the address stated in the complaint or information. The mailing of the
notice in parking cases shall be discretionary with the court. If the
defendant fails to appear or otherwise answer within thirty (30) days
after the mailing of the notice, or in parking cases if no notice is mailed
within sixty (60) days after the return date of the ticket or summons, the
court shall place such case in an inactive file or docket, subject to being
reopened if thereafter the defendant appears or the warrant provided
for in Subsection (B) is issued and executed.
A. Any person who has been convicted in the Municipal Court and
sentenced by the Municipal Judge for violation of any ordinance of the
City, whether the punishment be by fine or imprisonment, or by both,
may be put to work to perform labor on the public street, highways,
alleys, or other public works of the City at a minimum of one (1) full
business day. It shall be deemed as part of the judgement and sentence
of the court that such defendant may be worked as herein provided: The
City Administrator shall have the power, and be authorized to call all
such defendants to work out the full number of days which they have
been sentenced.
B. If the punishment is by fine and the fine not be paid, then Court may
issue community service hours as it deems appropriate, to be no less
than one (1) full business day.
SECTION 17-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 17-26
1:339
SECTION 17-26. Reimbursement of Certain Costs — When. [Ord.
No. 93-36 §§ 1 — 2, 2-8-1994]
Upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty for violating Section 15-2 of
the Code of the City of Lexington, the Municipal Court may, in addition to
imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the person to reimburse
enforcement agencies which made the arrest or the costs associated with
such arrest. Such costs shall include the reasonable costs of making the
arrest including the costs of chemical test made under this Chapter to
determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the costs
of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody. The
enforcement agency may establish a schedule of such costs, however, the
court may order the costs reduced if it determines that the costs are
excessive.
SECTION 17-27. through SECTION 17-43. (Reserved)
SECTION 17-26 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 17-27
1:340
ARTICLE II
Court Clerk
SECTION 17-44. Office Created. [Ord. of 1-2-1973, § 1]
The office of Clerk of the Municipal Court is hereby established.
SECTION 17-45. Appointment; Term. [Ord. of 1-2-1973, §§ 1,5]
The City Council is hereby authorized appoint a Clerk of the Municipal
Court, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The appointment
referred to may be made by a motion presented, seconded and passed by a
majority of the Council. The term of office of the Municipal Court shall be
one (1) year.
SECTION 17-46. Salary. [Ord. of 1-2-1973, § 3]
The compensation to be paid to the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be
established by the City Council, payable monthly. The person appointed as
Clerk shall present to the Council, or a person designated by the Council, a
list of the hours worked in connection with his office, and upon approval by
the Council, or a person designated by the Council, payment shall be made
in the same manner as is customary by the City.
SECTION 17-47. Duties. [Ord. of 1-2-1973, § 4]
The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall:
1. Attend all Court sessions as may be established by the Judge of the
Municipal Court;
2. Be responsible of all record keeping of the court as such record keeping
may be determined to be necessary by the Judge of the Municipal
Court;
3. Maintain records as to monetary accountability of all Court revenues in
accordance with the procedures set up by the Judge of the Municipal
Court and the laws of the State, including but not limited to, the proper
accounts for all bonds which may be filed with the Court;
4. Carry on all those duties and responsibilities as may be set out by the
Statutes of the State;
5. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to
the Clerk by the Judge of the Municipal Court; however, in the event
such added responsibility shall substantially increase the amount of
time required to be spent by the Clerk, said additional duties and
responsibilities should be first reviewed and approved by the City
Council.
SECTION 17-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 17-47
1:341
Chapter 18
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS
Cross Reference — Building inspector/code enforcement
officer — authorized to enforce ch. 18, § 2-209.
SECTION 17-47 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 17-47
1:342
ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 18-1. Fortunetelling. [Ord. of 5-7-1945, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fortunetelling within the
City.
SECTION 18-2. Distribution of Handbills and Pamphlets. [Ord. of
5-1-1933, § 1; Ord. No. 92-82 § 1, 6-8-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbills or pamphlets
to the premises of any person within the City without the consent of the
person occupying said premises.
SECTION 18-3. (Reserved)56
SECTION 18-4. Leaving Excavations or Cellar Doors Uncovered.
[Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 7, 10-21-1912]
If any person, in the City, shall dig or cause to be dug, or shall make any
excavation in or adjoining any highway, thoroughfare or other public place,
or shall dig any well, cistern or vault, or shall leave the same open or
exposed and without a sufficient fence or other protection around it, or
shall suffer or permit any cellar door or grating, opening on any highway
or thoroughfare, to be and remain open or in an unsafe or dangerous
condition, whereby persons may be in danger of falling on or over such
cellar door, or into such cellar or vault, the person so offending shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-5. Intoxicated Persons Entering Schoolhouse, Church
House, Courthouse or Other Public Place.57 [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 27,
10-21-1912]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to enter any schoolhouse
or church house in which there is an assemblage of people, met for a
lawful purpose, or any courthouse, in a drunken or intoxicated and
disorderly condition, or to drink or offer to drink any intoxicating
liquors in the presence of such assembly of people, or in any courtroom
in the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to attend or be in any
other public place, in a drunken or intoxicated and disorderly condition,
and any person so doing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. As used in
this Section, the term "public place" includes but is not limited to any
common carrier, building street, lane, park or place of public resort,
56.Editor's Note: Former Section 18-3, Keeping Bees, adopted and amended by Rev. Ord. No.
70 §1, 10-21-1912, was repealed 7-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21 §2.
57.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 574.075.
SECTION 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-5
1:343
SECTION 18-6. Vagrancy.58
Every person who may be found loitering around houses of ill-fame,
gambling houses or places where liquors are sold or drunk, without any
visible means of support, or shall attend or operate any gambling device or
apparatus, or be engaged in practicing any trick or device to procure money
or other thing of value, or shall be engaged in any unlawful calling whatever,
and every able-bodied married man who shall neglect or refuse to provide
for the support of his family, and every person found tramping or wandering
around from place to place without any visible means of support, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-7. Impersonating, Interfering with City Officers.59
[Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 99, 10-21-1912]
Whoever shall, in the City, falsely represent himself to be an officer of the
City, or shall, without being lawfully authorized, exercise any of the duties,
functions or powers of an officer of the City, or shall hinder, obstruct, resist
or otherwise interfere with an officer of the City in the discharge of his
official duty, or attempt to rescue any person from the custody of any such
officer, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-8. False Affidavit.60 [Ord. No. 80-16 § 1, 9-2-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to swear out, declare, sign or execute any
affidavit or statement which shall directly cause or contribute to cause any
other person to be charged with any violation of any Lexington Municipal
Ordinance, when the affiant shall know said affidavit to be false.
SECTION 18-9. Passing Bad Checks. [Ord. No. 81-04 §§ 1-5,
3-3-1981]
recreation or amusement other than a privately owned and operated
business establishment.
A. The passing of a bad check in the City of Lexington, Missouri, to any
person, firm or corporation is hereby prohibited.
B. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check, when, with the
purpose to defraud, he issues or passes a check or other similar sight
order for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the
drawee, or that there is no such drawee.
C. If the issuer had no account with the drawee or if there were no such
drawee at the time the check or order was issued, this fact shall be
prima facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge
that the check or order would not be paid.
58.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 568.040.
59.State Law Reference — Impersonating an officer, RSMo. § 575.120.
60.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 570.030.
SECTION 18-5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-9
1:344
SECTION 18-10. Resisting or Interfering with Arrest.61 [Ord. No.
88-25 §§ 1-3, 12-13-1988]
SECTION 18-11. Controlled Substances.62 [Ord. No. 94-17 § I,
6-14-1994]
SECTION 18-12. Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia. [Ord. No.
94-18 § I, 6-14-1994]
D. If the issuer has an account with the drawee, failure to pay the check or
order within ten (10) days after notice in writing that it has not been
honored because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee is prima
facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the
check or order would not be paid. Written notice as used in this Section
means notice deposited as first class mail in the United States Mail and
addressed to the issuer at his address as it appears on the dishonored
check or to his last known address.
E. Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provision of this Section,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be penalized as set out in Section 1-8.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest if,
knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making an arrest, for the
purpose of preventing the Officer from effecting the arrest, he:
1. Resists the arrest of himself by using or threatening use of violence
or physical force or by fleeing from such officers;
2. Interferes with the arrest of another person by using or threatening
the use of violence, physical force or physical interference.
B. This Section applies to arrest with or without warrants and to arrest for
any crime or ordinance violation.
C. Resisting or interfering with arrest is punishable by a fine of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to ninety (90) days in jail.
A. No person shall possess, or have under his control, less than thirty-five
(35) grams of marijuana.
B. Any person who violates this Section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be penalized by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both, fine and imprisonment.
A. No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia
to plan, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
61.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 575.160.
62.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see § 195.202, RSMo.
SECTION 18-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-12
1:345
SECTION 18-13. Harassment — Phone Calls. [Ord. No. 99-57 § 1,
2-8-2000]
SECTION 18-14. Littering. [Ord. No. 2014-25 §§ 1 — 7,
11-18-201463]
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body, marijuana.
B. Any person who violates this Section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be penalized as set out
in Section 1-8 of the Municipal Code.
A. The offense of harassment in the City of Lexington, Missouri, of any
person, firm, or corporation is hereby prohibited.
B. A person commits the offense of harassment if for the purpose of
frightening or disturbing another person, he does any of the following:
1. Calls the victim on the phone or sends them a writing and threatens
to commit a felony; or
2. Calls the victim on the phone or sends them a writing and uses
coarse language that would be offensive to the average person; or
3. Makes an anonymous phone call to the victim; or
4. Makes repeated phone calls.
C. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Section,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) or more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or may be imprisoned in the City or County
Jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or both fine and imprisonment
together with court cost therein.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Subsection:
ACCUMULATED LITTER — Litter of an amount and degree so as to
constitute a nuisance.
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation and cooking and consumption of food.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 18-14, Littering,
adopted 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 99-59.
SECTION 18-12 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-14
1:346
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample, or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter or literature.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material
which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — A publication of general circulation printed, distributed
and subscribed to by the recipient which contains either news,
opinions, advertisements or other items of general interest, and in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not fewer than four (4) issues per
year, and sold to the public.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the City, owned and/or used by the City and
developed to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
B. Litter In Public Places; Throwing Or Distributing Handbills In Public
Places. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other
public place within the City for a person to hand out or distribute a
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
C. Depositing Handbill On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises. No person
shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
SECTION 18-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-14
1:347
SECTION 18-15. through SECTION 18-17. (Reserved)
D. Prohibiting Distributing Of Handbills Where Property Posted. No
person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any handbill upon any private
premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance
thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice advising that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left upon such
premises.
E. Distributing Handbills At Private Premises.
1. No person shall throw, deposit, leave or distribute any handbill in
or upon private premises except by handing or transmitting such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then
present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that
in case of private premises which are not posted as provided above,
such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such
private premises. This provision shall not be interpreted to
authorize the placing of handbills under or behind screens or
entrance doors, or in mailboxes when so prohibited by Federal
postal law or regulations. This provision shall not apply unless the
owner of the property notifies the distributor to cease throwing,
depositing, leaving or distributing any handbill. The owner of the
property must also advise the City that the distributor has been
notified to cease distribution of handbills.
2. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to political or campaign material
during an election year, nor to newspapers (as defined herein)
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such
a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon
private property.
F. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
penalized as set out in Section 1-8.
SECTION 18-14 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-15
1:348
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against Property
SECTION 18-18. Stealing Property of Another.64
SECTION 18-19. Trespassing Upon Private Property. [Rev. Ord. No.
34, § 87, 10-21-1912]
Whoever shall, in the City, be found trespassing upon the premises or
property of another, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-19.1. Regulating Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers.65
[Ord. No. 2008-30 §§ 1 — 18, 11-25-2008]
A. As used in this Section, the following words shall mean:
PROPERTY — Everything of value, whether real or personal, tangible
or intangible, in possession or in action, and shall include but not be
limited to the evidence of a debt actually executed but not delivered or
issued as a valid instrument and all things defined as property under
State law.
STEAL — To appropriate by exercising dominion over property in a
manner inconsistent with the rights of the owner, either by taking,
obtaining, using, transferring, concealing or retaining possession of his
property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally steal the property of
another, either without his consent or by means of deceit.
C. If the property stolen within the meaning of Subsection (B) is a chattel
and the person charged with stealing the same proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that no further transfer was made, and
that, at the time of the appropriation he intended merely to use the
chattel and promptly to return or discontinue his use of it, he has a
defense to a prosecution under this Section. "Chattel" as used in this
Section does not include money, securities, negotiable instruments,
documents of title, postage or revenue stamp or other valuable papers.
D. A person who appropriates lost property shall not be deemed to have
stolen the same within the meaning of Subsection (B) unless such
property is found under circumstances which give the finder knowledge
of or means of inquiry as to the true owner.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words have the
meaning indicated:
64.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 570.030.
65.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2008-30 § 21, adopted November 25, 2008, repealed section
18-19.1 "all solicitation prohibited — penalty" and enacted new provisions set out herein.
Former section 18-19.1 derived from ord. no. 83-12, §§ 2 — 4, 8-16-83.
SECTION 18-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-19.1
1:349
CANVASSER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence, without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of:
PEDDLER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence, without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting
to sell a good or service. A "peddler" does not include a person who
distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising
an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for
purchase at a location away from the residence or at a time different
from the time of visit. Such a person is a "solicitor".
SOLICITOR — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence, without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of:
Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if
incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of
money for or against such cause, or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event
or service.
2.
Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic,
philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational,
civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if
incidental to such purpose there is the sale of some good or service,
or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or
service.
2.
B. Exception. This Section shall not apply to a Federal, State or local
government employee or a public utility employee in the performance
of his/her duty for his/her employer. It does not apply to: community
organizations, schools, scouts, religious groups or non-profit
organizations.
C. Identification Card Required for Peddlers and Solicitors, Available for
Canvassers. No person shall act as a peddler or as a solicitor within the
City without first obtaining an identification card in accordance with
this Section. A canvasser is not required to have an identification card
but any canvasser wanting an identification card for the purpose of
reassuring City residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued
one upon request.
D. Fee. The fee for the issuance of each identification card shall be:
SECTION 18-19.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-19.1
1:350
1. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant
otherwise licensed to do business within the
City
no fee
2. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant
not otherwise licensed to do business within
the City
a fee of $5.00 per
day
3. For a solicitor (including a commercial
solicitor advertising an event, activity, good
or service for purchase at a location away
from the residence)
no fee
4. For a canvasser requesting an identification
card
no fee
E. Application for Identification Card. Any person or organization (formal
or informal) may apply for one (1) or more identification cards by
completing an application form at the office of the issuing officer during
regular office hours.
F. Contents of Application. The applicant (person or organization) shall
provide the following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Number of identification cards required.
3. The name, physical description and photograph of each person for
which a card is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's
license, State identification card, passport or other governmentissued
identification card (issued by a government within the
United States) containing this information may be provided and a
photocopy taken. If a photograph is not supplied, the City will take
an instant photograph of each person for which a card is requested
at the application site. The actual cost of the instant photograph
will be paid by the applicant.
4. The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant.
5. The permanent and (if any) local address of each person for whom a
card is requested.
6. A brief description of the proposed activity related to this
identification card. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be
substituted for this description at the option of the applicant.)
7. Date and place of birth for each person for whom a card is
requested and (if available) the social security number of such
person.
8. A list of all infraction, offense, misdemeanor and felony convictions
of each person for whom a card is requested for the seven (7) years
immediately prior to the application.
SECTION 18-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-19.1
1:351
9. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and State license plate
number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom
a card is requested.
10. If a card is requested for a peddler:
a. The name and permanent address of the business offering the
event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal).
b. A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the State
of Missouri, provided that no copy of a license shall be required
of any business which appears on the City's annual report of
sales tax payees as provided by the Missouri Department of
Revenue.
c. The location where books and records are kept of sales which
occur within the City and which are available for City
inspection to determine that all City sales taxes have been
paid.
11. If a card is requested for a solicitor:
a. The name and permanent address of the organization, person
or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted.
b. The web address for this organization, person or group (or
other address) where residents having subsequent questions
can go for more information.
12. Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps
including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other
municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc.
G. Issuance of Identification Card. The identification card(s) shall be
issued promptly after application but in all cases within sixteen (16)
business hours of completion of an application, unless it is determined
within that time that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years.
2. With respect to a particular card, the individual for whom a card is
requested has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years, or
3. Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable
neglect.
H. Investigation. During the period of time following the application for
one (1) or more identification cards and its issuance, the City shall
investigate as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained in
the application. If the City has not completed this investigation within
SECTION 18-19.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-19.1
1:352
the sixteen (16) business hours provided in Subsection (G), the
identification card will nonetheless be issued, subject, however, to
administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation.
I. Identification Cards of Other City. Instead of the application procedure
above, if an applicant produces identification cards issued by another
City having an ordinance substantially the same as this one, the issuing
officer may in his discretion immediately issue identification cards
without the necessity of a formal application or investigation.
J. Denial — Administrative Revocation. If the issuing officer denies (or
upon completion of an investigation revokes) the identification card to
one (1) or more persons, he shall immediately convey the decision to
the applicant orally and shall within sixteen (16) working hours after
the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which
shall be immediately made available to the applicant. Upon receipt of
the oral notification and even before the preparation of the written
report, the applicant shall have at his option an appeal of the denial of
his application before the following tribunal:
1. The City Council at its next regular meeting or, if the next regular
meeting is more than ten (10) days from the denial of the
application, at a special meeting to be held within that ten (10) day
period, due notice of which is to be given to the public and the
applicant, or
2. Before the Municipal Court of the City, provided that such a
hearing will be scheduled within ten (10) days of the request, due
notice of which is to be given to the public and the applicant.
K. Hearing on Appeal. If the applicant requests a hearing under
Subsection (J), the hearing shall be held in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act of the State of Missouri and review from
the decision (on the record of the hearing) shall be had to the Circuit
Court of the County in which the City is located. The hearing shall also
be subject to the Missouri Open Meetings and Records law.
L. Display of Identification Card. Each identification card shall be (when
the individual for whom it was issued is acting as a peddler or solicitor)
worn on the outer clothing of the individual, so as to be reasonably
visible to any person who might be approached by said person.
M. Validity of Identification Card. An identification card shall be valid
within the meaning of this Section for a period of six (6) months from its
date of issuance or the term requested, whichever is less.
N. Revocation of Card. In addition to the administrative revocation of an
identification card, a card may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
1. Any violation of this Section by the applicant or by the person for
whom the particular card was issued.
SECTION 18-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-19.1
1:353
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on the activity.
3. Conviction of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the last seven (7) years.
4. Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
The revocation procedure shall be initiated by the filing of a
complaint by the City Attorney or the issuing officer pursuant to
the State Administrative Procedure Act and a hearing before the
tribunal identified in Subsection (J) above.
O. "No Visit" List. The issuing officer shall maintain a list of persons within
the City who restrict visits to their residential property (including their
leasehold, in the case of a tenant) by peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers. The issuing officer may provide a form to assist residents
and this form may allow the resident to select certain types of visits that
the resident finds acceptable while refusing permission to others. This
"no visit" list shall be a public document available for public inspection
and copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided to each
applicant for and each recipient of an identification card. If a canvasser
chooses not to apply for an identification card, it will be the
responsibility of that canvasser to obtain in some other way a copy of
the current "no visit" list.
P. Distribution of Handbills and Commercial Flyers. In addition to the
other regulations contained herein, a solicitor or canvasser leaving
handbills or commercial flyers about the community shall observe the
following regulations:
1. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any sign utility
pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-ofway.
The Police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer
found within the right-of-way.
2. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any privately
owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately
owned property.
3. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any of the
property:
a. Listed on the City "no visit" list, or
b. Having a "no solicitor" sign of the type described in Subsection
(Q)(1) or (Q)(2).
4. Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be
required to identify himself/herself to the Police (either by
producing an identification card or other form of identification).
SECTION 18-19.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-19.1
1:354
This is for the purpose of knowing the likely identity of the
perpetrator if the City receives a complaint of damage caused to
private property during the distribution of handbills or flyers.
Q. General Prohibitions. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall:
1. Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly
posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right-of-way (public
or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/
or canvassing. Such sign need not exceed one (1) square foot in size
and may contain words such as "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" in
letters of at least two (2) inches in height. (The phrase "no
soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall also prohibit peddlers and
canvassers.)
2. Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a
sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into
the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter,
which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and
which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser.
3. Enter upon any private property where the current occupant has
posted the property on the City's "no visit" list (except where the
posting form indicates the occupant has given permission for this
type of visit), regardless of whether a front yard sign is posted.
4. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main
entrance to the dwelling or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the
front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident
or occupant of the property.
5. Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to
such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors.
6. Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M.
Except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the
peddler, solicitor or canvassers has an express invitation from the
resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to enter upon
any posted property.
R. Violation to be Prosecuted as Trespass. Any person violating any part of
this Section shall have committed a trespass on such property and shall
be prosecuted under the general trespass ordinance of the City. The
penalty for such violation shall be the same as for any other trespass.
SECTION 18-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-20
1:355
SECTION 18-20. Blasting Rock or Other Substances. [Rev. Ord. No.
34, § 6, 10-21-1912]
Whoever shall, in the City, blast or cause to be blasted with powder or
other explosive substances, any rock or other substances, without having
such rock or other substances, at the time of setting off the blast, covered
on all sides of the orifice with good, sound plank, timber or other material
of sufficient width, length, thickness and weight, and so placed as to
effectually prevent fragments of the rock or other substances from
ascending into the air, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-21. Cheat, Swindlers, Etc. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 54,
10-21-1912]
Any person, within the City, who shall engage in or aid, or abet any other
person in any game, device, trick or scheme, or by means of any deception
whatsoever designed or intended to cheat, swindle or defraud any person
out of any money or thing of value, or who shall attempt to aid another in
attempting to cheat, swindle or defraud anyone out of any money or thing
of value, by means of any trick, scheme, device or deception, or by any
false representation, statement or pretense, or by any means, or instrument
or device, commonly called the "confidence game", or who shall have in
his possession any device, instrument, trick or tool used or designed to be
used in any game, slight-of-hand performance or scheme of any character,
intended or designed to cheat, swindle or defraud any person out of money
or thing of value, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-22. Misusing Burial Grounds. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 60,
10-21-1912]
Every person who shall willfully destroy, disfigure or injure any wall, fence,
hedge, monument, tombstone, tree or shrubbery around or within any
cemetery, graveyard or burial ground for any other purpose than a burial
ground, or shall be guilty of any unseemly, offensive or lascivious conduct
within or about such burial ground, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all cemeteries,
graveyards, or burial grounds within the City, and to all such burial grounds
within five (5) miles thereof belonging to the City, or which are or may be
used for the interment or sepulcher of the inhabitants of the City, whether
belonging to the City or to any person, company, corporation, church or
association.
SECTION 18-23. Taking and Depositing Earth, Sand, Etc., From or
on Public Places. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 70, 10-21-1912]
Any person who shall take from or deposit on any street, alley, thoroughfare,
sidewalk or other public place of the City, or on property not owned or
controlled by him, without having lawful authority to do so, any turf, loam,
gravel, rock or other material, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-24
1:356
SECTION 18-24. Tearing Down or Defacing Signs, Etc. [Rev. Ord.
No. 34, § 79, 10-21-1912]
Any person who shall, in the City, remove, take or tear down, deface, mark,
injure or destroy any sign belonging to another, or shall deface, injure or
remove any sign indicating the number of any street, without having lawful
authority to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-25. Vandalism. [Ord. No. 80-15, § 1, 9-2-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, or contribute to cause, any
damage, injury, marking, cutting, scarring, scraping, burning, defacing or
vandalism to any item of public or private property, real or personal
property, whether said damage as described above shall be in whole or in
any part.
SECTION 18-26. Trespass by Peddlers; a Nuisance. [Ord. No. 78-15
§§ 1 — 3, 11-20-1978]
SECTION 18-27. through SECTION 18-35. (Reserved)
A. The practice of being in and upon private residences in the City of
Lexington, Missouri, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant
merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been
requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the
purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a
misdemeanor.
B. The City Marshal and Police Force of the City of Lexington are hereby
required and directed to suppress the same, and to abate any such
nuisance as is described in Subsection (A) hereof.
C. Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance, as described and
prohibited in Subsection (A) hereof, upon conviction thereof shall be
fined a sum not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) together with costs of proceeding, which
said fine may be satisfied, if not paid in cash by execution against the
person of anyone convicted of committing the misdemeanor as herein
prohibited.
SECTION 18-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-27
1:357

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Order
SECTION 18-36. Affrays.66
If two (2) or more persons shall, in any public place, voluntarily or by
agreement engage in any fight, or use any blows or violence toward each
other, in any angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other any willful
mischief, or if any person shall assault another and strike him, in any public
place, to the terror or disturbance of others, the person so offending shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-37. Unlawful Assembly.67 [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 1,
10-21-1912]
If three (3) or more persons shall assemble together with the intent, or
being assembled shall agree mutually to assist one another, to do any
unlawful act, with force or violence, against the person or property of
another, or against the peace or to the terror of the people, such persons so
assembling, and each of them, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-38. Riots.68
If three (3) or more persons, being assembled as mentioned in Section
18-37, shall proceed to carry out or accomplish their purposes, or do any
unlawful act in furtherance or supposed furtherance of said purposes, in
a violent, unlawful or tumultuous manner, to the terror or disturbance of
peaceful citizens, every person so offending, or who shall aid or assist in
doing any unlawful act, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-39. Disturbing the Peace.69 [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 2,
10-21-1912; Ord. No. 2001-09 §§ 1 — 3, 2-13-2001]
A. Disturbance Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following
definitions shall apply:
1. Property of another: Any property in which the actor does not have
a possessory interest.
2. Private property: Any place which at the time is not open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
3. Public place: Any place which at the time is open to the public. It
includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
66.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. §§ 574.010 — 574.030.
67.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 574.040.
68.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 576.040.
69.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 574.010.
SECTION 18-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-39
1:359
SECTION 18-40. Disturbing Religious Assemblies.70 [Rev. Ord. No.
34, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Every person who shall willfully, maliciously or contemptuously disquiet or
disturb any camp meeting, congregation or other assembly met for religious
worship, or when meeting at the place of worship, or dispersing therefrom,
or any school or other meeting or assembly of people met together for any
lawful purpose whatever, by making a noise, or by rude or indecent behavior
or profane discourse within the place of assembly, or so near the same as
to interrupt or disturb the order or solemnity thereof, or who shall willfully
menace, threaten or assault any person being there, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-41. False Alarms.71 [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 18,
10-21-1912]
Any person, within the City, who shall willfully give, sound or make any false
alarm of fire, or who shall deceive the City Marshal or any Police Officer
4. If a building or structure is divided into separate occupied units,
such units are separate premises.
B. Peace Disturbances. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance
if:
1. He unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person
or persons by:
a. Loud noise;
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient;
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating obnoxious and offensive odor.
2. He is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
70.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 576.010.
71.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. §§ 575.080-575.090.
SECTION 18-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-41
1:360
or citizen by a false alarm, or cry to the Police shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-42. Common Assault.72 [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 61(a),
10-21-1912]
Any person who shall assault or beat or wound another, under such
circumstances as not to constitute any other offense defined in this Chapter,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-43. Throwing Stones or Other Substances Across or
Upon Streets or Sidewalks. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 69, 10-21-1912]
Whoever shall, within the City, wantonly or mischievously throw or project
any stone, brick, metal or other hard substance in, upon, over or across any
street, alley, thoroughfare or other public place, or in, upon, over or across
any private property, without lawful permission, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-44. Unlawful to Refuse Order of Court. [Ord. No.
79-20A § 2, 7-3-1979]
Any person who shall willfully, intentionally or deliberately refuse or fail to
obey a lawful order of the Municipal Court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-45. Escape from Custody. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 100,
10-21-1912]
Any person lawfully detained or imprisoned in the County Jail, or held in
custody by an officer of the City, who shall break or escape from such
imprisonment, or shall by force or violence escape, or attempt to escape
from such prison, or from such officer, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-46. Leaving the Scene of a Motor Vehicle Accident.
[Ord. No. 96-05 § 1, 5-14-1996]
A. A person commits the crime of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the streets,
alleyways or highways within the municipal limits of the City of
Lexington, or on any publicly or privately owned parking lot or parking
facility generally open for use by the public within the City limits of the
City of Lexington, and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property, due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of injury, damage or
accident without stopping and giving his/her name, place of residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
72.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 560.070.
SECTION 18-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-46
1:361
SECTION 18-47. Domestic Assault. [Ord. No. 2001-47 § 1,
8-14-2001]
Police Officer is in the vicinity then to the nearest police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose of
investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
C. Any violation of this Section shall be punishable under the general
penalty Section of the ordinances of Lexington, Missouri, being Section
1-8.
A. A person commits the crime of domestic assault in the third degree if
the act involves a family or household member or an adult who is or has
been in a continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature
with the actor, as defined in Section 455.010, RSMo., and:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to such family or household member; or
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument; or
3. The person purposely places such family or household member in
apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means; or
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household
member; or
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or
household member knowing the other person will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such family or household member by unreasonably and
substantially restricting or limiting such family or household
member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or
transportation for the purpose of isolation.
B. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or may be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than
ninety (90) days, or both fined and imprisoned together with court cost
therein.
SECTION 18-46 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-48
1:362
SECTION 18-48. Disorderly Conduct. [Ord. No. 2007-39 § 1,
10-9-2007]
Any person who, with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a
breach of the peace may be occasioned, or with the intent to cause violence
to persons or property, commits any of the following acts shall be deemed
to have committed the offense of disorderly conduct:
1. Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any
person is placed in fear of safety of his/her life, limb or health.
2. Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby
property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged.
3. Uses offensive, abusive, threatening or insulting language, conduct or
behavior.
4. Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as
to endanger the life, limb, health or property or another.
5. Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of
causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl, or for the purpose
of doing bodily harm to another.
6. Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place.
7. Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by
an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device.
8. Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any
fraudulent, scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any
place or from any person in the City, or to aid or abet therein.
9. Any male person who accosts or attempts to force his company on any
female.
10. Uses "fighting words" directed towards another who becomes outraged
and thus creates turmoil.
11. Any person, by acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a
lawful occupation.
12. Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such
public way when ordered by a Peace Officer or other lawful authority.
13. Congregates with others on any public street and refuses to move when
ordered by a Peace Office.
14. By his/her actions, causes a crowd to collect, except when lawfully
addressing such crowd.
SECTION 18-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-48
1:363
SECTION 18-49. through SECTION 18-54. (Reserved)
15. Stations himself/herself on the public street or follows pedestrians for
the purpose of unlawfully soliciting alms.
16. Causes a disturbance in any bus or other public conveyance by running
through it, climbing through windows or upon seats, or otherwise
annoying passengers or employees therein.
17. Stands on sidewalks or street corners and makes insulting remarks to
or about passing pedestrians and/or motorists.
18. Uses vulgar, obscene or profane language upon any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk or in any public place.
SECTION 18-48 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-49
1:364
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Against Morals
SECTION 18-55. Indecent or Profane Language in Public
Conveyances. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 26, 10-21-1912]
Any person who, while being conveyed through or about the City in any
public conveyance, shall be guilty of using indecent or profane language, or
of cursing or swearing, or of any offensive or disorderly conduct, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-56. Indecent Exposure; Obscene Books, Acts.73 [Rev.
Ord. No. 34, § 28, 10-21-1912]
Any person who shall, within the City, appear in any public place in a state of
nudity or in an indecent or lewd dress, or shall make an indecent exposure
of his person, or be guilty of any obscene or lewd conduct, act or behavior,
or shall exhibit, sell or offer to sell any obscene or lewd book, picture
or other thing, or shall exhibit or perform, or permit to be exhibited or
performed upon premises under his management or control, any obscene,
immoral or lewd play, show or representation, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 18-57. Prostitution Generally.74
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, perform in or participate in
any form of sexual intercourse for hire, or offer to do so, within the City.
SECTION 18-58. through SECTION 18-64. (Reserved)
SECTION 18-65. Purchase or Possession by Minor Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 83-16A §§ 1 — 5, 11-1-1983; Ord. No. 2007-20 § 1, 5-8-2007]
SECTION 18-66. through SECTION 18-75. (Reserved)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to purchase or attempt to purchase or have in his possession any
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer as defined by Chapter 311
and Chapter 312, RSMo., 2000, or who is visibly intoxicated as defined
in Section 577.001, RSMo., and as the same is amended from time to
time, or who has a detectable blood alcohol content of more than twohundredths
of one percent (.02%) or more by weigh of alcohol in such
person's blood.
B. Possession shall include both exclusive control and group control, joint,
non-exclusive, care, custody, possession or control of any such
substance.
73.State Law Reference — Public indecency, RSMo. § 66.130 et seq.
74.State Law Reference — Prostitution, RSMo. §§ 567.020 — 567.030.
SECTION 18-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-66
1:365

ARTICLE V
Weapons
SECTION 18-76. Dangerous and Concealed Weapons.75 [Rev. Ord.
No. 34 § 5, 10-21-1912]
If any person shall carry concealed upon or about his person a dangerous
or deadly weapon of any kind or description, or shall go into any church
or place where people have assembled for religious worship, or into any
schoolroom or place where people are assembled for educational, political,
literary or social purposes, or to any election precinct on any election day,
or into any courtroom during the sitting of court, or into any other public
assemblage of persons met for any lawful purpose other than for militia
drill, or meetings called under militia law of this State, having upon or
about his person, concealed or exposed, any kind of firearm, bowie knife,
springback knife, razor, metal knucks, billy, sword can, dirk, dagger, sling
shot or other similar deadly weapon or shall, in the presence of one (1)
or more persons, exhibit any such weapon in a rude, angry or threatening
manner, or shall have any such weapon in his possession when intoxicated,
or, directly or indirectly, sell or deliver, loan or barter to any minor any
such weapon, without the consent of the parent or guardian of such minor,
he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing contained in this
Section shall apply to legally qualified Sheriffs, Police Officers, and other
persons whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or criminal, make
arrests, or aid in conserving the public peace, nor to persons traveling in a
continuous journey peaceably through the City.
SECTION 18-77. Discharge of Weapons. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 16,
10-21-1912]
Any person, within the City, who shall fire off or discharge any rifle, shotgun,
carbine, musket, pistol, revolver or other firearm or ordnance, or any cat
gun, spring gun or air gun, or who shall throw any rock, pebble or hard
substance by hand, or by means of a sling, crossbow, India-rubber band
or bow, or by any other means shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor;
provided, that nothing in this Section shall be so construed as to prevent the
discharge of firearms by the City Police, by the State Militia on parade days,
or by any detachment of the United States Army, when done by command
of the proper officer; nor shall it be construed so as to prevent the firing of
cannons or other firearms on days of public celebration.
SECTION 18-78. Same — Excepted from Provisions of Sections
18-76 and 18-77. [Ord. No. 92-07 § 1a, 6-8-1992]
The provisions of Sections 18-76 and 18-77 shall not apply to personnel
of any component of the Armed Forces of the United States or this State
when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under orders
requiring them to carry weapons; or to civil officers of the United States,
75.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, RSMo. § 571.030.
SECTION 18-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-78
1:367
this State or any political subdivision thereof while in the discharge of
their official duties; or to the use of firearms at military funerals, athletic
events and other appropriate occasions when only blank ammunition is
used and proper safety precautions are taken, or to approved firing ranges,
licensed shooting galleries or upon or within private grounds or premises
under circumstances when the weapon or device can be fired, discharged
or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and
also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any ground
or space outside the limits of such range, gallery, or grounds upon Council
approval; or to prevent the carrying of any type of firearm whatsoever,
unless it is unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery
or to and from an area where hunting is allowed by law; or to any person
acting lawfully in the defense of life or property.
SECTION 18-79. Discharging Arrows from Bow or Crossbow
Prohibited — Exceptions. [Ord. No. 92-07 § 1b, 6-8-1992]
Any person who shall discharge arrows from a bow or crossbow in the City,
or any person having temporary custody of a minor who shall permit such
minor to discharge arrows from a bow or crossbow in the City, except for the
following purposes, and then only under conditions which do not endanger
the life or property of any person, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor:
SECTION 18-80. Firearms in City Buildings. [Ord. No. 2004-07 § 1,
3-9-2004]
1. The shooting of same on a regularly established range pursuant to a
permit issued by the City therefor.
2. The shooting of same by one whose business entails the testing of such
equipment in established facilities constructed and maintained for such
purposes.
A. No person who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement by the
Missouri Director of Revenue under Sections 571.101 to 571.121,
RSMo., or who has been issued a valid permit or endorsement to carry
concealed firearms issued by another State or political subdivision of
another State shall, by authority of that endorsement or permit, be
allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any
building or portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the City.
B. Signs shall be posted at each entrance of a building entirely owned,
leased or controlled by the City stating that carrying of firearms is
prohibited. Where the City owns, leases or controls only a portion of a
building, signs shall be posted at each entrance to that portion of the
building stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited.
C. This Section shall not apply to buildings used for public housing by
private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges or private
dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the City.
SECTION 18-78 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-80
1:368
SECTION 18-81. through SECTION 18-88. (Reserved)
D. Any person violating this Section may be denied entrance to the
building or ordered to leave the building. Any City employee violating
this Section may be disciplined. No other penalty shall be imposed for a
violation of this Section.
E. No person who has been issued a certificate of qualification which
allows the person to carry a concealed firearm before the Director of
Revenue begins issuing concealed carry endorsements in July 2004,
shall, by authority of that certificate, be allowed to carry a concealed
firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or portion of a
building owned, leased or controlled by the City.
SECTION 18-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-81
1:369

ARTICLE VI
Nuisances
DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 18-89. Creating, Maintaining Prohibited.76 [Ord. of
5-5-1970, § 1]
No person shall cause or maintain any nuisance as defined by the laws
of this State, or the ordinances of the City or cause or maintain any such
nuisances within the City or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits
thereof.
SECTION 18-90. What Constitutes Nuisance Generally. [Ord. of
5-5-1970, § 2]
Any act done or committed or suffered to be done or committed by any
person, or any substance or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in
or upon any public or private place within the City which is injurious or
dangerous to the public health is hereby declared a nuisance. All pursuits
followed or acts done within the City by any person to the injury, annoyance,
inconvenience, or damage to the public is hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 18-90.1. Accumulation of Refuse, Junk, Trash — Penalty.
[Ord. No. 84-19, §§ 1,2, 6-27-1984; Ord. No. 2005-19 § 1, 6-14-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, or occupying
any premises within the City to allow for a period in excess of ten (10)
days refuse, junk and/or trash to accumulate or remain upon such
premises to an extent or in such manner as to be unsightly, dangerous
or detrimental to the life, health, property or safety of any person in the
City.
B. As used in this Section, these terms shall have the following meanings:
JUNK — Old or scrap lead, iron, steel, aluminum, copper, brass, rope,
rags, batteries, glass, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles and/or
appliances, or parts thereof, or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material.
JUNK YARD — An establishment, area, location, place of business, or
other premises maintained, operated, used or permitted to be used, for
the storing, keeping, buying, selling, or collecting of junk as defined
herein; or for the operation of an automobile graveyard, garbage dump
or sanitary fill.
UNSIGHTLY — Presenting an appearance or scene in plain view of the
public which is dissimilar in nature and quality to the view presented by
76.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 77.530.
SECTION 18-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-90.1
1:371
SECTION 18-90.2. Vehicle Parking and Storage — Unapproved
Areas. [Ord. No. 2012-27 § I, 8-14-2012]
adjoining premises in the immediate proximity and constituting a junk
yard as defined herein.
C. Penalties. Any person violating a provision of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day of violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Upon conviction, the offenses herein
prescribed are punishable by confinement for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days and/or by fine in an amount not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
D. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, agent, tenant or
occupant of any premises to allow or cause any of the following items to
remain on such premises for longer than forty-eight (48) hours in any
outside area which can be viewed from a ground location off the
premises: any appliance manufactured for indoor use only, bedding,
bottles, boxes, broken glass, cans, cardboard, cartons, furniture
manufactured for indoor use only, jars, machine parts, motor vehicle
parts, pallets, paper, plumbing fixtures, rags, scrap metal, abandoned/
unusable tires unless covered for reuse, abandoned/unusable tire rims
unless covered for reuse and water heaters.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Section:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — A licensed or unlicensed vehicle, powered or
unpowered, or component thereof, including truck/trailer beds/boxes,
that is incapable of operating if it meets one (1) or more of the following
criteria: it has flat or missing tire/s or wheel/s, is wrecked or junked; is
wholly or partially dismantled, a motorized vehicle incapable of moving
under its own power, watercraft not on a dedicated wheeled vehicle,
has vegetation or debris which has collected in or around or under the
vehicle, is used for storage of any kind, is being used for on-site human,
animal or fowl habitation.
UNIMPROVED AREAS — Those areas not paved with a concrete,
asphalt or other sealed surface pavement material capable of
supporting all vehicles used thereon and in all weather conditions
without emitting dust or mud onto the adjacent street or adjoining
property during use. Land or gravel surface covered with vegetation,
such as grass, weeds, or other vegetation, is considered an unimproved
area.
VEHICLE — Any device, or component thereof, in, upon or by which
any person or property is or may be transported or pulled upon a
highway, street or waterway, including, but not limited to, travel trailer,
camper, motor home/coach, trailers of all kinds, trucks of all sizes, cars,
buses, boats, and off-road vehicles. Devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks are not deemed to be a
vehicle.
SECTION 18-90.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-90.2
1:372
SECTION 18-91. Unsafe Structures. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 2]
All buildings, bridges, or other structures of whatever character kept or
maintained, or which are permitted by any person owning or having control
of the same to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public is hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 18-92. Offensive Odors. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 2]
All privies or privy vaults kept in such a condition as to emit an offensive,
noxious or disagreeable odor, and all substances emitting an offensive,
noxious, unhealthy or disagreeable odor in the neighborhood where they
exist within the City are hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 18-93. (Reserved)77
SECTION 18-94. Offensive Substances Thrown onto Public or
Private Property. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, §§ 3-5]
B. The following are declared to be nuisances:
1. The parking of any vehicle on grassy or unimproved areas.
(Excluding gravel driveways and gravel parking areas existing
before passage of this Section, and rear yard compacted gravel
pads as permitted by Lexington City Code Section 29-30.)
2. The open storage of an inoperable, licensed or unlicensed, vehicle
on any type surface for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
C. Exceptions.
1. Subsection (B) above shall not apply to any vehicle (except when
used for on-site human, animal or fowl habitation) parked or stored
in a completely enclosed building or fenced area, and not visible
from adjacent public or private property. Nor shall this Subsection
apply to any vehicle upon the property of a business licensed as a
salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so long as the
business is operated in compliance with its business license and the
property is in compliance with the Lexington City Code.
2. Agricultural zones. Subsection (B) above shall not apply to any
vehicle (except when used for on-site human, animal or fowl
habitation) located on agriculturally zoned lots provided the
vehicles are set back from the property line a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet.
77.Editor's Note-Ord. no. 2009-08 § 2, adopted February 24, 2009, repealed section 18-93
"Obstruction and Filth on Public Ways" in its entirety. Former section 18-93 derived from
ord. of 5-5-1970 § 2; ord. no. 92-09 §§ 1 — 2, 6-8-1992.
SECTION 18-90.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-94
1:373
SECTION 18-95. Keeping Offensive Substances. [Ord. of 5-5-1970,
§ 24]
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to allow any putrid or
unwholesome meats or fish, decayed fruits or vegetables, refuse, offal,
excrement, chamber lye or other filthy, offensive substance or thing to be or
remain in or upon any house, building, lot or premises owned or occupied
by him or under his charge and control.
SECTION 18-96. (Reserved)78
SECTION 18-97. Tenement, Boardinghouses. [Ord. of 5-5-1970,
§ 14]
Every tenement, boardinghouse, lodging house or any building used for
such purpose, or any part thereof, within the City which is leased, let
or rented for lodging purposes and which is not sufficiently lighted or
ventilated and provided with water, and kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, or in which the strength, ventilation, light or sewerage is in any
manner insufficient or prejudicial to life or health, or which does not have
adequate or properly constructed privies or water closets shall be deemed
a nuisance.
SECTION 18-98. Storage of Explosives. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 15]
Any house, building or tank within the City used for the special or exclusive
storage of powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, coal oil or other explosive
substances detrimental to the public health, or where endangering
quantities of such explosives are kept exposed or insecure for the purpose
A. Any animal, vegetable matter or other substance whatever which is or
may become putrid, offensive or unhealthy thrown into or upon any
public or private property within the City is hereby declared a nuisance.
B. Any filth, garbage, foul or unclean water, from any kitchen, house,
tenement, or other place, within the City, conducted, cast, thrown or
allowed to escape into or upon any public or private property is hereby
declared a nuisance.
C. Any offal, blood, filth, manure, rubbish, still slops, or any refuse, animal,
vegetable matter or any unclean, foul or nauseous liquor, which shall be
discharged out or from any premises in the City owned or occupied by
any tanner, dyer, livery stable keeper, pork or beef packer, soap boiler,
tallow chandler, butcher or any other person, thrown into, deposited on
or left in any stream of water within the City, or on any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public place or upon any vacant lot in the City is hereby
declared a nuisance.
78.Editor's Note-Ord. no. 2009-08 § 2, adopted February 24, 2009, repealed section 18-96
"Unsafe Sidewalks, Gutters and Curbstones" in its entirety. Former section 18-96 derived
from ord. of 5-5-1970 § 2.
SECTION 18-94 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-98
1:374
of display or in any manner so as to endanger human life is hereby declared
a nuisance.
SECTION 18-99. Barbed Wire Fences. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 21; Ord.
No. 2008-07 § 1, 3-11-2008]
No person shall, without first obtaining special permission from the City
Council, except as permitted in Chapter 29, Zoning, Article II, build or place
or cause to be built or placed any fence composed in whole or in part
of barbed wire on the line of or adjacent to any highway, street, alley or
other public place, and any such fence which may be built without such
permission, or which having been built by such permission shall not be
removed at the expiration of ten (10) days after notice requiring the removal
thereof has been served by order of the Council upon the owner, agent or
tenant of the premises upon which such fence is situated is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
SECTION 18-100. Stagnant, Foul Water and Liquid. [Ord. of
5-5-1970, § 2]
Any pond or pool of stagnant water within the City and all foul or dirty
water or other liquid when discharged through any drainpipe or spout, or
thrown into or upon any street, alley, thoroughfare or lot within the City to
the injury and annoyance of the public is hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 18-101. Obstructing, Throwing Substances into Water
Courses and Drains. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 6]
It is hereby declared a nuisance to throw into any branch, stream, drain or
watercourse within the City, any dead animal or fowl or any filthy substance,
or to place therein any obstruction whatever.
SECTION 18-102. Foul Cellars, Vaults, Etc. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 11]
Any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer or sink which is nauseous,
foul, offensive or injurious to the public health is hereby declared a
nuisance.
SECTION 18-103. Wells and Cisterns Containing Unwholesome
Water. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 13]
Any well or cistern on any property within the City shall be deemed a
nuisance whenever a chemical analysis shows that the water of such well or
cistern is of an impure or unwholesome nature.
SECTION 18-104. Keeping Animals and Fowl in Unwholesome
Surroundings. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 12]
Whenever any stable, shed or apartment, or any yard or appurtenance
thereof, in which any horse, mule, cattle, sheep, cow or swine or any
other animal or fowl shall be kept, or any place within the limits of the
SECTION 18-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-104
1:375
City in which manure or liquid discharges of such animals shall collect
or accumulate, and which stable, stall, shed or apartment, or any yard
or appurtenance thereof, is not kept in a clean and wholesome condition
so that no offensive smell shall be allowed to escape therefrom shall be
deemed a nuisance; provided, that nothing in this Section shall be so
construed as to include manure deposits upon any private property for the
purpose of cultivating the same.
SECTION 18-105. Offensive Animal Pens. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 2]
All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens within the City permitted
by the persons owning or controlling the same to be in such a condition as
to become offensive, annoying or injurious to the public are hereby declared
a nuisance.
SECTION 18-106. Keeping Dead Animals in City. [Ord. of 5-5-1970,
§ 7]
It is hereby declared a nuisance for the owner or keeper of any animal or
fowl which may die to permit the same to remain within the City for a longer
period of time than twelve (12) hours after such animal or fowl has died.
SECTION 18-107. Bringing Diseased or Injured Animals into City.
[Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 25]
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to bring or cause to be
brought into the City any diseased or injured animal of any kind that is
usually slaughtered for food.
SECTION 18-108. Killing Diseased or Injured Animals for Food
Value. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 26]
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to kill any diseased or
injured animal with a view to or for the purpose of having the carcass
dressed or prepared for food purposes, or to sell, give away or in any
manner dispose of, or offer to sell, give away or in any manner dispose of
for use as food all or any part thereof.
SECTION 18-109. Slaughterhouses. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 8]
All slaughterhouses situated within the City are hereby declared to be
public nuisances.
SECTION 18-110. Steaming and Rendering Animal Substances.
[Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 9]
The steaming, boiling or rendering of any offal, tainted or damaged tallow
or lard, or the steaming and rendering of any animal substance, in such a
manner as to occasion an offensive smell, or which will by undergoing such
process of steaming, boiling or rendering it unwholesome or offensive to
smell within the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
SECTION 18-104 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-111
1:376
SECTION 18-111. Storing and Keeping Offensive Hides. [Ord. of
5-5-1970, § 10]
The placing or storing of any green or salted hides in any store, warehouse
or other place or building within the City, causing an offensive odor to arise
from said hides, to the injury or annoyance to the occupant of any house,
store, place or building, or those residing in the vicinity thereof, or the
general public is hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 18-112. through SECTION 18-115. (Reserved)
SECTION 18-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-112
1:377

DIVISION 2
Abatement
SECTION 18-116. Right of Entry of City Officials. [Ord. of 5-5-1970,
§ 19]
The City Marshal, Policemen of the City, members of the City Council and
Board of Health are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises within
the City in order to ascertain the existence or location of any nuisance, and
to ascertain the name of any person causing or maintaining the same or for
the purpose of abating the same.
SECTION 18-117. Notice to Abate; Service of Notice. [Ord. of
5-5-1970, § 20]
It shall be the duty of the City Marshal, whenever he is notified by the
City Council or the Board of Health, to forthwith give a written notice to
the person causing or maintaining a nuisance to abate the same within a
reasonable time to be specified in the notice. In the event that the City
Marshal shall not give the notice within a reasonable time, the Mayor,
Council or any member thereof may cause such written notice to be given.
Such notice may be served by the City Marshal or any Police Officer of the
City. A copy of the notice shall be kept by the Officer serving the same,
who shall make his written return thereon stating how, when, on whom and
where he served the same, and subscribe his name thereto. The notice may
be served by delivering the same to the person to be notified, or a copy
may be left at the usual place of abode of such person with a member of
his family over the age of fifteen (15) years or in the event that said person
cannot be found within the City, the notice may be served by depositing said
notice in the U.S. mail addressed to said person at his last known address.
SECTION 18-118. Failure to Comply with Notice to Constitute
Violation. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 27]
Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified
in the notice to abate required by Section 18-117, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and punished in accordance with Section 1-8.
SECTION 18-119. Cost of Abatement by City May be Charged to
Owner in Addition to Fine and Penalty. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 28]
If upon the trial and conviction of any person for causing or maintaining
any nuisance, it shall appear that the nuisance complained of continues
to exist, the Municipal Judge may, in addition to the penalty imposed for
causing or maintaining such nuisance, make an order directing the City
Marshal to abate the nuisance forthwith and report the expense thereof to
the Municipal Judge, who may make the same a part of the judgment in
addition to the fine imposed, the same to be collected as other fines and
penalties.
SECTION 18-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-120
1:379
SECTION 18-120. Summary Abatement by City; Special Tax Against
Property; Lien; Suit to Collect Tax. [Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 29]
SECTION 18-121. When Abatement is to be at Expense of City.
[Ord. of 5-5-1970, § 31]
Should any nuisance exist in the City, the abatement or removal of which
is not prescribed or provided for in this Code, the same shall be abated or
removed by the City Marshal at the expense of the City.
SECTION 18-122. Code Abatement Services. [Ord. No. 2012-23 § I,
7-24-2012]
Abatement of code violations shall be the actual cost(s) for contracted
service(s) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) administrative charge and
twenty-four dollars ($24.00) filing fee.
SECTION 18-123. through SECTION 18-128. (Reserved)
A. The City Council is authorized to prevent, abate and remove in a
summary manner, and in a manner specified by special ordinance or
resolution, any nuisance existing on any private property within the
City, and to assess the costs and expenses incurred by the City in
removing or abating such nuisance as a special tax against property,
and issue a special tax bill against the same in the name of the owner of
such property; provided, that such nuisance was caused by such owner,
or by his agent or any other person with the consent of such owner.
B. The special tax so levied and the special tax bill so issued against said
property for the costs and expenses of such abatement, or removal of
such nuisance, shall be a special lien against such property in the same
manner and with the same effect that special tax bills are for paving
streets, paid for by special assessments.
C. Such special tax bill shall be in favor of the City and the same may be
collected by suit thereon, in the name of the City, in its own behalf, in
any Court of competent jurisdiction, and said levy, special assessment
and tax bills and all matters and things incident and pertaining thereto,
shall insofar as practicable, conform with the levy, special assessment
and tax bill for the paving of streets, paid for by special assessments.
SECTION 18-120 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-123
1:380
ARTICLE VII
Curfew For Minors
SECTION 18-129. Definitions. [Ord. of 12-5-1960, § 1]
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
HIGHWAY — Any road, lane, dock, wharf, or any terminal or continuance of
a roadway open to the public.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — The actual parent, legal guardian or a person
having the care, custody or control of a minor by consent of the parent, legal
guardian or by court action.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, places of amusement,
parks, playgrounds, dance halls and similar premises open to the public.
STREET — Any alley, thoroughfare, pathway or other course of travel open
to the public.
UNOCCUPIED PREMISES OR GROUNDS — All areas and premises of the
City, except those premises designed as dwellings or places of residences
and presently occupied by such residents.
SECTION 18-130. Established; Exemptions. [Ord. of 12-5-1960, § 2]
SECTION 18-131. Parents or Guardians Permitting Violations. [Ord.
of 12-5-1960, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to willfully or negligently
permit a minor under the age of seventeen (17) years who is subject to his
custody to violate any of the provisions of this Article, nor shall any such
parent or guardian issue a written consent as provided in Section 18-130,
except in cases of necessity.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17)
years to congregate, loiter, or be on the streets, highways, public places
or upon unoccupied premises or grounds in the City after the hour of
11:59 P.M. on Saturday and 10:59 P.M. on every other night.
B. The curfew established by Subsection (A), shall not apply to any person
under seventeen (17) years of age who is accompanied by his parent or
legal guardian or is sent by his parent or guardian on some urgent
business or errand which renders it necessary for him to be abroad
after the established curfew hours, in which case such person shall
personally have with him the written consent of his parent or guardian.
Nothing in Subsection (A) shall be interpreted as prohibiting minors
from traveling over or along public streets by direct route to and from
work in the regular course of employment where such occupation and
employment has been approved by authorities under the procedure
outlined by Statute and such minor has in his possession evidence of
such approval.
SECTION 18-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-132
1:381
SECTION 18-132. Person Other than Parent or Guardian
Accompanying Minor Violating Curfew. [Ord. of 12-5-1960, § 4]
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a parent or guardian, to accompany,
congregate or loiter with any person under the age of seventeen (17) years
on any public street, highway, public place or upon unoccupied premises in
the City during the curfew hours established by this Article, except by and
with the express consent of the parent or guardian of the minor.
SECTION 18-133. Violations. [Ord. of 12-5-1960, § 5]
A. Any person over the age of seventeen (17) years violating any
provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-8 of this
Code.
B. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age violating the provisions of
this Article, shall be dealt with according to the appropriate State
juvenile laws.
SECTION 18-132 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 18-133
1:382
Chapter 19
PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION 18-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 18-133
1:383

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 19-1. Use of Public Parks for Public Entertainment
Restricted. [Ord. of 8-2-1943, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain for any length of
time whatsoever, upon any public park or tract of land owned by the City,
any carnival, show or public entertainment of any kind or character, except
by special authority granted by the City Council.
SECTION 19-2. Public Parks, Recreation Areas — Hours. [Ord. No.
77-8, § 2, 7-5-1977]
That all of the public parks, recreation areas and pleasure grounds owned
by the City of Lexington and operated by the Lexington Park Board shall be
closed to the public from dusk until dawn, except for approved community
activity, or by special permission of the City Council and it shall be unlawful
for any person or vehicle to be in said parks or upon the public roads therein
during said hours.
SECTION 19-3. Lexington Community Park Speed Limit;
Regulations. [Ord. No. 77-8, § 3, 7-5-1977]
The speed limit on all public roads within the confines of Lexington
Community Park shall be twenty (20) miles per hour and it shall be unlawful
for any motor vehicle to leave the traveled portion of the public roads and
parking areas as are now or may be established and designated.
SECTION 19-4. Unlawful to Deface, Damage or Litter Public Parks.
[Ord. No. 77-8, § 4, 7-5-1977]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or cause damage to any
improvements located in said public parks, recreation areas or pleasure
grounds or to deposit or allow to be deposited in their presence any debris,
rubbish, trash, or other refuse, or to allow the same to be thrown from their
automobile on to any portion of the property comprising said park areas.
SECTION 19-5. Penalty. [Ord. No. 77-8, § 5, 7-5-1977]
Any person, persons, firms or corporations who shall be found to be in
violation of the provisions of Sections 19-2 through 19-4 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished in
accordance with Section 1-8.
SECTION 19-6. Unlawful to Fish Without License. [Ord. No. 82-8,
§ 1, 3-25-1982; Ord. No. 2000-17 § 1, 8-15-2000]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or through agents,
officers, servants or employees to hunt, lure, fish, hook, spear or capture
any fish within the waters, water courses, waterways or lakes located in any
SECTION 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 19-6
1:385
City park within the corporate limits of the City of Lexington, Missouri, or to
attempt any such actions, without first taking out and having a license and
permit issued by the Park Board or its lawfully designated representatives.
Citizens sixty-five (65) years or older and handicapped citizens are exempt
from paying a fee, however a permit must be obtained. Proof of exemption
is required by showing the State license waiver or letter.
SECTION 19-7. Fishing Permit. [Ord. No. 92-26 §§ 1-2, 1-26-1993]
A separate fee may and shall be charged for a "Fishing Permit" before
any person shall be permitted to fish upon or in any such waters, water
courses, waterways, or lakes located within the City of Lexington. The
"Fishing Permit" shall be issued by the Park Board or its lawfully designated
representatives.
SECTION 19-8. Boat Permit. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 3, 3-25-1982; Ord.
No. 92-26, § 3, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. 96-14 §§ 1-2, 7-9-1996]
SECTION 19-9. Park Board — Responsibility. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 4,
3-25-1982]
The Park Board may and shall promulgate its various rules and regulations
as it may deem appropriate to give meaning and effect to this Chapter from
time to time.
SECTION 19-10. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 5,
3-25-1982]
Any violation of this Section is deemed a misdemeanor, punishable under
Section 1-8 of this Code, which is the general penalty Section.
SECTION 19-11. Lexington Lion's Community Park Lake. [Ord. No.
96-02 § 1, 4-23-1996]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a boat in or upon
any waters, water courses, waterways or lakes located within the City
of Lexington without first obtaining or having a boat permit issued by
the Park Board or its lawfully designated representatives. A separate
fee shall be charged for said boat permits.
B. Only boats propelled by electric trolling motors, oars, or paddles shall
be allowed upon any waters, water courses, waterways or lakes located
within the City of Lexington.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) other than the Lexington Park
Board, to erect, construct, maintain, use, occupy, build or place any
type of free standing, floating or anchored structure which would abut,
border, come in contact with, or extend out and over the body of water
commonly known as Lexington Lion's Community Park Lake.
SECTION 19-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 19-11
1:386
SECTION 19-12. Park Designations. [Ord. No. 2004-08 § 1,
3-9-2004; Ord. No. 2005-18 § 1, 6-14-2005]
The City Council may enclose, improve, regulate, purchase or sell all public
parks or other public grounds belonging to the City and may purchase
and hold grounds for public parks within the City or within three (3) miles
thereof.
Lexington Community
Lake
375 Park Road
Irish Town Hill 150 Highland Avenue
College 1550 State Street
B. All unattached buildings or structures of accessory use, located in the
rear yard of the main structure located on lots abutting the Lexington
Lion's Community Park Lake shall have a set back of five (5) feet from
the rear property line, otherwise known as the ordinary water line.
C. If drought or other natural conditions exist that may jeopardize the
integrity of the lake, the Lexington Park Board shall regulate the use of
said Lexington Lion's Community Park Lake pursuant to Article I,
Section 19-9 and Article II, Section 19-17 of the Lexington Municipal
Code of Ordinance.
D. The City of Lexington, its employees, representatives, agents, assigns,
boards, or commissions shall not be responsible for, or liable to, any
property owner abutting the Lexington Lion's Community Park Lake,
for damages arising out of or from erosion, or other natural causes
along the shoreline or water's edge.
E. A violation of this Section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine, and/or imprisonment. Any person, firm, or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this Section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that
such violation continues, but if the offense be willful, on conviction
thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by
imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation
continues, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court.
F. The City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings against
any firm, person or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent occupancy
of such building, structure, or land, or prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises.
SECTION 19-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 19-12
1:387
Crystal Lake 725 S. 24th Street
Cell Tower 1475 Lafayette Street
Sprint 1116 Franklin Avenue
Lexington Riverfront 400 N. 10th Street
SECTION 19-12 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 19-12
1:388
ARTICLE II
Park Board
SECTION 19-13. Created.
There is hereby created in the City a Park Board.
SECTION 19-14. Appointment of Members.79 [Ord. No. 2014-17 § I,
6-24-2014]
The Mayor shall, with the approval of the City Council, appoint a Board of
nine (9) Directors to the Park Board, chosen from the citizens of the R-V
School District at large, with reference to their fitness for such office, and
no member of the City Government shall be a member of the Board.
SECTION 19-15. Terms of Office; Removal.80
The Directors of the Park Board shall hold office, one-third (1/3) for one (1)
year, one-third (1/3) for two (2) years, and one-third (1/3) for three (3) years
from the first of June following their appointment, and at their first regular
meeting, shall cast lots for their respective terms; and annually thereafter,
the Mayor shall, before the first of June of each year, appoint as before
three (3) Directors, who shall hold office for three (3) years and until their
successors are appointed. The Mayor, may by and with the consent of the
City Council, remove any Director for misconduct or neglect of duty.
SECTION 19-16. Vacancies; Compensation.81
Vacancies in the Park Board occasioned by removal, resignation or
otherwise, shall be reported to the City Council and be filled in like manner
as original appointments, and no Director shall receive compensation as
such.
SECTION 19-17. Organization; General Powers.82
The Directors of the Park Board shall immediately after their appointment,
meet and organize by the election of one (1) of their number President, and
by the election of such other officers, as they may deem necessary. They
shall make and adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations for their guidance
and for the government of the parks as may be expedient, not inconsistent
with this Article or Sections 90.500 through 90.570, RSMo. They shall have
the exclusive control of the expenditures of all money collected to the credit
of the Park Fund and of the supervision, improvement, care and custody
of said park. All monies received for such parks shall be deposited in the
Treasury of the City to the credit of the Park Fund and shall be kept
separate and apart from the other monies of the City and drawn upon by
79.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 90.520.
80.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 90.530.
81.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 70.540.
82.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 90.550.
SECTION 19-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 19-17
1:389
the proper officers of the City upon the properly authenticated vouchers of
the Park Board. Said Board shall have the power to purchase or otherwise
secure ground to be used for such parks, shall have power to appoint a
suitable person to take care of said parks and necessary assistants for
said person and fix their compensation, and shall have power to remove
such appointees, and shall in general, carry out the spirit and intent of
this Article and Sections 90.500 through 90.570, RSMo. in establishing and
maintaining public parks.
SECTION 19-18. Annual Report.83
The Board of Directors shall make, on or before the second Monday in June,
an annual report to the City Council stating the condition of their trust
on the first day of May of that year, the various sums of money received
from the Park Fund and other sources, and how much monies have been
expended and for what purposes, with such other statistics, information and
suggestions as they may deem of general interest. All such portions of such
report as relate to the receipt and expenditure of money shall be verified by
affidavit.
SECTION 19-19. Private Donations.84
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real
estate for the benefit of such park shall have a right to vest the title to the
money or real estate so donated in the Board of Directors created under this
Article to be held and controlled by such Board when accepted according
to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property, and as
to such property, the Board shall be held and considered to be the special
trustees.
SECTION 19-20. through SECTION 19-25. (Reserved)
83.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 90.560.
84.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 90.570.
SECTION 19-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 19-20
1:390
ARTICLE III
Community Park Lake
SECTION 19-26. Intent. [Ord. No. 95-30 § 1, 11-28-1995]
SECTION 19-27. Limitation on Processing of Applications. [Ord.
No. 95-30 § 2, 11-28-1995]
SECTION 19-28. Appeals. [Ord. No. 95-30 § 4, 11-28-1995]
A. It is the purpose of this Article to limit, except as otherwise provided
herein the processing of building permit applications for construction of
structures on the water's edge of Lexington Community Park Lake in
anticipation of adoption of permanent regulations governing the
establishment and location of Community Park Lake land uses, to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the City of Lexington. It is not the intent of this Article to deny
development rights protected by Statute or Constitution.
B. It is further intent of the City of Lexington to enact new regulations
governing the establishment and location of Community Park Lake land
uses in the most expeditious manner, and to consider any appeals to
construct on the Community Park Lake for the duration of this Article
on the basis of criteria contained herein.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, no City employee, officer, agent,
bureau, department or commission of the City shall accept for filing any
building permit for the construction of structures on the water's edge of
the Community Park Lake nor take any action to process such
applications, including but not limited to acceptance of fees, review or
evaluation of the application, scheduling for public review or hearing,
formulation of conditions or issuance of preliminary or final approvals
of such applications, except as hereinafter may be provided for.
B. The City Clerk, Building Official or other City Official responsible under
City regulations for reviewing the building permit application shall first
determine whether the building permit application is for the
construction of structure on the Community Park Lake for which no
exemption is provided pursuant to this Article. In the event that the
application is for construction of a structure on the Community Park
Lake for which no exemption is provided pursuant to this Article, the
official shall take no further action on the permit application and shall
return the application, together with any proffered application fee, to
the applicant with notification that the application will not be accepted
for filing or further processing for the duration of this Article.
A. An applicant for a building permit subject to this Article, who is
aggrieved by the City's decision not to accept for filing or further
process such application, may appeal for relief to the City Council. The
appeal shall be in writing and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk
within ten (10) days of the date of notification that the permit
SECTION 19-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 19-28
1:391
SECTION 19-29. Exemption. [Ord. No. 95-30 § 6, 11-28-1995]
This Article shall not apply to the following applications:
application will not be accepted for filing or be processed for the
duration of this Article.
B. The appeal shall be considered by the City Council within twenty (20)
days of the date the appeal is received in the office of the City Clerk.
The City Council shall not release the applicant from the requirements
of this Article, unless the applicant first presents credible evidence from
which the City Council can reasonably conclude that the delay in
processing his application for a building permit under this Article is
likely to substantially deprive the applicant of property rights protected
by Statute or Constitution considering the nature of the use of the land
proposed, other authorized uses permitted outright or conditionally
under the zoning designation, whether the applicant has a vested
property right in development of the land and the likelihood that such
factors will not be adequately addressed in subsequently enacted
zoning regulations. If the applicant makes such showing, the City
Council may reasonably condition authorization to proceed with the
application considering:
1. Whether the construction on the Community Park Lake in the
absence of standards and criteria contained in the new proposed
regulations governing the establishment and location of such land
uses jeopardizes the City's interest in preventing the improper land
uses;
2. The effect of the land use on the surrounding Lexington Community
Park.
C. The City Council may take the following actions:
1. Deny the appeal, in which case the application shall not be
accepted or further processed;
2. Grant the appeal, and direct that the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Building Official or other official responsible for
reviewing the application accept the application for filing;
3. Grant the appeal subject to conditions consistent with the criteria
set forth in this Section, and direct that the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Building Official or other official responsible for
reviewing the application accept the application for filing.
1. Any application for a building permit, subject to this Article, that was
accepted for filing by the City prior to November 28, 1995.
2. Any subsequent application for a building permit, subject to this Article,
following approval of an initial application for a building permit that
was accepted for filing by the City prior to November 28, 1995.
SECTION 19-28 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 19-29
1:392
3. Any amendment to a building permit, subject to this Article, existing on
November 28, 1995.
SECTION 19-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 19-29
1:393
Chapter 20
PLANNING COMMISSION
Cross Reference — Building inspector/code enforcement
officer — authorized to enforce ch. 20, § 2-209.
State Law Reference — Planning commission, RSMo. § 89.320 et seq.
SECTION 20-1. Composition; Appointments. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 3;
Ord. No. 99-33 § 1, 8-10-1999; Ord. No. 2005-45 § 1, 12-13-2005]
The Planning Commission shall consist of eight (8) members, including
a member of the City Council selected by Council annually at its first
organizational meeting in April and seven (7) citizen members appointed by
the Mayor and approved by the Council.
SECTION 20-2. Compensation of Members. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 3]
All citizen members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation.
SECTION 20-3. Terms of Office. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 3; Ord. No.
2001-64 § 1, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2014-14 § I, 6-10-2014]
The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four (4) years, except
that the terms of the citizen members first appointed shall be for varying
periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered. The members shall not
serve more than two (2) complete terms consecutively, however they may
be reappointed after a one-year absence. All citizen members shall serve
without compensation. Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid. The Council may remove any
citizen member for cause stated in writing and after public hearing.
SECTION 20-4. Vacancies. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 3]
Any vacancy on the Planning Commission shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose office is vacated by appointment of a new
member in the same manner as original appointments.
SECTION 20-5. Removal of Members. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 3]
The City Council may remove any citizen member of the Planning
Commission for cause, stated in writing, and after a public hearing.
SECTION 20-6. Election of Chairman and Secretary; Term. [Ord. of
4-2-1969, § 4]
The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from among
its citizen members. The term of the Chairman and Secretary shall be for
one (1) year, with eligibility for re-election.
SECTION 19-29 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 20-7
1:394
SECTION 20-7. Meetings; Rules; Records. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 4]
The Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings and special meetings
as they may provide by rules, and shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and keep a record of its proceedings. These records shall be public
records.
SECTION 20-8. To Perform Functions of Zoning Commission and
Planning Commission. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 10]
The Planning Commission shall have and perform all of the functions of the
Zoning Commission provided for in Chapter 89, RSMo. and shall have and
perform all of the functions of a Planning Commission as outlined in said
Chapter.
SECTION 20-9. Employees; Contracts for Professional Assistance;
Expenditures Generally. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 4]
The Planning Commission shall appoint the employees and staff necessary
for its work, and may contract with City planners and other professional
persons for the services that it requires. The expenditures of the Planning
Commission, exclusive of grants and gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
SECTION 20-10. Planning Commission to Adopt City Plan; Contents
of Plan. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, §§ 2,5]
The Planning Commission shall adopt, amend and carry out a City Plan for
the physical development of the City. The City Plan, with the accompanying
maps, plats, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the
Planning Commission's recommendations for the physical development and
uses of land, and may include, among other things, the general location,
character and extent of streets and other public ways, grounds, places and
spaces, the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals,
whether publicly or privately owned, the acceptance, widening, removal,
extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, or change of use
of any of the foregoing and the general character, extent ad layout of the
replanning of blighted districts and slum areas of the City.
SECTION 20-11. Planning Commission to Prepare Zoning Plan;
Contents of Plan. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 5]
The Planning Commission shall prepare a Zoning Plan for the regulation
of height, area, bulk, location and use of private, nonprofit and public
structures and premises, and of population density.
SECTION 20-12. Surveys and Studies in Preparation of City Plan;
Purpose of Plan. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 6]
SECTION 20-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 20-12
1:395
SECTION 20-13. City Plan May be Adopted as Whole or in Parts.
[Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 7]
The Planning Commission may adopt the City Plan as a whole by a single
resolution, or, as the work of making the whole City Plan progresses, it may
from time to time adopt a part or parts thereof, any part to correspond
generally with one (1) or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject
matter of the plan.
SECTION 20-14. Hearing Required Prior to Adoption of Plan;
Notice of Hearing; Adjournment. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 7]
Before the adoption, amendment or extension of the City Plan or a portion
thereof, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing
thereon. Fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in at least one (1) newspaper having a general circulation
within the City. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time.
SECTION 20-15. Majority Vote Required for Adoption of Plan; Form
of Resolution; Filing and Recording. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 7]
The adoption of the City Plan shall require a majority vote of the full
membership of the Planning Commission. The resolution shall refer
expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and other matters intended by
the Planning Commission to form the whole or part of the plan and the
action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof by the
identifying signature of the secretary of the Planning Commission, and filed
in the office of the Planning Commission, identified properly by file number,
and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the City Council
and the City Clerk, and a copy shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds.
SECTION 20-16. Public Officials to Furnish Information to Planning
Commission. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 8]
All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Commission
within a reasonable time, all available information required for its work.
A. In the preparation of the City Plan, the Planning Commission shall make
careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing
conditions and probable future growth of the City.
B. The City Plan shall be made with the purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinate development of the City which will, in
accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the general
welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development.
SECTION 20-12 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 20-17
1:396
SECTION 20-17. Power to Enter Upon Land; General Powers in
Performance of Functions and City Planning. [Ord. of 4-2-1969, § 8]
The Planning Commission, its members and employees, in the performance
of its functions, may enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys.
In general, the Planning Commission shall have the power necessary to
enable it to perform its functions and promote City planning.
Chapter 21
POLICE AND PRISONERS
Cross Reference — Performance of duties in police department when
employees on vacation, § 2-70.3; Fire, water and police committee
established, § 2-249; Municipal court, § 17-1 et seq.
State Law Reference — Police departments in cities of the third class,
RSMo., § 85.541 et. seq.
SECTION 20-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 20-17
1:397

ARTICLE I
Merit System Police Department
SECTION 21-1. Merit System Police Department Created. [Ord. No.
93-06 § 20-1, 6-22-1993]
The City shall have a Merit System Police Department consisting generally
of a Police Personnel Board, Chief Police, Deputy Chief of Police, and such
number of regular and reserve Police Officers of such rank and grade as the
City Council may provide for from time to time.
SECTION 21-2. Police Personnel Board — Qualifications,
Composition and Compensation. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-2, 6-22-1993;
Ord. No. 2001-66 § 1, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-44 § 1, 12-13-2005;
Ord. No. 2017-35 §§ 1 — 2, 11-28-2017]
SECTION 21-3. Police Personnel Board — Member Removal. [Ord.
No. 93-06 § 20-3, 6-22-1993]
The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected
to the City Council, remove any member of the Personnel Board from
office. A member may also be removed by three-fourths (3/4) of all the
members elected to the City Council, independent of the Mayor's approval
or recommendation.
A. There is hereby established a Police Personnel Board which shall
consist of six (6) members. Said members are to be residents of the City,
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The term for
each member shall be for three (3) years, except initially two (2)
members shall be appointed for one year, two (2) members shall be
appointed for two (2) years, and two (2) members shall be appointed for
three (3) years. Members appointed will serve their terms or until their
successors shall be appointed, subject to resignation or removal for
cause. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. The
members shall not serve more than two (2) complete terms,
consecutively, however they may be reappointed after a one-year
absence.
B. The Board shall annually elect a Chairman and Secretary. They shall
hold office for one year or until their successors are duly elected and
qualified. The Chairman shall be the presiding officer at all meetings.
The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings in a permanent
record book, and shall be the custodian of all forms, papers, books,
records, and completed examinations by the Board.
C. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of all business at any regular or special meeting.
D. All members of the Police Personnel Board shall serve without
compensation.
SECTION 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-4
1:399
SECTION 21-4. Police Personnel, Board — Powers and Duties. [Ord.
No. 93-06 § 20-4, 6-22-1993]
The Police Personnel Board shall organize itself and it shall have the power
and authority, as may be reasonably required and necessary, to effectively
perform the following duties and functions:
1. Receive and process employment applications. All employment
applications for employment by the Lexington Police Department shall
be submitted to the City Administrator in substantial compliance with
the form prescribed by the Board. Thereafter, the applications shall be
presented to the Police Personnel Board upon request of the Mayor for
review and consideration. All applications of successful applicants shall
be retained by the City Administrator as part of the officer's permanent
personnel file. All applications of unsuccessful applicants may be
retained by the City Administrator, or destroyed after ninety (90) days
at the discretion of the City Administrator.
2. Administrator employment examinations. The Board shall promulgate
and administer examinations as to fitness and qualifications, for all the
positions in the Police Department. The examinations shall include such
written test, oral examinations/interviews, scores on basic police
academy work and other job related tests as are necessary in the
opinion of the Board to measure the qualifications of applicants to the
City Police Department. From the results of the examinations/
interviews, the Police Personnel Board shall provide a list of eligible
persons for employment with the Police Department to the Mayor. The
Mayor shall appoint from the list of eligible applicants upon the
confirmation of a majority vote cast by the entire City Council.
3. Process recommendations for officer promotion. No person shall
receive an increase in rank, compensation or otherwise be promoted
within the Police Department except upon the written recommendation
of the Police Chief submitted to the Police Personnel Board and
approved by the Mayor and a majority of the entire City Council. The
Board shall receive, process and determine all recommendations
submitted by the Chief of Police pertaining to the promotion of
individuals employed by the Lexington Police Department. The Board
shall provide a list of eligibles to the Mayor for promotion within the
Police Department. The Mayor and Council shall act as soon as
practicable on all promotion recommendations referred by the Board.
4. Make compensation recommendations. The Board from time to time
may make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council regarding
the compensation to be paid to the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of
Police and other persons employed in the Lexington Police Department.
5. Promulgate rules and regulations. The Board from time to time may
promulgate rules and regulations governing the conduct and activities
of persons employed in the Police Department. The Board is authorized
to establish personnel policies for the Police Department subject to
SECTION 21-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 21-4
1:400
SECTION 21-5. Police Personnel Board — Demotion, Termination,
and Related Disciplinary Matters. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-5,
6-22-1993]
The Board shall hear and determine all matters of appeal pertaining to the
demotion, termination and discipline of persons employed by the Lexington
Police Department in the form and manner hereafter prescribed.
confirmation by the City Council as otherwise prescribed by ordinance.
Any rule or regulation so promulgated shall be effective when approved
and confirmed by resolution passed by a majority of votes cast by the
entire City Council.
6. Meetings. The Mayor and/or Board Chairman are authorized to call
meetings of the Board for any purpose reasonably related to police
business at any time upon actual notice to the members of the Board.
Notice of all meetings shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance, with such meeting being open to the general public, pursuant
to the Missouri Sunshine Law, RSMo. Section 610.010 et seq.
1. Any person suspended or otherwise disciplined (discipline greater than
a written reprimand) by the Chief of Police or any person suspended,
demoted, discharged or otherwise disciplined (discipline greater than a
written reprimand) by the Mayor, for misbehavior or inefficiency in the
performance of his/her duties shall, upon application therefore, be
afforded a public hearing before the Police Personnel Board.
2. The application for public hearing before the Police Personnel Board
shall be in writing and filed by the aggrieved party with the City
Administrator within five (5) days of the disciplinary action complained
of, and shall state with particularity all reasons known to the appellant
to warrant a challenge of the disciplinary action. The appellant is
required to provide to the Board a copy of any written document
received by him/her from the Chief of Police or Mayor pertaining to the
imposition of the disciplinary action challenged in the appeal.
3. As soon as practicable after application for hearing is filed, and no later
than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal is filed with the City
Administrator, the Board shall convene, hear and determine the
allegations of the appeal at a public hearing. Upon notification of a
hearing date, the Chief of Police or Mayor shall file with the City
Administrator, a written statement setting forth the charges and
specifications supporting the discipline which is being appealed, a copy
of which shall be provided to the accused officer.
The Board shall have the power to summon witnesses to appear at
the hearing as provided by law. The appellant shall then be allowed to
present any evidence in defense or mitigation of the discipline imposed
so far as is relevant and material as determined by the Board. The
Police Department, by the Chief of Police or other authorized
representative will then be afforded an opportunity to present rebuttal
SECTION 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-5
1:401
SECTION 21-6. Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-6, 6-22-1993]
evidence, or otherwise reply. No further evidence will be submitted, or
permitted and considered by the Board.
4. Any aggrieved party may be assisted by legal counsel at any hearing
before the Board, but the extent of counsel's representation and/or
participation in the proceedings shall be determined by the Chairman of
the Board. The Board may seek and obtain the advice and/or assistance
of the City Attorney in matters related to the conduct of disciplinary
proceedings. A formal record shall be made of the public disciplinary
hearing.
5. The Board may adjourn after conclusion of the public hearing and later
convene in any private place to discuss, deliberate, determine and enter
its written findings, decision and recommendation as provided herein.
Within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the public hearing as
aforesaid, the City Administrator shall deliver the Board's written
findings and recommendation on the matter to the Mayor for
presentation to the City Council. The Board may recommend that the
disciplinary action previously imposed may be either affirmed or
reversed. To be effective, any reversal recommended by the Board must
also be supported by the concurrence of the Mayor or two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the entire City Council. Thereafter, an appeal may be taken to
the Circuit Court as otherwise provided by law.
A. Qualifications and Term of Office.
1. No person shall be appointed Chief of Police who is not at least
twenty-five (25) years of age at the time of the appointment. Prior
to appointment, he/she shall be required to possess substantial
experience in matters of law enforcement training, policy, practice
and procedure with said experience to be determined by the Police
Personnel Board with reference to academic achievement and/or
practical knowledge acquired on the job as a Police Officer, and he/
she must have law enforcement certification according to the laws
of the State of Missouri.
2. Upon appointment, the Chief of Police shall be entitled to hold
office during good behavior and efficient service, and may be
reappointed/recommissioned annually in accordance with the
application, selection and appointment procedures as otherwise
provided within the Revised Ordinances of the City of Lexington.
[Ord. No. 2015-06 § 2, 3-10-2015]
3. To conform the terms of employment of the Chief of Police of
Lexington with current Missouri law, it is hereby provided that the
City is obligated to comply with the procedures outlined in Section
106.273, RSMo., imposed by the Missouri legislature. [Ord. No.
2016-32 § 1, 12-27-2016]
SECTION 21-5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 21-6
1:402
4. To additionally clarify Section 21-6(A)(2), the Chief need not be
"reappointed or recommissioned" annually absent procedure
specifically provided therefore, and serves, as provided in Section
26-6(A)(1), of the Code "during good behavior and efficient
service." [Ord. No. 2016-32 § 1, 12-27-2016]
5. Any inference of the Municipal Code inconsistent herewith
notwithstanding, the Municipal Code will be interpreted and
applied in a manner consistent with Subsection (2) and (3), above
to the end that any doubts are resolved and the City fully complies
with the current enactments of superior legislative authority. [Ord.
No. 2016-32 § 1, 12-27-2016]
B. Oath of Office. Before entering into the duties of his/her office the Chief
of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before some
Court of Record in the County, the City Clerk or Municipal Judge, that
he/she possesses all the qualifications prescribed for this office by law,
and that he/she will support the Constitution of the United States and of
the State of Missouri, the provisions of all laws of the State affecting
cities of Third Class, and the ordinances of the City and faithfully
demean himself/herself in office, which official oath or affirmation shall
be filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the
appointment.
C. Bond Required. The Chief of Police shall be required to execute to the
City a bond in the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) with one
good and sufficient surety, conditioned that he/she will faithfully
perform all the duties of the office as required by the laws of this State
governing Third Class cities, and the ordinances of the City and he/she
will promptly pay over all money in his/her possession belonging to the
City at the time and in the manner provided by law. Said bond shall be
approved by the Mayor and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
D. Supervisory Powers and Duties. The Chief of Police shall be the
executive authority within the Police Department, and in the
performance of the day to day duties, he/she shall be subject to the
orders of the Mayor only. The Police Chief shall possess all powers
afforded to Police Officers within the Department, and shall possess
such others powers as are reasonably necessary to enable the Police
Chief to perform his/her supervisory duties in a competent manner as
prescribed by law. The Police Chief shall be charged with the
responsibility and duty to afford proper direction, supervision and
control of all Police Officers within the Police Department, including the
Deputy Chief of Police. As directed by the Mayor, he/she shall be
required to attend meetings of the Police Personnel Board, City Council
or other assemblies, and promptly respond to any inquiry of the Police
Personnel Board on any matter reasonably related to the performance
of his/her duties. The Police Chief shall at all times be cognizant and
well-informed of the polices, practices, procedures, rules and
regulations promulgated by the City Council and Police Personnel
Board to govern the conduct, activities and operations of the Police
SECTION 21-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-6
1:403
SECTION 21-7. Deputy Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-7,
6-22-1993]
SECTION 21-8. Police Officers. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-8, 6-22-1993]
Department, and he/she shall be charged with the effective
implementation of the same on a daily basis.
E. Compensation. The compensation of the Chief of Police will be set by
the City Council.
A. Qualifications and Term of Office. The Deputy Chief of Police shall
possess all of the qualifications required of the Chief of Police, and upon
appointment he/she shall serve in office during good behavior and
efficient service, and be subject to reappointment in the same form and
manner as the Chief of Police.
B. Supervisory Power and Duties. The Deputy Chief of Police shall assist
the Chief of Police as directed in the administration of the day to day
ministerial and supervisory duties of the office. He/she shall be subject
to the orders of the Mayor and Chief of Police only. In the event of
absence or incapacity of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of Police
shall serve as Chief of Police until such time as the Chief of Police
returns and/or is able to resume his/her duties. The Deputy Chief of
Police shall possess all of the powers and duties ascribed to the Chief of
Police subordinate only to the Chief of Police in executive authority.
C. Compensation. The compensation of the Deputy Chief of Police will be
set by the City Council.
A. Qualifications. All Police Officers of the City of Lexington must be
twenty-one (21) years of age. Each officer must have law enforcement
certification as defined by the laws of the State of Missouri, and each
must meet the physical requirements as prescribed by the Police
Personnel Board.
B. Powers and Duties. The Police Officers of the City shall be conservators
of the peace and shall have the power to arrest all offenders against the
laws of the State or the ordinances of the City and to keep such persons
confined in the City jail, or other designated place of detention to
prevent their escape until a trial can be had before an appropriate
judicial tribunal in accord with the procedures prescribed by law for
such matters. The Police shall regularly patrol the City as required by
the Mayor and City Council, and shall be constantly alert, vigilant and
active both in the prevention of law violations as well as the
apprehension of violators of the laws of the State and ordinances of the
City of Lexington. Police Officers shall have the power to make an arrest
for any offense against the laws of the City, State of Missouri, or
otherwise provided by law.
SECTION 21-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 21-8
1:404
SECTION 21-9. Reserve Police Officers. [Ord. No. 93-06 § 20-9,
6-22-1993]
SECTION 21-10. Uniform Allowance. [Ord. No. 2017-01 § 1,
1-24-2017]
C. Compensation. The compensation of Police Officers will be set by the
City Council.
D. Probationary Period. All Police Officers will be employed and serve on a
probationary status for six (6) months next succeeding the date of their
original appointment as a Police Officer for the City of Lexington.
During the probationary period, Police Officers shall be employed and
serve at the will and pleasure of the City Council. An officer terminated
during the probationary period may not appeal such action to the Police
Personnel Board.
A. Qualifications. All Reserve Police Officers shall possess all of the
qualifications required of regular Police Officers.
B. Powers and Duties. The Reserve Police Officers shall possess all of the
powers and duties of regular Police Officers and they shall otherwise
serve as dictated by the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Police Personnel Board.
C. Compensation. The Reserve Police Officers shall receive no
compensation.
A. To the extent and amount annually approved in the City Budget, a
uniform allowance will be provided for full time officers of the
Lexington Police Department.
B. This allowance may be applied to the purchase of police uniforms and
accessories such as uniforms, uniform belts, holsters, duty shoes,
badges, and rank or grade and police insignia, and a Kevlar or similar
body armor vest, all to be used during periods of active duty with the
Lexington Police Department by the officer for whom the allowance is
provided. Amounts not used annually are forfeited.
C. Because the allowance is intended primarily to maintain such uniforms
and accessories the following provisions are enacted to permit on a
secondary and conditional basis, reimbursement for acquisition of a
primary duty weapon acquired during the current fiscal year and
actually carried by the officer at the waist while on active duty at the
time he/she seeks reimbursement:
1. Near the end of the budget year, March 31, annually, an officer
seeking reimbursement for such a weapon may apply at least by
March 15, to the Chief or his/her designee for reimbursement.
Applicant will supply reasonable verification.
SECTION 21-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-10
1:405
SECTION 21-11. through SECTION 21-35. (Reserved)
2. The Chief or his/her designee will inspect the condition, fit and
appearance of the uniforms of such an officer before the budget
year closes on March 31, and suggest remedial acquisitions if the
uniforms and accessories are deficient in the sense applied to such
inspections of the appearance of members of the United States
military forces.
3. If no new acquisitions are needed, or if applicant establishes the
needed acquisitions will not consume the unused allowance, the
Chief or his/her designee will approve payment of the unused
portion of the allowance, not to exceed the weapon cost actually
expended and verified.
D. The Chief may promulgate and post rules and regulations for the
implementation of this Section and to avoid unjust forfeiture.
SECTION 21-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 21-11
1:406
ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Provisions
SECTION 21-36. School Crossing Guards. [Ord. No. 87-0014, §§ 1-5,
8-25-1987]
SECTION 21-37. Use of Excessive Force During Non-Violent Civil
Rights Demonstrations. [Ord. No. 94-28 §§ 1-2, 12-27-1994]
A. That in the interest of and for the safety of the children attending any of
the R-5 Public Schools, including but not limited to the Leslie Bell
Elementary School located at 400 South 20th Street, the Middle School
located at 16th and Main and the High School located on Aull Lane, it is
deemed appropriate that the City Council authorize the Board of
Education through its Superintendent of Schools to place school
crossing guards at various locations within the City, including those
guards for the schools above enumerated.
B. The Board of Education of the R-5 School District through its
Superintendent of Schools is hereby authorized to place competent
adults at the school crossings of the Leslie Bell School, Middle School
and High School, together with any other school crossings which the
Board seems appropriate.
C. The competent adults selected by the R-5 Board of Education through
its Superintendent of Schools are hereby authorized to enter upon the
streets of the City at the selected school crossings, control the flow of
the vehicular traffic and pedestrian school children traffic at each of
said selected school crossings during the times that they have been
directed to do so by the Board of Education through its Superintendent
of Schools. Such competent adult school crossing guards are hereby
authorized to use stop signs, stop sign paddles and other appropriate
equipment to assist in the proper control of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
D. The Police Department of the City of Lexington shall give the selected
school crossing guards such training as is requested by the R-5 Board of
Education through its Superintendent of Schools and to render such
assistance for the safety of the school children to the R-5 Board of
Education as may be necessary or appropriate from time to time.
E. The authorization herein given shall be effective between the hours of
7:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. of each day that the schools herein referred to
are in session.
A. The use of excessive force by any law enforcement personnel within its
jurisdiction against any individual engaged in a non-violent civil rights
demonstration is hereby prohibited. The City also prohibits the physical
barring of any entrance or exit to such a facility and will enforce all
applicable State laws regarding same.
SECTION 21-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-37
1:407
SECTION 21-38. through SECTION 21-41. (Reserved)
B. Any law enforcement personnel found to be violating any provision of
this Section shall be subject to the penalties as outlined in the Police
Department Manual of the City of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 21-37 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 21-38
1:408
ARTICLE III
City Jail
SECTION 21-42. City Jail.
That the prison is hereby abolished. All City prisoners shall be housed in
the Lafayette County Jail under the jurisdiction of the Sheriff of Lafayette
County.
SECTION 21-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 21-42
1:409
Chapter 22
RAILROADS
State Law References — Authority to regulate railroads, RSMo. § 77.540;
Powers of council relative to railroads, RSMo. § 77.200.
SECTION 22-1. Climbing on Cars.
If any person shall, within the City, climb upon, hold to or in any manner
attach himself to any locomotive, engine or car while the same is in motion,
he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that this Section
shall not apply to any employee of the railroad company, nor to any
passenger, nor to any other person who may be acting by permission or
under the rules of the company then operating the railroad.
SECTION 22-2. Speed Limit.85
No locomotive engineer, railroad employee or other person shall cause
any locomotive engine, railroad passenger car or freight car to be driven,
propelled or run, upon or along any railroad track within the City at a
greater speed than the rate of twenty (20) miles per hour.
SECTION 22-3. Use of Warning Signals.86
Any person having charge of any railroad engine, who shall fail or neglect
to ring the bell or sound the whistle of such engine before starting to
move across or along any street, avenue, highway or public road in the
City, or who shall fail or neglect to ring the bell or sound the whistle when
approaching any such street, avenue, highway, or public road crossing, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 22-4. Obstructing Crossings.
No railroad company, or its agents or employees shall permit a locomotive
engine or train, or any part thereof, to occupy or obstruct any street
crossing in the City for a greater length of time than fifteen (15) minutes.
SECTION 22-5. Construction, Maintenance of Crossings.87
All railroad companies using, constructing or occupying any railroad track,
on any street, alley or thoroughfare in the City, shall keep such street, alley
or thoroughfare in repair, and shall, when such street, alley or thoroughfare
intersects any other street, alley or thoroughfare, construct, build and keep
in constant repair good and sufficient crossings at the intersection of such
streets, alleys or thoroughfares. Such crossings shall be constructed of such
material and in such a manner as the City Council may by ordinance direct.
85.State Law References — Authority to regulate speed of railroad engines, RSMo. § 77.540.
86.State Law References — Bell, whistle at crossings, RSMo. § 389.990.
87.State Law References — Crossings generally, RSMo. § 389.610.
SECTION 21-42 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22-6
1:410
SECTION 22-6. Warning Devices at Crossings — Signboards.
Every railroad corporation, company or person operating any railroad, or
running engines or cars through the City shall cause signboards to be
placed, well supported by posts or otherwise, and constantly maintained
across each traveled street where the same is crossed by such railroad. Said
signboards shall be elevated so as not to obstruct travel, and to be easily
seen by travelers, and on each side of such signboard shall be painted, in
capital letters, the words "Railroad Crossing-Look Out for Cars", or such
other warning as to sufficiently attract attention. The letters so painted on
such signboards shall be at least nine (9) inches in length, and of sufficient
width to appropriately correspond with their length.
SECTION 22-7. Warning Devices at Crossings — Barricades.
Every railroad company which has railroad tracks which run through the
City or any portion thereof shall be required to erect, place or construct
such barricades or other warning devices as shall be required by the City
Council at all such crossings within the streets, alleys or other public ways
within the City. Upon notice by registered mail, return receipt requested,
from the City to any such railroad company directing such company to
erect, place or construct such warning devices, it shall be unlawful for such
railroad company to fail to do so within sixty (60) days after receipt of such
notice.
SECTION 22-8. Headlight Required.88
No conductor, engineer, fireman, brakeman, switchman, yardmaster or
other person in charge of any locomotive, tender, car or train of cars, shall,
after dark, run or move, or cause or permit to be run or moved, for any
purposes whatever, within the City, any such locomotive, tender, car, or train
of cars, without having a brilliant and conspicuous light placed in front of
the same, facing the direction in which the same may be moving, whether
running or moving forward or backward.
Chapter 22A
SIGNS
88.State Law References — Headlight requirements, RSMo. § 389.900.
SECTION 22-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22-8
1:411

ARTICLE I
Garage Sale Signs
SECTION 22A-1. Unlawful to Post any Sign — When. [Ord. 81-14
§ 1, 11-17-1981]
It is and shall be unlawful to post, tack, attach or display any sign, bill,
advertisement, poster of notice any place within the corporate limits of
the City of Lexington for any purpose whatsoever without the consent of
the owners. This Chapter shall not affect the right of all citizens to the
unfettered use of their own property.
SECTION 22A-2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 81-14 § 2, 11-17-1981;
Ord. No. 2005-20 § 1, 6-14-2005]
Any person or persons, group, organization or corporation shall have and
obtain from the City Clerk a permit prior to any and all sales of goods,
furniture, clothing, appliances or personal property of every kind, size,
shape, color or description which sale is not in the ordinary course of
business. Said sales are commonly referred to as garage sales, yard sales,
patio sales, porch sales and the like.
SECTION 22A-3. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 81-14 § 3,
11-17-1981]
The application for permit containing a surety bond for damages must be
filed with the City Clerk, in writing, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
the commencement of the sale, declaring the following information:
SECTION 22A-4. Term for Permit. [Ord. No. 81-14 § 4, 11-17-1981;
Ord. No. 2005-20 § 1, 6-14-2005]
Permits shall be issued for one (1) to five (5) consecutive day periods upon
presentation of a proper application as above described and the payment of
a one dollar ($1.00) permit fee. No person or persons, group, organization
1. Date(s) of sale;
2. Address of sale;
3. Every and all person(s) involved in the sale;
4. Exact time of opening and closing each day;
5. The number, size, description and exact location of all publicly posted
bills, signs or advertising posters.
6. Name of person, group, organization or corporation responsible.
7. Signed by an individual citizen and resident of Lexington, Missouri, who
shall be personally and financially responsible for any violation of this
Chapter.
SECTION 22A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-4
1:413
or corporation shall have more than one (1) garage sale, yard sale, patio
sale, porch sale or the like per month.
SECTION 22A-5. Contents of Sign. [Ord. No. 81-14 § 5, 11-17-1981]
All signs, posters, bills or advertisements posted within the public purview
shall contain the name, address and phone number of the person or
persons, organization, group, family or corporation holding such sale as
well as the name, address and phone number of the person signing the
application and bond for permit.
SECTION 22A-6. Signs to be Removed within Twenty-four Hours.
[Ord. No. 81-14 § 6, 11-17-1981]
All such signs, posters, bills or advertisements shall be removed, taken
down, destroyed or properly disposed of in an appropriate trash receptacle
within twenty-four (24) hours after the close of the sale.
SECTION 22A-7. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. 81-14 § 7,
11-17-1981]
Any violation of this Chapter is herewith declared to be and shall be a
misdemeanor punishable under Section 1-8, the general penalty section of
this Code.
SECTION 22A-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-7
1:414
ARTICLE II
Exterior Signs
SECTION 22A-8. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
The purpose of this Article is to regulate all exterior signs erected or
installed, after February 8, 2000, so as to protect the property values as well
as the character of the various zoning districts in the City, to protect health,
safety and morals and to promote the public welfare. It is the intention of
this Article to regulate the design, construction, location and maintenance
of all signs, both for appearance and safety, and to provide for the removal
of unsafe, unsightly and unlawful signs and to enhance the appearance and
economy of the City and to not negatively effect the City's tourism industry.
SECTION 22A-9. Definitions. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms shall be deemed to have
the meanings indicated below:
ADVERTISING SIGN — Any sign that advertises, promotes or gives
information on products, events or businesses not conducted within the
premises or location upon which the sign is located.
APPLICANT — Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership
and the like, singular or plural.
AREA — The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the
extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved,
spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis
of actual surface area. The computation for sign composed of individual
letters, numerals, or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the
smallest rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing each of said
letter or devices. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area
of one (1) face only. Double-faced signs shall be so constructed that the
perimeter of both faces coincide and are parallel and not more than twentyfour
(24) inches apart.
AWNING — A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall
of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework.
Minimum height seven (7) feet and maximum height eleven (11) feet.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to or projecting from a building at a
ninety degree (90°) angle, and is made an integral part of the building. The
sign can be no more than twenty-four (24) square feet.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The City Inspector, or his agent, of the
City of Lexington is charged with the administration and enforcement of the
sign ordinance.
DETACHED SIGN TYPE "A" — Any freestanding sign, which has a clearance
of less than ten (10) feet.
SECTION 22A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-9
1:415
DETACHED SIGN TYPE "B" — Any freestanding sign, which has clearance
of ten (10) or more feet, Commercial/Industrial districts only. Maximum
height of twenty (20) feet, sign to be a maximum of one hundred (100)
square feet.
DETACHED SIGN TYPE "C" — Any monument-type identification sign,
which rises from the ground, illuminated or non-illuminated, and generally
has no clearance under it.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hand, place, suspend or affix and shall
also include the painting of signs on the exterior of a structure.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by uprights, braces, poles,
or other vertical members in or upon the ground and not attached to a
building.
FRONTAGE — The length of the lot along the abutting street. The front of
the lot abutting more than one (1) street is considered separate for each
street.
GROUND SIGN — Any detached sign on the same lot or parcel for the
purpose of indicating the name of the business, service, article or product
offered, and which has its bottom portion erected upon or supported by the
ground, a ground planter box or other support.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign giving the name and address of a building,
business, development or establishment. Such signs may be wholly or partly
devoted to a readily recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which is lighted by use of electricity or
other artificial light. Illuminated signs shall be oriented so as to prevent
casting light onto residential properties.
LETTER DISPLAY — Individual letter mounted on a parapet wall.
LOCATION — A lot, premises, building, wall, property, or any place
whatsoever upon which a sign is located.
MANSARD ROOF — A roof, which appears to be a part of the wall, usually
constructed for appearance only.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY — A covering structure projecting from and
attached to a building, or self supporting and/or which can be retracted or
Residential requirements. Minimum height three (3) feet, maximum
height six (6) feet, sign to be a maximum of twelve (12) square feet and
six (6) feet from the curb edge or property line.
1.
Commercial requirements. Minimum height three (3) feet, sign to be a
maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet.
2.
RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS — Maximum height of six (6) feet, sign
to be a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet.
1.
COMMERCIAL REQUIREMENTS — Maximum height of ten (10) feet,
sign to be a maximum of forty (40) square feet.
2.
SECTION 22A-9 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-9
1:416
rolled to the structure by which it is supported. Minimum height of seven
(7) feet and a maximum height of eleven (11) feet.
NON-ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which is lighted by natural sunlight
only.
PAINTED WALL SIGN — A sign which is painted directly on a structure.
Maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign constructed to remain indefinitely.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign which is not permanently affixed to one (1)
location and has the capability of being moved from one (1) site to the next
without disassembly. Portable signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
PREMISES — That portion of a lot or building occupied by a single
occupant, exclusive of common area, if any, shared with adjacent occupants.
Permitted sign area shall be separately calculated for multi-tenant,
commercial buildings only when said tenants have a separate entrance for
their exclusive use.
ROOF LEVEL — Where the eaves of the roof connect to the top of the
wall, except where a mansard roof is used. Mansard roof level shall be the
uppermost elevation of the roof.
SIGN — The term sign shall mean and include every sign, name, number,
identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration or insignia and structure
supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any
building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land
and which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business.
STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for the sign,
including foundations where applicable.
SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE MARKER — A sign identifying the subdivision,
located at one (1) or more of the subdivision entrances. Maximum of twentyfour
(24) square feet.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not permanently attached to the
ground, building or other load-bearing structure. Temporary signs are
intended to be displayed for a short period of time not to exceed thirty (30)
days.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to or erected against an exterior wall of a
building or structure, which projects not more than twelve (12) inches from
a wall and presents only one (1) face of advertising copy to the public.
1. Commercial requirements. Maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
2. Residential requirements. Maximum of four (4) square feet.
SECTION 22A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-10
1:417
SECTION 22A-10. Responsibility for Violation. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1,
2-8-2000]
The applicant, the owner of the sign, the owner of the land or structure, and
the person in charge of erecting the sign or structure are all subject to the
provisions of this Article and therefore subject to the penalty hereinafter
provided.
SECTION 22A-11. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1,
2-8-2000]
Any applicant, person, firm and corporation or other entity violating the
provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
SECTION 22A-12. Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay a
building permit fee to the City of Lexington. Any changes made to the sign
other than maintenance shall require a new building permit. The fee shall
be based on the permit fee schedule of Section 6-30. The minimum permit
fee for any sign shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The area of the sign shall be
calculated from the geometry of the extreme limits of one (1) face.
SECTION 22A-13. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
A permit will not be required for the following listed signs. These
exemptions, however, shall apply only to the requirement of the permit
and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility for its erection, maintenance, appearance and removal.
1. Construction project signs.
a. One (1) per street frontage.
b. To be removed at completion of construction.
c. To be located on premises.
2. For sale or for rent signs.
a. One (1) per street frontage.
b. To be removed within ten (10) days after sale or letting.
c. To be located on premises.
d. Not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face.
3. Political signs.
SECTION 22A-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-13
1:418
a. Shall be placed back of the property line on private property.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to have these
signs removed not later than seven (7) days after the election or
event and they shall not be erected earlier than sixty (60) days
prior to the election or event to which they pertain.
c. There shall be no political signs on any public utility pole.
4. Traffic or other municipal signs or informational signs.
a. Legal notice, railroad crossing signs, danger, warning and such
temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs necessary for
traffic control or as may be approved by the City Council. Each sign
shall not be more than six (6) square feet per sign face, nor exceed
a height of ten (10) feet from the ground level.
5. Memorial signs.
a. Names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze or other metal.
6. Temporary signs.
a. For public, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations including
banners and cloth signs.
b. One (1) per street frontage.
c. To be located on premises or off premises.
d. To be placed no sooner than forty-five (45) days prior to the event
and to be removed within ten (10) days following the event.
7. Church or school signs.
a. One (1) illuminated or non-illuminated sign per church or school,
on church or school premises, indicating activities and services
therein provided and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet per
side.
8. Residential development signs.
a. Residential developments shall be permitted two (2) detached signs
type "C", identifying the name of the development only for each
entrance of the development. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area. Said sign shall be maintained on private
property, no closer than ten (10) feet to the property line.
9. Plaques.
a. Plaques or signs denoting historical landmarks or points of interest
as may by recommended by HPC.
10. Subdivision real estate signs.
SECTION 22A-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-13
1:419
SECTION 22A-14. Revocation of Permits. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1,
2-8-2000]
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any
permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the
provisions of this Article or any amendment hereto.
SECTION 22A-15. Application for a Sign Permit. [Ord. No. 99-52
§ 1, 2-8-2000]
Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Inspector or his
designee upon a form provided by said Building Inspector and shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to insure compliance
with all appropriate laws and regulations of the City including, but not
limited to:
a. Shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet per sign face and shall
be maintained in good repair and shall be removed when ninetyfive
percent (95%) of the lots in said subdivision have been sold.
b. One (1) sign per subdivision entrance.
c. Each subdivision may have one (1) off-premises sign located within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior boundary of the
subdivision.
1. Name, address, and business license number of permit applicant.
2. Name and address of owner of sign.
3. Name and address of the owner and the occupant of the premises
where the sign is located or to be located.
4. Clear and legible drawings with description showing the precise
location of the sign which is the subject of the permit and all other
existing signs on the same premise or permit and all other existing
signs on the same premise or as otherwise specified by the Building
Inspector or his designee.
5. Drawings showing the dimensions, construction supports, sizes,
materials of the sign, and method of attachment and character of
structural members to which attachment is to be made.
6. Any other information required by the Building Inspector or his
designee.
The Building Inspector or his designee shall issue a permit for work
to be done on a sign when an application therefor has been properly
made and the sign complies with all appropriate laws and regulations
of the City.
SECTION 22A-13 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-16
1:420
SECTION 22A-16. Signs Allowed. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
The following sign standards shall apply in the City of Lexington. Only signs
as described herein and as may be described under Section 22A-13 shall be
permitted.
SECTION 22A-17. Non-Conforming Existing Signs. [Ord. No. 99-52
§ 1, 2-8-2000]
Signs that were erected before February 8,2000, may continue to exist and
be maintained in a safe manner, however, such non-conforming signs may
not be replaced, expanded, enlarged or modified to denote the change in the
type of business or a change in ownership or substantially improved other
than in compliance with these regulations.
1. Churches, public and semi-public buildings, hospitals and institutions in
residential districts may have only one (1) bulletin board not more than
thirty-two (32) square feet in area, nor exceed a total height of seven (7)
feet above grade at its base.
2. Only those signs permitted in (1), temporary signs not more than six (6)
square feet in area pertaining to lease or sale of premises and
nameplates when non-illuminated and not greater in area than four (4)
square feet are allowed in a residential district.
3. Detached signs. Each establishment may be allowed one (1) onpremises
detached sign. Establishments may be allowed an additional
on-premises detached sign, provided both signs are located a minimum
of one hundred twenty (120) feet from one another along the street
frontage of the tract of land. Establishments in commercial districts
may be allowed a third (3rd) detached sign, provided all signs are
located a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet from one another
along the street frontage of the tract of land. Signs in historical districts
must conform to the style of the surrounding properties as to not take
away from the historic value of the properties.
No part of the detached sign structure or its advertising content shall
be placed or extend into any street, street right-of-way or private
property other than the property owned by the establishment. Signs
along the street shall be located twenty (20) feet from the point of
intersection so as to not obstruct vision at an intersection or a vehicular
entry or exit from the property.
In all districts there shall be a setback of five (5) feet from the property
line of the tract of land owned by the establishment.
The sign surface area shall have a maximum of forty-eight (48) square
feet. The sign may be supported by posts or poles that do not exceed a
height of two (2) feet plus a planter box, if used, at least six (6) inches
but not more than twenty-four (24) inches average elevation in height.
The sign shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above the prevailing
grade, nor a length of eight (8) feet.
SECTION 22A-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-17
1:421
Any non-conforming sign, prior to February 8,2000, shall within a period of
ten (10) years be made to comply with all of the provisions of this Article
together with all other ordinances of the City applicable thereto, or be
removed. This Section shall not be applicable to a sign that has received a
variance for its particular location.
SECTION 22A-18. Engineering Design and Materials. [Ord. No.
99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
SECTION 22A-19. Inspection. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
SECTION 22A-20. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
Every sign or other advertising structure, together with all its supports
or braces, shall be kept in good repair. The sign location shall be free of
rubbish and weeds. All structural members and all copy areas are to be
kept painted and clean so as to prevent deterioration, oxidation, rust, paint
fading, paint peeling or other unsightly conditions. After thirty (30) days'
notice, in writing, the Building Inspector may order the removal of any sign
that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
A. All permanent signs, sign structures, and non-structural trim shall be
constructed of approved combustible or non-combustible materials.
B. Obstruction of Egress Openings, Ventilation. A sign shall not be
erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape
window, door, or other opening; or so as to prevent free passage. A sign
shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or
shall not be so placed as to interfere with an opening, which is required
for legal ventilation.
C. All electrical signs, either temporary or permanent, shall be connected
to permanent electrical service installed according to the requirements
of the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition. All wiring for newly
constructed detached signs shall be underground, unless this is
determined to be prohibited by the Building Inspector.
A. As soon as a sign has been erected, the permittee shall notify the
Building Inspector, who shall inspect such sign and approve the same if
it is in compliance with the provisions of this Article. The Building
Inspector for all signs having footings may require footing inspections.
B. Building Inspector may from time to time, as he deems necessary,
inspect all signs or other structures regulated by this Article for the
purpose of ascertaining whether they are secure or whether they are in
need of removal or repair. If the sign does not comply with the
provisions of this Chapter, the Building Inspector shall notify the
applicant in writing of such non-compliance and give the applicant
thirty (30) days, or less if the Building Inspector determines a
hazardous situation exists, to comply. All signs may be reinspected at
the discretion of the Building Inspector.
SECTION 22A-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-21
1:422
SECTION 22A-21. Abandoned Signs. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
Any sign, now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted or a product sold, shall be removed by the owner,
agent or lessee having the beneficial use of the building, structure or land
upon which such sign may be found. If the owner, agent or lessee fails to
remove the sign, the Building Inspector shall remove it in accordance with
Section 22A-22, "Removal". These removal provisions shall not apply where
a succeeding owner, agent or lessee conducts the same type of business, or
advertises a current product and agrees to maintain the signs as provided
for in Section 22A-20.
SECTION 22A-22. Removal. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1, 2-8-2000]
The Building Inspector shall order the removal of any sign erected in
violation of this Article, or any existing sign which has been abandoned, or
where lack of maintenance has created a hazard to the public safety. Thirty
(30) days' notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner of such sign, or
the building, structure or premises on which sign is located, to remove the
sign or to bring it into compliance with this Article. Upon failure to remove
the sign or comply with this notice, the Building Inspector shall cause the
removal of the sign or removal incurred by the Building Inspector shall be
assessed to the owner of the property on which sign is located and may be
collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and such
charges shall be a lien on the property. The Building Inspector may cause
any sign, which is an immediate peril to persons or property, to be removed
summarily without notice.
SECTION 22A-23. Appeals and Variances. [Ord. No. 99-52 § 1,
2-8-2000]
Within the purview of its jurisdiction, the Board of Adjustment is
empowered to review or modify the Building Inspector's, or his designee's,
order or determination with respect to signs covered by this Chapter and
may consider variances as provided by law.
SECTION 22A-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 22A-23
1:423
Chapter 23
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC
WORKS INCLUDING WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWER
DEPARTMENT
Cross References — City bench mark established, § 2-3; Street and alley
committee established, § 2-249; Obstructions and filth on public ways
declared a nuisance, § 18-93; Unsafe sidewalks, gutters and curbstones
declared a nuisance, § 18-96; Parks and recreation, § 19-1 et seq.; Planning
and zoning generally, § 20-1 et seq.; Subdivisions, § 24-1 et seq.; Water
and sewers, § 28-1 et seq.; Building inspector/code enforcement
officer — authorized to enforce ch. 23, § 2-209.
State Law Reference — Control of streets and sidewalks, RSMo. § 77.520.
SECTION 22A-23 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 22A-23
1:424
ARTICLE I
In General89
SECTION 23-1. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Grounds. [RSMo.
77.520; Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1, 2-24-2009]
The City Council may prohibit and prevent all encroachments into and
upon the sidewalks, streets, avenues, alleys and other public places of
the City and may provide for the removal of all obstructions from the
sidewalks, curbstones, gutters and crosswalks at the expense of the owners
or occupants of the ground fronting thereon or at the expense of the person
causing the same; the Council may also regulate the planting of shade trees,
erecting of awnings, hitching posts, lampposts, awning posts, telephone,
telegraph and electric light poles and the making of excavations through
and under the sidewalks or in any public street, avenue, alley or other public
place within the City.
SECTION 23-2. Obstruction of and on Public Ways — Nuisance.
[Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1, 2-24-2009]
A. Obstructions — Nuisance. All obstructions caused or placed on any
street, sidewalk or public alley and all wood, barrels, crates, lumber,
bricks, stones, dirt, filth, slops, vegetable matter, grass clippings,
leaves, branches or other articles placed or thrown by any person on or
in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place which in any way may
cause, or is liable to cause, danger, injury, inconvenience or annoyance
to the public within the City is hereby declared a nuisance.
B. Exceptions.
1. Merchants may use three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to and in
front of their buildings for the purpose of displaying their wares
and merchandise.
2. Persons receiving or discharging any article in the way of regular
business unless such articles are permitted to remain more than
two (2) hours upon any square, street, alley or sidewalk.
3. Any person may use the squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks in the
construction of any new building, or in the removal, repair or
alteration of any building, or for the purpose of piling thereon
building materials or tools, provided such person shall first have
obtained the written permission of the Mayor or the Mayor's
designee to use such squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks for such
purposes.
4. Obstructions or barricades deemed necessary by the City.
89.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2009-08 § 1, adopted February 24, 2009, repealed sections
23-1 — 23-2, 23-4 and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections
23-1 — 23-2, 23-4 derived from ord. of 5-5-1970 § 17; rev. ord. no. 34 § 71, 10-21-1912;
ord. no. 80-11 § 1, 8-12-1980.
SECTION 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-2
1:425
SECTION 23-3. Adjacent Property Owners to Keep Sidewalks Clean,
Free of Debris, Snow, Ice, etc. [Rev. Ord. No. 34, § 71, 10-21-1912;
Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 2019-07, 2-12-2019]
5. Regulatory, information or direction signs, kiosks.
6. Sidewalk cafes when approved by the City Council.
7. Displays during fairs or public events approved by the City Council.
8. Daytime only sidewalk sales by merchants in front of their
buildings.
C. Sidewalk Blockage. In no case shall sidewalks be blocked so as to
prohibit:
1. The normal flow of traffic including both foot and wheelchair
access.
2. Access to fire hydrants or other safety devices.
3. Street crossings.
A. Generally. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to keep the
sidewalk, curbing and gutters abutting real property owned, occupied
or possessed by him/her swept clean of mud, filth, dirt, snow, grass
cuttings, and clear and clean from weeds, grass or any substances
which are unhealthy or unsafe shall be deemed as maintaining a public
nuisance.
B. Snow/Ice Removal From Sidewalks. Property owners, lessees or
occupants, are responsible for the removal of the natural accumulations
of snow and ice from any public sidewalk abutting their business,
residential, or other property within the City of Lexington.
1. Business District Sidewalks.
a. Sidewalks on the following streets are hereby defined as
business district sidewalks:
(1) Main Street, from Highland Ave, East to 16th Street.
(2) Franklin Street, from Highland Ave, East to 14th Street.
(3) South Street, where sidewalks installed, from 9th Street
East to 14th Street.
(4) 8th Street, from Main to Franklin.
(5) 9th Street, from first alley North of Main, South to
Franklin.
(6) 10th Street, from first alley North of Main Street South to
South Street.
SECTION 23-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-3
1:426
(7) 11th Street, from first alley North of Main Street, South to
South Street.
(8) 12th Street, from first alley North of Main Street, South to
South Street.
(9) 13th Street/Business Hwy 13, from Main Street, South to
Francis Avenue.
(10) 14th Street, from Main Street, South to Franklin.
In the event snow and/or ice remains on a business district
sidewalk for more than eighteen (18) hours after the snow stops
falling or after ice forms, as determined by the City, then the City
may issue a citation to the abutting property owner, lessee or
occupant of the property for non-compliance with this Section. The
City may also remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk.
2. All Public Sidewalks Other Than Business District Sidewalks. In the
event snow and/or ice remains on any public sidewalk other than a
business district sidewalk for more than thirty six (36) hours after
the snow stops falling or after ice forms, as determined by the City,
then the City may issue a citation to the abutting property owner,
lessee, or occupant of the property for non-compliance with this
Section. The City may also remove the snow or ice from the
sidewalk.
C. Abatement Procedures.
1. Snow and ice on a sidewalk is deemed to present an immediate
public risk to safety for pedestrians due to the high probability of
injury from falls on the exposed surfaces of snow or ice. Therefore
the seven (7) day notice of abatement does not apply. (RSMo
67.398)
2. If the person so notified does not abate the nuisance within the time
period specified, a duly appointed official of the City may proceed
to abate or have the nuisance abated. Entry upon any premises or
property made to abate any nuisance as described above shall be
lawful and shall not constitute trespass.
3. If the duly appointed official of the City causes such condition to be
removed or abated, the cost of removal or abatement and the proof
of notice to the owner of the property shall be certified to the City
Clerk who shall cause the certified cost to be included in a special
tax bill or added to the annual real estate tax bill, at the collecting
official’s option, for the property and the certified cost shall be
collected by the City Collector or other official collecting taxes in
the same manner and procedure for collecting real estate taxes. If
the certified cost is not paid, the tax bill shall be considered
delinquent, and the collection of the delinquent bill shall be
governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes. The tax
SECTION 23-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-3
1:427
SECTION 23-4. Maintenance and Repair of Sidewalks. [RSMo.
88.890; RSMo. 88.877; Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1, 2-24-2009]
bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt
against the owner and shall also be a lien on the property from the
date the tax bill is delinquent until paid.
4. Notice of the lien shall be mailed to the owner. Failure of the City
Clerk to record the lien claim or to mail any such notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose such lien for charges as provided in Sections 18-119 and
18-120.
D. Dumping Of Snow. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push or place
or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private
property, sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or
alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon
the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except
where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business
district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or
alley temporarily, the accumulation shall be removed promptly by the
property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of the
accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
E. Violation. Violation of any part of this Section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and any person convicted of violating this Section may be
punished as provided in Section 18-122 of this Code. Each day for which
a violation exists beyond the abatement period provided herein shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Maintenance And Repair.
1. No property owner shall permit any sidewalk dedicated to public
use and enjoyment, which abuts property owned by that person, to
fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. Said property owner
shall have the responsibility for maintenance, repair, construction
and upkeep of all such sidewalks.
2. All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones, within the City, permitted to
remain in any unsafe condition or out of repair by any person
required by ordinance to keep the same in good condition and
repair are hereby declared a nuisance.
B. Property owner Notification of Unsafe Sidewalk.
1. Whenever the City Building Inspector or his designee determines
that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice shall be given to the
property owner or his representatives or by publication of the lot or
premises adjacent to and abutting upon said sidewalk of such
determination. Said notice shall be given in writing and delivered
by U.S. mail or in person by the Building Inspector or designee or
published in the local newspaper. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of
SECTION 23-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-4
1:428
SECTION 23-5. Coasting on Handsleds or Skates. [Rev. Ord. No. 34,
§ 24, 10-21-1912; Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1, 2-24-2009]
Except in or on streets, or other places specially designated by the City
Marshal for that purpose, any person within the City who shall coast upon
any handsled or skates in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 23-6. through SECTION 23-14. (Reserved)
the owner to place said sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice
shall specify a reasonable time, but not more than thirty (30) days,
within which such work shall be commenced and shall further
provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the
owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair said
sidewalk within the time limit or in a manner otherwise than in
accordance with this Section, the Building Inspector shall have said
sidewalk repaired. The cost of repairs hereunder shall be levied
as a special assessment against the premises which said sidewalk
abuts and adjoins.
2. Any person who shall, after having been notified as above, fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with said order, shall be guilty of an
offense, and shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.
SECTION 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-6
1:429

ARTICLE II
Street Commissioner
SECTION 23-15. Office Created. [Rev. Ord. No. 12, § 1, 10-21-1912]
The office of Street Commissioner is hereby created.
SECTION 23-16. (Reserved)90
SECTION 23-17. Qualifications. [Rev. Ord. No. 12 § 3, 10-21-1912]
The person appointed to the office of Street Commissioner shall possess a
thorough and practical knowledge of the latest and most approved methods
of street improvement, and of the work and material required and tools used
in the opening, widening, grading, guttering and paving of streets, alleys
and sidewalks, and also a practical knowledge of the work to be done and
material used in the construction of drains, sewers, culverts and bridges.
He shall be sober and industrious, a qualified voter of the City and during
his term of office shall reside therein.
SECTION 23-18. (Reserved)91
SECTION 23-19. (Reserved)92
SECTION 23-20. General Duties. [Rev. Ord. No. 12, § 5, 10-21-1912;
Ord. No. 2009-19 § I, 4-14-2009]
A. It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to superintend the
construction of all public works ordered by the City Council, to make
out the plans, specifications and estimates for such public work as may
be required by the Council, to perform engineering ordered by the City
Council and to employ such labor as may be necessary and oversee the
same.
B. He shall personally superintend and direct all the labor required to be
done in the opening, widening, grading, guttering, paving or other
improvement of any street, alley, City installed sidewalk or
thoroughfare of the City.
C. He shall give his personal attention to and direct the labor employed in
the construction of any building, bridge, culvert, drain or sewer or in
the improvement of any public place, whenever required by ordinance
or resolution of the Council.
90.Editor's Note — Ord. No. 95-06 adopted on 4-11-1995 repealed § 23-16 which originally
derived from Rev. Ord. No. 12 § 2, 10-21-1912.
91.Editor's Note — Ord. No. 95-06 adopted on 4-11-1995 repealed § 23-18 which originally
derived from Rev. Ord. No. 12 § 3, 10-21-1912.
92.Editor's Note — Ord. No. 95-06 adopted on 4-11-1995 repealed § 23-19 which originally
derived from Rev. Ord. No. 12 § 3, 10-21-1912.
SECTION 23-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-20
1:431
SECTION 23-21. Purchases. [Rev. Ord. No. 12, § 7, 10-21-1912]
The Street Commissioner shall keep an accurate and itemized account of all
purchases made by him, and of all services rendered by those in his employ
or under his control, and shall certify to the correctness of all accounts for
purchases made by him.
SECTION 23-22. Care and Custody of Property. [Rev. Ord. No. 12,
§ 8, 10-21-1912]
The Street Commissioner shall have the care and custody of all tools,
machinery, implements and other property of the City, or those under his
control in the performance of his duties, and shall be held responsible for
their loss and abuse.
D. He is hereby authorized to make such repairs on the streets and alleys
of the City as may be immediately necessary for the safety and
convenience of the public.
E. He shall see that all streets, alleys, gutters, drains and sewers are kept
free from obstructions and in a clean conditions.
F. He shall, when in the course of his duties, observe any accumulation of
snow, ice, mud, filth, debris or other offensive matter or anything
calculated to impede the free and unobstructed passage of pedestrians
on public sidewalks, notify the Nuisance Enforcement Officer and
request enforcement of City ordinance, Chapter 23, Sections 23-2 and
23-3 to eliminate such obstructions.
G. He shall have general supervision over the streets, alleys and public
places of the City and recommend to the Council from time to time any
necessary improvements therein.
H. He shall report to the City Engineer/Building Inspector, for his
information and action, any sidewalk/s in the City that are not kept in
good condition and repair.
SECTION 23-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-22
1:432
ARTICLE III
Department of Public Works
SECTION 23-23. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2012-26 § 1, 8-14-2012]
The Department of Public Works will include the Street Department, the
Water Department and the Sewer Department. The office of Director of
Public Works may be occupied by one (1) person designated by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council.
SECTION 23-24. Powers. [Ord. No. 2012-26 § 1, 8-14-2012]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to act as department
head for all said departments and to supervise the construction, operation,
and maintenance of public works as ordered by the Mayor and the City
Council with the aid and assistance of such consultants as the City may
provide to oversee the operation of the department, supervision of
employees, discipline, and discharge or terminate employment. The
Director of Public Works will supervise all labor required to be done in
said departments. To give his personal attention to direct the labor in the
department, make such repairs to the public facilities as may be necessary
for the convenience, safety, and well-being of the public, to keep the same
in good operation, free of obstructions, and in a clean condition; to protect
themselves from the weather elements, including flood, and to provide
general supervision over the Sewer and Water Departments, as well as
streets and alleyways. The Director of Public Works will delegate authority
as necessary to foster efficient operation of each department.
SECTION 23-25. Duties. [Ord. No. 2012-26 § 1, 8-14-2012]
The Director of Public Works shall report to the City Engineer for
information and action to be taken, and to the City Administrator, and in his
absence to the Mayor, and keep facilities in good operating condition and
repair.
SECTION 23-26. Account of all Purchases. [Ord. No. 2012-26 § 1,
8-14-2012]
The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate and itemized account
of all purchases made for public works and all services rendered by all
those under his supervision and certify the correctness of all amounts for
purchases and expenditures under the procurement ordinances and policies
of the City of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 23-27. Authority Over Care and Custody of Supplies. [Ord.
No. 2012-26 § 1, 8-14-2012]
The Director of Public Works shall have ultimate authority over the care and
custody of all tools, machinery, implements, supplies, and other property
of the City of Lexington, Missouri, or those under the Director's control in
performance of his duties.
SECTION 23-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-28
1:433
SECTION 23-28. through SECTION 23-33. (Reserved)
SECTION 23-28 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-28
1:434
ARTICLE IV
Excavations
SECTION 23-34. Permit Required. [Ord. of 11-2-1971, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or otherwise dig in any public
thoroughfare, street, alley or other City property without first obtaining a
permit therefor.
SECTION 23-35. Written Application to be Filed Prior to Making
Excavation; Contents of Request. [Ord. of 11-2-1971, § 2; Ord. No.
2004-04 § 1, 2-10-2004]
Any person desiring to excavate or otherwise dig in any public
thoroughfare, street, alley or other City property for any purpose
whatsoever shall file a written request application which shall set out in
detail the specifications of the proposed excavations along with the specific
area in which such excavations are to be made. A minimum of directional
boring under the thoroughfares, streets, alleys or other City property will
be required, however City Council may waive the boring requirement.
SECTION 23-36. Inspection of Proposed Excavation; Approval or
Disapproval. [Ord. of 11-2-1971, § 2]
The proposed excavation and area shall be inspected by the Mayor or
a person properly authorized by the Mayor to make said inspection and
written approval or disapproval of the proposed excavation shall be filed
with the City Clerk and shall bear the signature of the person making the
inspection.
SECTION 23-37. Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 80-20, § 2, 11-3-1980]
Upon approval of a proposed excavation by the Mayor or other authorized
person, the person desiring to make the excavation shall pay a permit fee to
the City Collector in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall
obtain a receipt therefor.
SECTION 23-38. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. of 11-2-1971, § 2]
The City Clerk shall only issue a permit for a proposed excavation upon
presentation of the receipt from the City Collector, approval of the proposed
excavation by the person inspecting the proposed excavation and payment
of one dollar ($1.00), City Clerk fee for the issuance of the permit.
SECTION 23-39. Restoration of Surface; Inspection. [Ord. of
11-2-1971, § 2; Ord. No. 2009-31 § 1, 8-11-2009]
The person making an excavation shall return and restore the area within
fourteen (14) days of the permit issuance date to in as good a condition
as it was prior to the excavation and shall have the same inspected by the
Street Commissioner, Mayor or a person properly authorized by the Mayor
SECTION 23-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-39
1:435
to make the inspection. For each violation penalties shall be chargeable to
the applicant at a rate of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
day and not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for so
long as the violation continues.
SECTION 23-40. Cutting of Streets; Requires a Bond and/or
Security Deposit for Repair and Restoration; Standards for
Restoration; Penalty Provision. [Ord. No. 03-85-2004, §§ 1-8,
3-5-1985; Ord. No. 88-24 § 2, 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 2004-30 § 1,
11-9-2004; Ord. No. 2009-18 § 1, 4-14-2009]
A. No individual, firm, corporation, utility department or other entity
whatsoever shall make an opening in any street or alley of the City of
Lexington, unless the City Clerk has issued a duly authorized permit. A
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for said permit shall be required as
set out in Section 23-37.
B. Cutting, backfilling and restoring street or alley surfaces shall be under
the supervision of the Street Superintendent or his designee. The
following procedures are to be used when opening streets or alleys: The
street shall be cut twelve (12) inches wider than the trench on each
side. All street and alley crossings shall be backfilled with one (1) inch
size clean MoDot Type I rock, four (4) feet back of curb to four (4) feet
back from the edge of the asphalt. Job excavated material may be used
for compacted backfill (outside of street or alley right-of-ways) when the
job excavated material is finely divided and free from debris, organic
material, cinders or other corrosive material and stones larger than
three (3) inches in greatest dimension. Large masses of moist, stiff clay
shall not be used. Job excavated material shall be compacted to ninetyfive
percent (95%) of maximum density at optimum moisture content as
determined by ASTM D698 when the test is appropriate or to seventy
percent (70%) relative density as determined by ASTM D2049 when
that test is appropriate. See reference drawing street patch details. The
concrete should not exceed seven (7) inches thick with a mix of 3500
PSI with no reinforcing steel, with a minimum cap of two (2) inches of
hot asphalt to street level. Oil and sealed alleys shall be filled to within
two (2) inches of surface with one (1) inch rock with fines; then filled to
surface with cold mix.
SECTION 23-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-40
1:436
STREET PATCH DETAIL
C. The permit holder shall present to the City Clerk the permit card signed
by the Street Superintendent or his representative certifying as to the
completion of the work in accordance with the ordinances of the City of
Lexington.
D. In the event that the work is not approved by the Street
Superintendent, permit holder shall, within three (3) days from the time
such notice of deficiency is given, replace the work in accordance with
the conditions and requirements herein contained and set out further in
this Chapter. In the event of failure to comply with the deficiency notice
stating intent on the part of the City to contract for whatever remedial
work is necessary and required, the permit holder shall be fully,
completely, absolutely and unequivocally liable and shall pay the total
cost of the contract and any other expenses involved in repairing the
street and putting it back in condition as set out herein and in the other
provisions of this Chapter.
E. The permit holder, at his expense, shall maintain at all times during the
progress of the work suitable barricades, fences, signs or other
adequate protection for the public safety, and shall maintain such
danger lights, signals or flagmen as may be necessary to insure safety
to the public. In the event the above safety measures are not complied
with and the City is required to furnish necessary safety devices, the
permit holder will be responsible for indemnity to the City for all
reasonable costs associated therewith.
SECTION 23-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-40
1:437
F. The permit holder shall assume any and all liability in regard to any
excavations and shall execute and deliver his contractual agreement
wherein he indemnifies the City and holds the City of Lexington free
from damages in any manner.
G. The permit holder shall, as a condition precedent to receiving his
permit to open the street, be required to execute and deliver to the City
of Lexington, his full and satisfactory performance bond in cash or
corporate surety in an amount sufficient to reasonably insure the
proper, effective and successful completion of the project and assuring
the City of his complete and absolute financial responsibility for
replacement and repair of the street as set out in Section 23-39 of the
ordinances of Lexington and in this Chapter. Posting of the performance
bond is a condition precedent to the receipt of a permit under this
Section and is required prior to opening a basic area five (5) feet by five
(5) feet in dimension as well as an additional ditch tract of two feet (2)
by twelve and one-half (12 1/2) feet in dimension. The opening of
additional area will require posting of additional bond in accord with
the provisions of this Section. Bonds required to be posted shall
substantially comply with the following schedule:
1. For excavation or cutting a concrete or brick street, the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each linear
foot over the basic area; and
2. For excavation or cutting an asphalt, black top, oil top, hot mix or
macadam surface, the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
plus three dollars ($3.00) for each linear foot over the basic area;
and
3. For excavation or cutting a gravel, dirt or shale street, the sum of
one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) plus one dollar fifty
cents ($1.50) for each linear foot over the basic area.
SECTION 23-40 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-40
1:438
ARTICLE V
Public Right-of-Way
SECTION 23-41. Purpose and Necessity. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(1),
6-12-2001]
The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the interest
of public safety and welfare and right-of-ways are a fixed resource which
needs to be managed to maximize the preservation of essential services
to the inhabitants of Lexington, Missouri. In light of changes in the law
and technology, the City of Lexington expects an increase in the use and
excavation in the right-of-way, therefore the City of Lexington needs to
control and regulate the right-of-way to protect public safety and welfare.
Due to damages to the right-of-way caused by excavation, this accelerates
the end of the useful life of the pavement. The City of Lexington finds that
the demand to perform work in its public right-of-way by service providers
can be effectively administered through the issuance of a permit.
SECTION 23-42. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(2), 6-12-2001]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
ABANDONED FACILITIES — Those facilities owned by the ROW user that
are not is use and will not be utilized by the owner in the future.
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — The fee charged by the City to recover its cost
incurred for right-of-way management including, but not limited to, costs
associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing and verifying
right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
improvements; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
revoking right-of-way permits; and other costs the City may incur in
managing the provision of this Article.
APPLICANT — Any person requesting permission to occupy, lease or
operate facilities using the right-of-way or to excavate the right-of-way.
APPLICATION — The form designed by the City Engineer which an
applicant must use to obtain a permit.
AREA OF INFLUENCE — The area within one (1) foot around a street
excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by the excavation
and is subject to more rapid deterioration.
CONSTRUCT — Includes construct, install, erect, build, affix or otherwise
place any fixed structure or object in, on, under, through or above the rightof-
way.
DEGRADATION — The accelerated depreciation of a street caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the paved portion of the street that is
normally subject to vehicular traffic resulting in the need to reconstruct
such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not
occur.
SECTION 23-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-42
1:439
DEGRADATION AREA — The area of the excavation in the public right-ofway
and the area one (1) foot around the perimeter of the excavation.
EMERGENCY FACILITIES WORK — Facilities work made necessary by
unexpected emergency condition including, but not limited to, the
following:
EXCAVATE — Includes any cutting, digging, excavating, tunneling, boring,
grading or alteration of the surface or subsurface material or earth in the
right-of-way.
FACILITY — Lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, conduit
facilities, poles, towers, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas,
transmitters, gates, meters, appurtenances or other equipment.
FACILITY-BASED SERVICE PROVIDER — A service provider owning or
possessing facilities in the right-of-way.
PARKWAY — The area between a property line and the street curb.
PAVEMENT — Includes Portland cement concrete pavement, asphalt
concrete pavement, asphalt treated road surfaces and any aggregate based
material.
PERSON — Any natural or corporate person, business association or
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing or any other
legal entity.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any project undertaken by the City for the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public
infrastructure and including, without limitation, streets, alleys, bridges,
bikeways, parkways, sidewalks, sewers, drainage facilities, traffic control
devices, street lights, public facilities, public buildings or public lands;
provided that projects undertaken by the City for the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public infrastructure funded
by or substantially by user fees imposed upon those using the public
infrastructure shall not be deemed "public improvements" and shall not be
exempt from the permit requirements of this Article.
An unexpected or unplanned outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other
failure of facilities that prevents or significantly jeopardized the ability
of a public utility to provide services to customers;
1.
An unexpected or unplanned outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other
failure of facilities that results or could result in danger to the public or
a material delay or hindrance to the provision of service to the public if
the outage, cut, rupture, leak or other such failure is not immediately
repaired, controlled, stabilized or rectified; or
2.
Any occurrence involving a facility that a reasonable person would
conclude, under the circumstances, warrants immediate and undelayed
action by the owner of the facility in order to protect the public and the
public rights-of-way.
3.
SECTION 23-42 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-42
1:440
PUBLIC LANDS — Any real property of the City that is not right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below or above the present and future City
streets, alleys, bridges, bikeways, parkways and sidewalks.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT — The authorization to excavate for the
construction, installation, repair or maintenance of any type of facility
within the right-of-way.
ROW USER — A person, its successors and assigns that uses the right-ofway
for purposes of work, excavation, provision of services or to install,
construct, maintain, repair facilities thereon including, but not limited to,
landowners and service providers. A ROW user shall not include ordinary
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or any governmental entity that has entered
into an inter-local agreement with the City regarding the use and occupancy
of the City's right-of-way (unless that governmental entity is acting as a
service provider in a proprietary capacity) or a reseller service provider that
does not own or control its own facilities in the right-of-way.
SERVICE — A commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery
system that is comprised of facilities located or to be located in the right-ofway
including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, internet
services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water,
telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines or sanitary sewerage.
SERVICE PROVIDER — Any person that is a provider of a service for
or without a fee that has the requisite certifications and authorizations
from applicable governmental entities, including the FCC (Federal
Communications Commission), to provide such service. Service providers
includes both facility-based service providers and reseller service providers.
SECTION 23-43. Policy. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(3), 6-12-2001]
SECTION 23-44. Administration. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(4),
6-12-2001]
The City Engineer is the principal City Official authorized to administer
right-of-way permits for work and excavations made in the right-of-way. The
City Engineer may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
A. It is the policy of the City to authorize any service provider to utilize the
right-of-way in a competitively neutral, non-discriminatory manner that
maximizes the efficient use of and conserves the right-of-way and
minimizes the burden on the right-of-way physically and aesthetically.
Any use of the right-of-way by a ROW user shall be subject to the terms
and conditions hereof in addition to applicable Federal, State or local
requirements.
B. This article also is designed to regulate occupancy and excavations in
the right-of-way by providing, among other things, for the issuance of
permits to construct, reconstruct, repair and maintain facilities within
the right-of-way in the City.
SECTION 23-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-45
1:441
SECTION 23-45. Requirements of Service Provider. [Ord. No.
2001-29 § 1(5), 6-12-2001]
Any person desiring to conduct facilities work within the public rightsof-
way must first apply for and obtain a permit, in addition to any other
building permit, license, easement or authorization required by law, unless
such facilities work is emergency facilities work. A person conducting
emergency facilities work shall as soon as practicable notify the City of
the location of the work and shall apply for the required permit by the
next business day following the commencement of such emergency facilities
work. A permit should be obtained for each project.
1. Any existing service provider must register within thirty (30) days of the
effective date of this Article.
2. Any person who is not an existing service provider prior to the effective
date of this Article and who wishes to become a service provider must
first register with the City.
3. The service provider shall report any changes in its registration
information within thirty (30) days.
4. No service provider shall be authorized to utilize the right-of-way in any
capacity or manner without registering and obtaining the necessary
right-of-way permit from the City. The permits shall be conspicuously
displayed at all times at the work site.
5. The information required for registration includes the following:
a. Identity and legal status of service provider, including related
affiliates.
b. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
c. The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person
whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning the
applicant's facilities work within the public right-of-way.
d. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
facilities if applicant is not the owner.
e. An engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the
applicant's facilities, including proposed manholes or poles; length,
size, type and depth of facilities; relationship to other facilities; and
number of street crossings and their locations and dimensions.
f. Projected commencement and termination dates, unless such dates
are unknown at the time the permit is issued, in which case a
provision requiring the permit holder to provide the City Engineer
with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined shall be included. The anticipated duration of the
facilities work shall be provided at the time of the application.
SECTION 23-45 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-45
1:442
g. Copies or other proof of certificates of insurance.
h. Any additional information the City Engineer may require
including, but not limited to, such conditions and requirements as
are reasonably necessary to protect structures and facilities in the
public rights-of-way from damage and for the proper restoration of
such public rights-of-way, structures and facilities and for the
protection of the public and the continuity of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
6. The service provider shall participate in any joint planning,
construction and advance notification of right-of-way, including
coordination and consolidation of street cut work as directed by the
City Engineer.
7. To the extent allowed by law, the City may limit the number of
registrations in a competitively neutral manner based upon, but not
necessarily limited to, specific local considerations such as:
a. The capacity of the right-of-way to accommodate service facilities.
b. The disruption arising from numerous excavations of the right-ofway.
c. Any other consideration based upon the interests of the public
safety and welfare.
8. Payments of fees. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of
fees as designated in this Article.
9. Authority of applicant. The City Engineer shall review each application
and, upon determining that the applicant has all requisite authority to
perform the facilities work and that the applicant has submitted all
necessary information and has paid the appropriate fee, shall issue the
permit, except as provided in Subsection (13) hereof.
10. Review of application. It is the intention of the City that disruption of
the public rights-of-way should be minimized. Upon receipt of the
application, the City Engineer shall:
a. Evaluate the degree of excavation necessary to perform the
facilities work in the public rights-of-way and determine whether
the proposed excavation will be more than minor in nature. If the
applicant can show to the City Engineer's reasonable satisfaction
that the facilities work involves no significant disruption or damage
to the public rights-of-way or that the facilities work involves timesensitive
maintenance, then the City Engineer shall grant the
permit without delay; provided, that if the permit is not issued in
ten (10) business days, the aggrieved party may appeal as provided
in Subsection (14); and
b. For circumstances where the City Engineer determines that there
will be significant excavation of the public rights-of-way and where
SECTION 23-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-45
1:443
no exemption under (10)(a) or any other provisions of this
Subsection applies, the City Engineer may, consistent with the
time requirements set forth in Section 23-45 and in the permit,
direct permit holders performing facilities work in the same area
to consult with the City Engineer on how they may schedule and
coordinate their work to accomplish the goals of this Article.
c. All public works supervisors must sign off on the plans and
specifications prior to the City Engineer approval of the permit.
Supervisors must review the plans and specifications within fortyeight
(48) hours of the application date.
11. Changes. An applicant receiving a permit shall promptly notify the City
Engineer of any changes in the information submitted in his
application.
12. Index. The City Engineer shall maintain an index of all applicants who
have been granted permits and their point(s) of contact.
13. Denial of permit. The City Engineer may deny an application for any of
the following reasons if deemed in the public interest:
a. Undisputed past-due fees from prior permits or delinquent debt
owed to the City.
b. Failure to return the public rights-of-way to their previous
condition under previously-issued permits.
c. Undue disruption to existing use of the public rights-of-way by the
public, the City or other utilities.
d. Environmental sensitivity, as defined by State or Federal Statutes,
of land within the desired project's scope.
e. The applicant is in violation of the provisions of this Article.
f. To protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent
interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel
over the right-of-way, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way
and its user.
g. Availability of space where the permit is being sought.
h. Whether the issuance of a right-of-way permit for the particular
dates and/or time requested would cause a conflict or interferes
with an exhibition, celebration, festival or any other event.
SECTION 23-45 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-45
1:444
If a permit is denied under Subsection (13)(c) or (13)(d), the City
Engineer shall cooperate with the applicant to identify alternative
routes which most nearly match the routes requested by the
applicant for the placement of facilities.
The City Engineer may issue a right-of-way permit in any case
where the permit is necessary to allow such user to materially
improve the service provided by the applicant or to prevent
substantial economic hardship to a user of the applicant's service.
14. Appeal of denial. Applicant may appeal within ten (10) calendar days of
the date of notice of such final decision of the City Engineer to the City
Administrator or Mayor, which appeal shall be acted upon by the City
Administrator or Mayor within five (5) business days and if denied by
the City Administrator or Mayor, the applicant may then appeal to the
City Council which shall act upon the appeal within thirty (30) days. If a
permittee still deems himself aggrieved after the appeal to the City
Council, such permittee shall have thirty (30) days after the effective
date to institute an action in the Circuit Court of Lafayette County,
Missouri.
15. Applicable fees. The fees collected pursuant to this Section will be used
only to reimburse the City for costs incurred in managing the public
rights-of-way and will not be used to generate revenue above such
costs. Fees paid for a right-of-way permit which is subsequently revoked
by the City Engineer are not refundable.
a. Non-exclusive franchises and owners of more than one thousand
(1,000) lineal feet of facilities within the public rights-of-way shall
be required to pay an annual fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). This fee is in lieu of and shall relieve such persons of
the obligations to pay such fees as would be ordinarily be required
under Subsection (15)(b) below for each permit sought during the
given year.
b. The fee required for a single excavation permit shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
c. Supplementary applications shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00).
16. Revocation of permit. Permittees hold right-of-way permits as a
privilege and not as a right. The City reserves its right to revoke any
right-of-way permit, without refund of the permit fee, in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any law or the rightof-
way permit. Upon breach the City Engineer shall make a written
demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation within five (5)
calendar days of receiving notification of the breach. The permittee is
required to submit a plan to the City Engineer within that five (5) days
for the correction. If the permit is revoked, the permittee shall also
reimburse the City for its reasonable costs, including administrative
costs, restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
SECTION 23-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-45
1:445
SECTION 23-46. Facilities Work. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(6),
6-12-2001]
attorney's fees, incurred in connection with such revocation. A
substantial breach shall include, but not limited to, the following:
a. Failure to maintain the required bond or insurance.
b. Repeated traffic control violations.
c. Failure to repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way.
d. Failure to complete the work in a timely manner.
e. Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit
application.
f. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the rightof-
way permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens.
A. Oversight Of Facilities Work.
1. Applicants shall comply with all City Codes and ordinances.
2. Facilities work shall be subject to periodic inspections by the City.
An inspection will be required at the start of backfilling. Upon
completion of all right-of-way restoration activities, the permittee
will schedule a closeout inspection with the Street Commissioner.
3. The City Engineer shall have full access to all portions of facilities
work and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to
prevent unauthorized work or unsafe traffic control. Such
corrective or stop work orders shall state that work not authorized
by a permit is being carried out, summarize the unauthorized work
and provide a period of not longer than thirty (30) days to cure the
problem; provided however, that the order may require immediate
remedial action or the cessation of activities where such is
necessary to protect the public safety. Such orders may be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the address listed on the
application or to the person in charge of the construction site at the
time of delivery. Such orders may be enforced by equitable action
in Circuit Court of Lafayette County, Missouri. If the City prevails,
the person involved in the facilities work shall be liable for all costs
and expenses incurred by the City, including reasonable attorney's
fees in enforcing the order, in addition to any and all fines and
penalties established in this Article.
4. Any person who engages in facilities work in the public rights-ofway
without a valid permit from the City shall nonetheless be
subject to all requirements of this Article. Unless the facilities work
is emergency facilities work, the City may, in its discretion, at any
SECTION 23-45 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-46
1:446
time until a permit is secured order the facilities work ceased and
do any of the following:
a. Require such person to apply for a permit within thirty (30)
days of receipt of a written notice from the City that a permit is
required;
b. Require such person to remove its property and restore the
affected area to a condition satisfactory to the City; or
c. Take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law
including, but not limited to, filing for and seeking damages for
trespass.
5. Owners of facilities that maintain more than one thousand (1,000)
lineal feet of facilities within the public rights-of-way shall keep
complete and accurate maps and records of the location of their
facilities. Within twelve (12) months of the effectiveness of this
Article, any person maintaining or owning more than one thousand
(1,000) lineal feet of facilities within the public rights-of-way shall
file with the City Engineer a detailed map of those portions of that
person's facilities lying within the public rights-of-way. Maps
furnished to the City Engineer shall show the location of the
facilities and their relationship to the public rights-of-way
boundaries. Map updates shall be provided to the City Engineer at
the time of payment of the annual excavation permit fee. The City
shall indemnify the owners of facilities required to provide a map
from any damages or harm caused by the improper use or
distribution of the maps and/or records provided by the owners of
the facilities. Such maps are intended to be proprietary to the
owners of the facilities and not owned by the City. The City, to the
extent permitted by law, will not provide such maps to third (3rd)
parties.
6. The rights granted by a permit inure to the benefit of the applicant.
The rights and permits shall not be assigned, transferred, sold or
disposed of, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, including by force or involuntary sale,
without the express written consent of the City. Such consent shall
not be withheld unreasonably nor required for assignment to
entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control
with the applicant.
7. Should any applicant fail to abide by the terms of a permit, the City
Council may, after thirty (30) days' written notice of breach or
default and after a public hearing in which applicant has been
afforded due process, terminate a permit if applicant has failed to
undertake reasonable steps to cure such breach or default. Upon
such termination, the City may order the removal of any of the
applicant's facilities under the permit and if applicant should
SECTION 23-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-46
1:447
refuse, the City may remove such facilities at applicant's sole
expense.
B. Construction Standards.
1. All facilities work shall be performed in accordance with applicable
health, safety and construction codes.
2. All facilities shall be installed and located so as to minimize
interference with the public and with other users of the public
rights-of-way, including the City.
3. Before initiating construction of new facilities in the public rightsof-
way, the applicant shall make all reasonable efforts to use
existing facilities. An applicant shall not place facilities where they
will damage or interfere with the use or operation of those
previously installed or obstruct or hinder the various utilities
serving the residents and businesses in the City in their use of any
public rights-of-way.
4. Any and all public rights-of-way disturbed or damaged during the
facilities work shall be promptly repaired or replaced by applicant
to their previous condition, at applicant's expense.
5. Any subcontractor of applicant used for facilities work must be
properly licensed under the law of the State and all applicable local
ordinances and each subcontractor shall have the same obligations
with respect to its work as applicant would have hereunder.
Applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of all
subcontractors is performed consistent with its permits and
applicable law, shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of
subcontractors and shall be responsible for promptly correcting
acts or omissions by the subcontractor.
6. After any excavation, the permittee shall, at its expense, restore all
portions of the right-of-way to the same condition that it was prior
to the excavation.
7. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and
to the condition required or fails to satisfactorily and timely
complete all restoration, the City may, at its option, serve written
notice upon the permittee and its surety that, unless within five (5)
days after serving of such notice a satisfactory arrangement can be
made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way, the City shall
immediately serve notice of failure to comply upon the surety and
the permittee and the surety shall have the right to take over and
complete the work; provided however, that if the surety does not
commence performance thereof within ten (10) days from the date
of notice, the City may take over and prosecute same to completion,
by contract or otherwise, at the expense of the permittee and the
permittee and its surety shall be liable to the City for any and all
SECTION 23-46 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-46
1:448
SECTION 23-47. Performance Guarantee and Remedies. [Ord. No.
2001-29 § 1(7), 6-12-2001]
excess cost assumed by the City by reason of such prosecution and
completion.
8. In restoring the right-of-way, the permittee guarantees its work and
shall maintain it for twenty-four (24) months following its
completion. During the twenty-four (24) months the permittee
shall, upon notification from the City, correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary. Said work shall be completed within a
reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, of the
receipt of notice. The City Engineer shall have the authority to
extend the guarantee period for up to an additional twenty-four
(24) months from the date of the new restoration if the City
Engineer determines any overt action by the permittee not to
comply.
9. The twenty-four (24) month guarantee period shall be applicable to
failure of the pavement surface as well as failure below the
pavement surface.
A. Performance Bond.
1. Prior to any facilities work in the public rights-of-way, an applicant
shall establish in the City's favor a performance bond in the penal
sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Owners of facilities that
maintain more than one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of facilities
within the public rights-of-way and franchises shall establish in the
City's favor a performance bond in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). An annual bond of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) automatically renewed yearly shall satisfy the
requirement of this Section. Differences in bond requirements,
including provision for self-insurance or provisions for a single
continuing bond where facilities work is conducted by the same
applicant under numerous permits, may be established by
regulation based on the extent or nature of the facilities work and
the past performances of the applicant but may not be based on the
characteristics of the applicant.
2. In the event an applicant fails to complete the facilities work in a
safe, timely and competent manner, there shall be recoverable,
jointly and severally from the principal and surety on the bond, any
damage or loss suffered by the City as a result, plus a reasonable
allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond.
3. Upon completion of the facilities work to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, the City Engineer shall eliminate the bond or reduce its
amount after a time appropriate to determine whether the work
performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established by the
City Engineer considering the nature of the work performed.
SECTION 23-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-47
1:449
SECTION 23-48. Relocation of Facilities in Existing Public Rightsof-
Way. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(8), 6-12-2001]
4. A performance bond shall be issued by a surety acceptable to the
City and shall contain the following endorsement: "This bond may
not be canceled or allowed to lapse until sixty (60) days after
receipt by the City of Lexington, Missouri, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of
intent to cancel or not to renew."
5. Recovery by the City of any amounts under the performance bond
does not limit an applicant's duty to indemnify the City in any way,
nor shall such recovery relieve an applicant of its obligations under
a permit or reduce the amounts owed the City other than by the
amounts recovered by the City under the performance bond or in
any respect prevent the City from exercising any other rights or
remedy it may have.
6. Evidence of liability insurance with an insurance company licensed
to do business in Missouri shall be submitted and on file with the
City. The amount will be not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) in aggregate. The insurance will protect the City
from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for loss or
damage to the extent caused or alleged to have been caused by the
negligent acts or omissions of the permittee. If the permittee is selfinsured,
it shall provide the City proof of compliance regarding its
ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in
the above amounts.
B. Cost Recovery.
1. In the event that an excavation is not refilled within a reasonable
time after it is ready for refilling, the City Engineer shall notify the
applicant making the excavation that if such excavation is not filled
within four (4) days, it shall be filled by the City. The cost of such
work shall be paid by the permit holder within ten (10) days after
completion and no additional permit shall be issued to that person
until such charge has been paid.
2. In the event the City incurs additional costs as a result of an
unauthorized action or an inaction by any person and/or owner of
facilities, the City shall have the right to recover from that person
or owner any and all documentable costs incurred including, but
not limited to, the identification of undocumented facilities,
completion of improper facilities work, long-term structural
damage, construction delay fees and penalties, fees paid to other
agencies and any other documentable costs incurred by the City
within the public rights-of-way.
SECTION 23-47 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-48
1:450
SECTION 23-49. Service Provider's Right to Sell, Transfer, Lease,
Assign, Sublet or Dispose. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(9), 6-12-2001]
In the event a service provider shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or
dispose of its facilities or any portion thereof that is located in City rightof-
way or right, title or interest in the same or transfer any rights granted
by the City to any person either by forced or involuntary sale or by ordinary
sale, consolidation or otherwise, it shall notify the City of same. In such
case, the buyer, transferee, lessee or assignee shall be subject to the terms
and conditions of this Article, including the requirements to register as
provided in the preceding Section.
SECTION 23-50. Reseller Service Providers. [Ord. No. 2001-29
§ 1(10), 6-12-2001]
A service provider may permit and has the authority to sell, sublet or lease
any use of excess capacity and sell services for resale to any reseller service
provider providing service within the City, including the service provider's
subsidiary or affiliate. The reseller service provider shall first register and
obtain any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration,
franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any appropriate
governmental entity including, but not limited to, the City or the FCC.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law or regulatory authority, the service
provider shall use all reasonable efforts to provide the City on an annual
basis the identity of entities with which the service provider has entered
into an interconnection and/or resale agreement within the City.
A. Whenever, by reason of changes to a street or in the location or manner
of constructing a drainage facility, sanitary sewer or other City-owned
underground or above-ground structure, it is deemed necessary by the
City to move, alter, change, adapt or conform existing facilities, the
owner of such facilities shall make the alterations or changes on
alternative right-of-way provided by the City, if available. The City will
endeavor to minimize the interference with previously installed
facilities when conducting its own facilities work.
B. The City shall provide the ROW user with written notice of relocations
and the anticipated date of said improvements as soon as working
drawings are available. The ROW user shall respond with any conflicts
and a proposed construction schedule within thirty (30) days.
C. Upon delivery of final design plans for such public improvements, the
ROW user shall remove and relocate its facilities in accordance with the
mutually agreed upon schedule, provided the project is not delayed by
adverse weather conditions.
D. In the event the ROW user is required to move its facilities in
accordance with this Section, any ordinary right-of-way permit fee shall
be waived.
SECTION 23-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-51
1:451
SECTION 23-51. Use of the Right-of-Way. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(11),
6-12-2001]
SECTION 23-52. Protection of the Public. [Ord. No. 2001-29
§ 1(12), 6-12-2001]
A. The ROW user shall coordinate the placement of facilities in a manner
that minimizes adverse impact on any public improvement as
reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not regulated,
the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public
improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public
improvement.
B. The ROW user shall consider any request made by the City concerning
placement facilities in private easements in order to limit or eliminate
future street improvement relocation expenses.
C. All facilities shall be located and laid so as not to disrupt or interfere
with any pipes, drains, sewers, irrigation systems or other structures or
public improvements already installed. Also, avoid, so far as may be
practicable, disrupting or interfering with the lawful use of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or other public lands of the City.
D. The ROW users shall not interfere with the facilities of the other ROW
user without their permission. If the City would require or negotiate to
have a service provider cease using its existing poles and to relocate its
facilities underground, all other service providers using the same poles
shall also relocate their facilities underground at the same time. The
City may waive this requirement when, in its sole discretion, it deems
relocation impractical. The cost of such relocation shall be borne in
accordance with this Article.
E. All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, other public
improvements or improvements of any kind damaged or removed by the
ROW user shall be fully repaired or replaced promptly by the ROW user
at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. If it is a
public safety matter, all such repairs or replacement shall be corrected
within twenty-four (24) hours of notice from the City.
F. The ROW user shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take
all necessary measures to provide accurate and complete on-site
information regarding the nature and location of its facilities within the
right-of-way, both underground and overhead. Such location and
identification shall be at the sole expense of the ROW user.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the ROW user to take adequate
measures to protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from
harm and damage.
B. The City and ROW users shall be responsible for taking reasonable
precautionary measures including calling for facility locations.
SECTION 23-51 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-52
1:452
SECTION 23-53. Right-of-way Vacation. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(13),
6-12-2001]
SECTION 23-54. Abandoned and Unusable Facilities. [Ord. No.
2001-29 § 1(14), 6-12-2001]
The City Engineer may allow underground facilities or portions thereof to
remain in place if it is in the best interest of public safety to do so. The ROW
user shall submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its facilities to the City. Facilities which remain unused for two
C. Any ROW user who for any purpose makes or cause to be made any
excavation in, upon, under, through or adjoining any street, sidewalk,
alley or other right-of-way and shall leave any part or portion thereof
open or shall leave part or portion thereof disrupted with rubbish,
building or other material during construction and/or the nighttime,
shall cause the same to be enclosed with good substantial and sufficient
barricades or drums equipped with the appropriate type warning lights
and orange safety fencing material which is properly secured around
the excavation or the disruption. The sole responsibility for maintaining
proper barricades, plates, safety fencing and/or lights are required
from the time the opening of the excavation until the excavation is
surfaced and opened for travel.
D. In the event the ROW user severely disturbs or damages the root
structure of any tree in the right-of-way to the detriment of the health
and safety of the tree, the ROW user will be required to remove and
replace the tree at the ROW user's cost.
A. If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of the
service provider and if the vacation does not require the relocation of
the service provider's facilities, the City shall reserve, to and for itself
and all service providers having facilities in the vacated right-of-way, an
easement for the right to install, maintain and operate any facilities in
the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such vacated right-of-way at
any time for the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or
repairing the same.
B. If the vacation requires the relocation of facilities and
1. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the service provider, the
service provider must pay the relocation costs, or
2. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City, the service
provider must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to
by the City and the service provider, or
3. If a person other than the service provider of the City initiates the
vacation proceedings, such other person must pay the relocation
costs.
SECTION 23-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-54
1:453
(2) years shall be deemed to be abandoned. The City may take possession
and ownership of the facility.
SECTION 23-55. Permitted Work. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(15),
6-12-2001]
SECTION 23-56. Supplementary Applications. [Ord. No. 2001-29
§ 1(16), 6-12-2001]
SECTION 23-57. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. No. 2001-29
§ 1(17), 6-12-2001]
A. The permittee shall not make any cut, excavation or grading of right-ofway
other than excavations necessary for emergency repairs without
first securing a right-of-way permit.
B. The permittee shall notify the City no less than three (3) working days
in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair, location or
relocation of facilities which would require any street closure or which
reduces traffic flow for more than four (4) hours.
C. All work performed in the right-of-way or which in any way impacts
vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded and
otherwise protected at the permittee's expense.
D. The permittee shall be liable for any damages to underground facilities
or for any damages to underground facilities that have been properly
identified prior to excavation.
E. The permittee shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic
control to the surrounding area. The permittee shall perform work on
the right-of-way at such times that will allow the least interference with
the normal flow of traffic, the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
F. The City may use the as-built records of the service provider's facilities
in connection with public improvements.
A. A right-of-way permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way
specified within the permit. Any permittee who determines that an area
greater than that which is specified in the permit must be excavated
must do the following prior to the commencement of work in that
greater area:
1. Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and
2. Receive a new right-of-way permit or permit extension.
B. A right-of-way permit shall be valid only for the dates specified in the
permit. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end
date, the permittee must apply for and received a new right-of-way
permit or a permit extension for additional time.
SECTION 23-54 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-57
1:454
A. A permittee shall not disrupt a right-of-way such that the natural free
and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways is
interfered with. Private vehicles may not be parked within or next to the
permit area.
B. Except in cases of emergency or with approval of the City Engineer, no
right-of-way work may be done when conditions are unreasonable for
such work.
C. Each applicant shall comply with all applicable Federal and State laws
as well as City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore
and hereafter adopted or established. The ROW user's rights are
subject to the Police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to relieve an applicant or the City of the express
provisions of an existing franchise, license or other agreement or
permit.
D. This Article may be amended from time to time and in no event shall
this Article be considered a contract between the City and an applicant
such that the City would be prohibited from amending any provision
hereof.
E. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to acts of God, fires,
strikes, riots, floods, war and other circumstances beyond the ROW
user's or the City's control. Applicant shall take immediate and diligent
steps to bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as
possible under the circumstances with its permit without unduly
endangering the health, safety and integrity of the applicant's
employees or property, the public, the public ROW, public property or
private property.
F. The City's failure to enforce or remedy any non-compliance of the terms
and conditions of this Article or of any permit granted hereunder shall
not constitute a waiver of the City's rights nor a waiver of any person's
obligation as herein provided.
G. The exercise of one (1) remedy under this Article shall not foreclose use
of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of
damages or penalties relieve an applicant of its obligations to comply
with its permits. Remedies may be used alone or in combination; in
addition, the City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. The
City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or
proceeding involving any provisions of this Article. No applicant shall
be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article by reason of any failure to the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
H. The provisions of this Article shall specifically apply to any lands or
property annexed by City as of the date of such annexation.
SECTION 23-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-57
1:455
SECTION 23-58. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(18),
6-12-2001]
Applicant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless
and defend the City, its officials, boards, Council members, commissions,
agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings and judgments, including reasonable attorney's fees, for
damage or equitable relief arising out of the construction and maintenance
of the applicant's facilities work, except to the extent such claim, suit, cause
of action or proceedings and judgments for damages or equitable relief
arise out of the negligent or willful misconduct of the City or its officials,
boards, Council members, commissions agents or employees.
SECTION 23-59. Severability. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(19), 6-12-2001]
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of the Article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
I. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act,
duty, matter or payment is required under this Article or any permit and
a period of time is proscribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be
computed so as to exclude the first (1st) and include the last day of the
prescribed or fixed period of time.
J. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any
way or to any extent, any right the City may have to acquire the
property of the applicant through the exercise of the power of eminent
domain.
K. In the event the City Council closes or abandons any public ROW which
contain facilities installed hereunder, any land contained in such closed
or abandoned public ROW shall be subject to the rights of the applicant.
L. Nothing contained herein shall in any manner be deemed or construed
to alter, modify, supersede, supplement or otherwise nullify any other
ordinances of the City or requirements thereof, whether or not relating
to or in any manner connected with the subject written hereof, unless
expressly provided otherwise herein or hereafter.
M. The City shall have the right to waive any provision of this Article or any
registration, permit or other authorization granted thereunder, except
those required by Federal or State law, if the City determines that it is
in the public interest to do so or that the enforcement of such provision
will impose an undue hardship on the person.
SECTION 23-57 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-60
1:456
SECTION 23-60. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2001-29 § 1(20), 6-12-2001]
For each violation of the provisions of this Article or of a permit granted
pursuant to this Article, as to which the City has given notice to applicant
as provided in this Article, penalties may be chargeable to the applicant at
a rate of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for so long as the violation continues.
The violation of any provision of this Article is hereby deemed to be grounds
for revocation of the permit and registration to operate with the City. In
addition to any other remedies, the City Attorney may institute injunction,
mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent violation of
this Article.
SECTION 23-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-60
1:457

ARTICLE VI
City-Owned Parking Lots
SECTION 23-61. Rental Charges Established. [Ord. No. 2002-09 § 2,
3-19-2002]
The following are hereby established as the rental charges for the use of the
City-owned parking lots:
SECTION 23-62. Rental to be on a First-Come, First-Served Basis —
When Charges are to be Paid. [Ord. No. 2002-09 § 3, 3-19-2002]
The City-owned parking lots shall be rented on a first-come, first-served
basis and all payments, fees and charges shall be paid no later than ten (10)
days prior to the rental date. The rental agreement shall be signed no later
than ten (10) days prior to the rental date.
SECTION 23-63. Police Officer to be on Duty — Payment for
Services. [Ord. No. 2002-09 § 4, 3-19-2002]
A member of the Police force shall be assigned and shall stay within the
immediate area of the parking lot during the period that it is being occupied
by any renter. The tenant shall pay to the City in addition to the rental an
hourly rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour per officer.
SECTION 23-64. Intoxicating Beverages on Premises. [Ord. No.
2002-09 § 5, 3-19-2002]
Intoxicating beverages shall not be served or consumed on any part of the
parking lot, except by written approval of the City Council. Such approval
shall in no way discharge the renter from meeting all of the laws of the State
regarding the serving of intoxicating liquors.
SECTION 23-65. Condition of Premises After Use by Tenant. [Ord.
No. 2002-09 § 6, 3-19-2002]
The parking lot shall be cleaned and shall be free of any debris or trash and
shall be in the same condition in which it was found by the tenant at the
conclusion of his rental period.
1. The per diem charge for not-for-profit organizations shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. The per diem charge for all profitable organizations shall be one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
3. The City Council shall have the power to waive any per diem charge
from time to time for the use of the City-owned parking lots by motion
passed by the Council.
SECTION 23-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23-66
1:459
SECTION 23-66. Closing Hour. [Ord. No. 2002-09 § 7, 3-19-2002]
The parking lots shall be closed at 1:00 A.M. All persons, other than those
necessary to clean up and return the area to the condition in which it was
found, shall be excluded from the area at that hour.
SECTION 23-66 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23-66
1:460
Chapter 23A
TRANSPORTATION BOARD
SECTION 23A-1. Membership. [Ord. No. 2008-18 § 1, 5-13-2008]
The Board shall be composed of nine (9) members that are citizens of the
City of Lexington. Each appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council for a term of three (3) years, the original appointments to the
Board to be made for the following terms:
Three (3) members appointed for a term of one (1) year.
Three (3) members appointed for a term of two (2) years.
Three (3) members appointed for a term of three (3) years.
All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any
member whose office becomes vacant. The Board shall elect a Chairman
and an Acting Chairman from its membership who shall serve for a term of
office of one (1) year.
SECTION 23A-2. Compensation of Members. [Ord. No. 2008-18 § 1,
5-13-2008]
All citizen members of the Transportation Board shall serve without
compensation.
SECTION 23A-3. Removal of Members. [Ord. No. 2008-18 § 1,
5-13-2008]
The City Council may remove any citizen member of the Transportation
Board for cause, stated in writing and after a public hearing.
SECTION 23A-4. Duties and Powers. [Ord. No. 2008-18 § 1,
5-13-2008]
The Board shall take the necessary steps to market and promote a vigorous
and constant transportation program. The Board shall be in charge of and
handle all correspondence to citizens, keep accurate records of business
proceedings, prioritize a street rehabilitation list, decide on the type of
rehabilitation to be completed on each street, prepare a cost estimate of
each street to be rehabilitated, maintain a liaison with City Council, seeking
funding options, solicit and interview contractors for projects.
SECTION 23-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 23A-4
1:461
Chapter 24
SUBDIVISIONS
Cross References — Buildings and building regulations, § 6-1 et seq.; parks
and recreation, § 19-1 et seq.; planning and zoning generally, § 20-1 et seq.;
streets, sidewalks and public grounds, § 23-1 et seq.; water and sewers,
§ 28-1 et seq.; Building inspector/code enforcement officer — authorized to
enforce ch. 24, § 2-209.
State Law References — Subdivision regulations, § 89.410, RSMo.; zoning
and planning, Ch. 88, RSMo.
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2004-31 § 1, adopted December 14, 2004, repealed
ch. 24 "subdivisions" and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former
ch. 24 derived from ord. of 4-5-1965 §§ 1 — 9; ord. of 2-19-1968 § 2; ord. of
4-2-1969 §§ 1, 9, 11 — 18; ord. no. 92-11 § 1, 6-8-1992.
SECTION 23A-4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 23A-4
1:462
ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 24-1. Purpose — Provisions Deemed Minimum
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
The purpose of this Chapter is to set forth rules and regulations for the
subdivision of real property so that each subdivision shall be properly
coordinated with existing streets, utilities, public facilities and plans for
developing these entities. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. To protect the public, among other purposes, such provisions are
intended to provide for permanently wholesome community environment,
adequate municipal services, safe streets and comprehensive, sound
development of the City, both as to its current and future requirements.
SECTION 24-2. Subdividers to Confer With City Engineer's Office
Prior to Taking Action. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
Advice and cooperation in the preparation of plats shall be freely given
by the office of the City Engineer. Each subdivider of land shall confer
with such office before preparing the preliminary plat in order to become
more thoroughly familiar with subdivision requirements and the zoning
provisions of this Code affecting the territory in which the proposed
subdivision lies.
SECTION 24-3. Subdivisions Defined — Exceptions to Subdivision
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2009-22
§ I, 6-23-2009]
A. Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have
these prescribed meanings:
SUBDIVISION — The division, redivision or resubdivision of a tract or
parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or other divisions of land.
LOT SPLIT — The splitting of an existing previously platted lot into not
more than two (2) tracts and does not create a substandard lot.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the
following divisions of land: Any transfer by operation of law.
C. Lot Splits. The intent of this Section is to provide for the issuance of
building permits on lots divided into not more than two (2) tracts
without having to replat said lot. The City may issue building permits
for such lots in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Application procedure. Requests for a lot split approval shall be
made to the City Clerk by the owner of the land. The application
shall include:
SECTION 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-3
1:463
SECTION 24-4. Commercial and Industrial Subdivisions — Options
for Platting, Etc. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
a. Four (4) copies of a scale drawing.
b. Legal description of the lots to be created.
c. The location of any structures thereon together with the
precise nature, location and dimensions; and name, signature,
and seal of the licensed engineer or the registered land
surveyor who prepared the drawing.
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be collected by the City
Clerk at the time the application is submitted to the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall forward the completed application
for Lot Split to the Planning And Zoning Commission for
consideration at their next scheduled meeting.
2. Requirements. No lot split will be approved if:
a. A new street or alley or other public improvements is needed
or proposed.
b. A vacation of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or
easements is required or proposed.
c. A lot split will result in significant increases in service
requirements (e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets,
etc.).
d. There is less street right-of-way than required by subdivision or
zoning regulations.
e. All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
f. Such split will result in a tract without direct access to a public
street.
g. A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created (ref:
29-10-D.5).
h. The lot has been previously split in accordance with these
regulations.
3. Ratification by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days of having
received the application from the City Clerk, notify the City Council
in writing of their decision of approval or disapproval or continue
for cause those applications which in the opinion of the Planning
and Zoning Commission do not comply with these regulations. If
action notification to the City Council has not been taken within the
forty-five (45) day period, such lot split shall be deemed to have
been approved.
SECTION 24-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-4
1:464
A. Persons proposing subdivisions in areas located in a district zoned
commercial or industrial may comply with the following procedures in
lieu of other requirements of this Chapter when establishing a plat as
required by this Chapter:
1. Plat approval. Plats required under this Chapter may be filed
without delineating lot lines and the exact positioning of any lot line
is exempt from the requirements of this Chapter if all lots within
the plat meet minimum lot size standards of the zoning district in
which the subdivision is platted.
2. Design and improvement standards. The design of the subdivision
shall accommodate the potential uses of the subdivision and the
impact of such uses on the size, capacity and extent of
improvements, services and utilities set out in Section 24-16A and
shall consider the potential uses of the zoning districts surrounding
the zoning district or districts in which the subdivision is platted in
the same manner.
B. A payment to the City in an amount to be determined by the City and
the person proposing the subdivision as being equal to the present
prevailing constructions costs of the necessary future improvements,
services and utilities may be made to the City in areas where significant
development has already occurred in the subdivision, proposed
subdivision or zoning districts surrounding the zoning district or
districts in which the subdivision is platted.
SECTION 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-4
1:465

ARTICLE II
Preliminary Plat
SECTION 24-5. Requirements and Filing. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
Three (3) prints of a preliminary plat shall be filed with the Planning and
Zoning Commission at least ten (10) days before the meeting at which
approval is asked. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred (100)
feet to one (1) inch or larger and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision, which must not be so similar to
that of an existing subdivision as to cause confusion, and names of
adjacent subdivisions;
2. The names of the owner and licensed engineer or surveyor responsible
for the survey and design;
3. The location of boundary lines and their relation to establishing section
lines or fractional section lines;
4. The location and width of existing and proposed streets, roads, lots and
alleys, building lines, easements, parks, playgrounds, school sites and
other features of the proposed subdivision and similar facts regarding
property immediately adjacent thereto; the location and size of existing
sewers and any other utilities and how the streets, alleys or highways in
the subdivision offered for record may connect with those in the nearest
subdivisions. If there are no adjacent subdivisions, then a map made on
a smaller scale may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission showing outline and ownership of adjacent properties and
location and distance of nearest subdivision;
5. A survey showing physical features of the property, including locations
of watercourses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures, size of
adjacent drainage areas in access and other features pertinent to the
subdivision. The outline of wooded areas or the location of important
individual trees may be required. Topography shall be shown by
contours of five (5) or two (2) foot intervals. All grades shown shall be
referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. The approximate
acreage of the property is to be indicated;
6. Approximate grades and gradients of streets, including existing streets
within the proposed development and outside streets tangent or
adjacent thereto;
7. A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision, that
is, the type of residential use, location of business or industrial sites and
sites for churches, schools, parks or other special uses;
8. North point, scale and date.
SECTION 24-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-6
1:467
SECTION 24-6. Indication of Sites for Parks, Schools and
Playgrounds. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
Suitable sites for parks, schools, playgrounds and other public requirements
shall be carefully considered and indicated on the preliminary plat so that
it can be determined which of such sites should be indicated on the final
plat and when and in what manner such areas will be acquired by the
appropriate public agency.
SECTION 24-7. Filing Fee. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
The subdivider shall, upon such filing, pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per
lot; except that in no case shall the fee be less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), regardless of the
number of lots.
SECTION 24-8. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission — Right
of Applicant Following Commission Action. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
As soon as practicable and not later than sixty (60) days after its receipt
of the preliminary plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, after
having given due consideration thereto, advise the person filing the plat
of its approval or disapproval thereof and, if it is disapproved, shall advise
the person filing it of the reasons for its disapproval. The failure of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to act within sixty (60) days after the
date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval. The approval
of a preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision,
but is merely an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the
final plat for record. No grading of streets or construction work shall be
done in the subdivision before the final plat is accepted, except with the
written approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council. Upon refusal of the Planning and Zoning Commission to approve
a preliminary plan, the applicant may make such changes as are required
for approval and resubmit the plan or he may appeal the decision to the
City Council which may reverse the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approve the preliminary plan.
SECTION 24-9. Sale of Lands by Reference to Unapproved Plat
Prohibited — Penalty Setting Aside Transaction. [Ord. No. 2004-31
§ 1, 12-14-2004]
No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the planning
jurisdiction of the City knowingly or with intent to defraud may transfer,
sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell that land by reference to or by other
use of a plat of any purported subdivision of the land before the plat has
been approved by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission
and recorded in the office of the Lafayette County Recorder of Deeds. Any
person violating the provisions of this Section shall forfeit and pay to the
City a penalty not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each lot
SECTION 24-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-9
1:468
transferred or sold, agreed or negotiated to be sold and the description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in
the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from
the penalty. Such penalty shall be set by the Council. The City may enjoin or
vacate the transfer, sale or agreement by legal action and may recover the
penalty in such action.
SECTION 24-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-9
1:469

ARTICLE III
Final Plat
SECTION 24-10. Submission — Contents. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
After the preliminary plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or by the City Council on appeal, a final plat in the form of a
record plat shall be prepared and three (3) prints thereof shall be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission and three (3) prints thereof shall be
presented to the City Council at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at
which approval by them is asked. The plat prints shall be easily readable, of
good quality and shall be to scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to
the inch unless otherwise directed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and it shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
1. The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions, the names of
streets to conform wherever possible to existing street names and
numbers of lots and blocks in accordance with a systematic
arrangements;
2. An accurate boundary survey of the property with bearings and
distances referenced to section or fractional section corners and
showing, in dotted lines, the lines of all adjacent lands and the lines of
adjacent streets and alleys with their widths and names;
3. Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other
features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and of arcs of all curves and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground;
4. The location of building setback lines on all streets and the location and
dimensions of utility and drainage easements and other public rights-ofway
or access;
5. Profiles of grades for streets, if required by the City Council or by the
Planning and Zoning Commission;
6. A preliminary drainage master plan showing proposed drainage
facilities for the entire subdivision and detailed storm drainage plans
covering that portion to be initially platted. Size, location and alignment
of ditches and drainage structures shall be shown;
7. Certification of dedication of all streets, public highways, alleys, parks
and other land intended for public use signed by the owner or owners
and by all other parties who have lease rights, mortgage or lien interest
in the property, together with any restrictions which are to apply to lots;
8. An affidavit of ownership, showing fee simple title and encumbrances
and liens;
SECTION 24-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-10
1:471
SECTION 24-11. Figures and Letters. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
All figures and letters shown on the final plat must be plain, distinct and of
sufficient size to be easily read and shall be of sufficient density to make a
lasting and permanent record.
SECTION 24-12. Key Map — Submittal of List of Property
Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
When in a final plat more than one (1) sheet is used, a key map showing
the entire subdivision at smaller scale with block numbers and street names
shall be shown on one (1) of the sheets or on a separate sheet of the same
size. A copy of such restrictions as may be filed in connection with the
property shall be submitted with the final plat.
SECTION 24-13. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission and
Notice to Applicant — Variations. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
9. Certification by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that all the
necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon;
10. Certificates of approval on the tracing to be filled out by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council; and
11. North point, scale and date.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the final plat, determine its recommendation as to whether
the plat shall be approved, approved with modifications or disapproved
and shall within such thirty (30) day period give notice to the subdivider
of its determination. If approved, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall so note on the face of the plat and shall thereupon forward it to the
City Council, notifying the subdivider of its action. If approved with
modification or if disapproved, the Commission shall attach to the
original plat a statement of the reasons for such action and shall
forthwith return the original of such plat to the subdivider, retaining
one (1) copy thereof for its records.
B. The Commission may recommend a variation of the application of the
provisions of this Chapter in harmony with their general purpose and
intent and in accordance with the rules contained in this Chapter in
cases where there are particular difficulties or particular hardships in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of any such rule or provision
relating to the subdividing of land and may recommend to the City
Council that the Council approves the plat of subdivision of this
Chapter, stating the reasons for their recommendations.
SECTION 24-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-14
1:472
SECTION 24-14. Applicants Right of Appeal to City Council. [Ord.
No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
If the final plat is returnable to the subdivider as provided in Section 24-13,
they may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
the City Council and the decision of a majority of the members of the City
Council present and voting at the meeting to which such appeal is made
shall be final.
SECTION 24-15. Action by City Council on Subdivision Plat
Mandatory. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2007-09 § 1,
3-13-2007]
A. The City Council, upon receipt of a final plat of a subdivision, shall
consider such plat and the recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission relating thereto. The City Council shall then, by
resolution, approve the plat as submitted or with such changes or
alterations as may be found necessary to make it conform to any zoning,
street, development or public improvement plans which may have been
adopted or which may appear desirable or shall reject the plat and
return it to the applicant with a statement of the reasons for rejection.
B. After satisfactory compliance with Section 24-16 of this Chapter and
final approval by the City Council, the developer will submit a sufficient
quantity of mylar and paper copies of the final plat to the City for City
use and for the recording of the subdivision with the Lafayette Recorder
of Deeds. (The County requires one (1) mylar and one (1) paper copy.)
SECTION 24-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-15
1:473

ARTICLE IV
Public Improvements93
SECTION 24-16. Installation of Public Improvements Required.
[Ord. No. 2007-09 § 1, 3-13-2007]
A. Installation Of Public Improvements.
1. Before the final plat of any subdivision shall be recorded, the
subdivider/developer shall provide for the installation of all public
improvements required by the City ordinances of Lexington,
Missouri, and any additional improvements as may be required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. The
installation of such public improvements shall be at no cost to the
City.
2. Where subdivision plats or development plans are approved in
phases, no phase of a final plat or development plan shall be
recorded unless all required public improvements for said phase
are installed in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Performance Bond Required. The subdivider/developer shall post a
performance bond or other sufficient surety, acceptable to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council, to guarantee the completion
of the installation of the public improvements. The bond shall be posted
with the City Clerk at the time the final plat is accepted by the City
Council. The City alone shall determine the amount of the performance
bond or surety required.
C. In-Progress Inspection. All public improvements required by these
regulations shall be inspected and approved by the City Building
Official as such improvements are being installed. The subdivider/
developer shall notify the City Building Official prior to the
commencement of construction of any such improvement.
D. As-Built Plans. Before the Planning and Zoning Commission will
approve the final plat for recording, the applicant's engineer shall
certify to the City through the submission of detailed "as-built" plans
that the improvements have been constructed substantially in
conformance with the approved plans and specifications and that the
improvements are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances
and are ready for dedication to the City.
1. The "as-built" plans shall show actual elevations of all elevation
points shown on the approved public improvement plans,
computation of all actual grades, computations of actual detention
volume, actual dimensions and GPS locations of all structures, both
93.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2007-09 § 1, adopted March 13, 2007, repealed sections 24-16
"when buildings may be erected — permits and conditions precedent" and 26-16A
"provisions for adequate utility services — connections to utilities prior to approval of plat
prohibited" and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections 24-16 — 24-16A
derived from ord. no. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004.
SECTION 24-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-16
1:475
SECTION 24-16A. Conditions of Acceptance — Guarantee. [Ord. No.
2007-09 § 1, 3-13-2007]
above and underground, and all underground public improvements
relative to all easements or rights-of-way. All sewer laterals shall be
further located by giving a GPS location and the distance from the
upstream manhole down to the lateral connector.
2. The information to be included in the "as-built" plans may be
provided on the approved construction plans; but, if for any reason,
placing said notations on the construction plans is not possible,
then this information shall be presented on a separate drawing or
drawings.
3. The "as-built" survey shall be sealed by a land surveyor registered
in the State of Missouri, with the design engineer's seal and
supplied and paid for by the subdivider, along with any additional
engineering fees incurred by the City in connection with review of
the "as-built" survey.
A. Final Inspection. Upon completion of all public improvements within
the area covered by the final plat, the subdivider/developer shall notify
the City who thereupon shall conduct a final as-built inspection of all
improvements installed. If the City Building Official determines that
there are defects, deficiencies or deviations in any such improvements
installed or if there are any deviations in such improvements as
installed from the approved engineering plans and specifications, the
City Building Official shall so notify the subdivider/developer in writing.
The City Building Official may require the subdivider/developer to
terminate all further work until necessary steps are taken to correct
any defect, deficiency or deviation found in the inspection. The
subdivider/developer shall, at its sole expense, correct such defects,
deviations or deficiencies. When such defects, deficiencies or deviations
have been corrected, the subdivider/developer shall notify the City that
the improvements are ready for reinspection.
B. Acceptance Of Public Improvements. The City Building Official will
advise the Planning and Zoning Commission of his final inspection
findings. The Planning and Zoning Commission will act upon his
findings and recommend approval/disapproval of the as-built plan to the
City Council for their action.
C. Warranty. Upon acceptance of such subdivision improvements by the
City Council, a two (2) year warranty period shall commence. Partial
acceptance shall not be considered unless a phased subdivision
development plan has been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission as a part of the plat approval process.
1. The subdivider/developer shall provide the City a two (2) year
maintenance guarantee of the public improvements. The two (2)
SECTION 24-16 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-16A
1:476
SECTION 24-16B. When Buildings May be Erected — Permits and
Conditions Precedent. [Ord. No. 2007-09 § 1, 3-13-2007]
year guarantee shall ensure any repairs or replacement of the
improvements found to be necessary by the City Engineer.
2. The subdivider/developer shall post a performance bond or other
sufficient surety, acceptable to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council, to guarantee that the subdivider/
developer will correct all defects in such improvements or facilities
that occur within two (2) years after the offer of dedication of such
facilities or improvements is accepted by the City.
3. Such guarantee will be in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of
the estimated cost of the improvements, but shall not be less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per lot and shall be filed with
the City Clerk prior to the acceptance of the improvements by the
City Council.
4. In no case shall the performance bond be released prior to the
expiration of the two (2) year warranty term.
D. Defects Defined. The term "defects" refers to any condition in facilities
or public improvements dedicated to the public that requires the City to
make repairs in such facilities or improvements over and above the
amount of maintenance that normally would be required as determined
by the City. If such defects appear, the guaranty may be enforced
regardless of whether the facilities or improvements were constructed
in accordance with the requirements of this Article.
A. No building permit shall be issued for a building within such subdivision
until:
1. The construction and installation of curb and gutter, pavement,
sanitary and storm sewer lines and necessary improvements to
existing sanitary and storm sewer facilities, streets and utilities
have been completed and accepted by the City Building Official in
the block upon which the lot fronts.
2. Or, construction of streets and sewers and necessary improvements
to existing sanitary and storm sewers, streets and utilities shall
have been assured by adequate surety, bond or cash escrow in
favor of the City. The City alone shall determine the amount of the
surety, bond or cash escrow required.
B. Installation of all such streets and utilities shall conform to the
minimum standards of the City.
SECTION 24-16A GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-16C
1:477
SECTION 24-16C. Provisions for Adequate Utility Services —
Connections to Utilities Prior to Approval of Plat is Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2007-09 § 1, 3-13-2007]
The City Council may refuse to approve a plat unless it is evident that
adequate sewer facilities and necessary improvements to existing sewer
and storm sewer facilities and other utilities can be provided within a
reasonable time.
SECTION 24-17. Installation of Permanent Monuments. [Ord. No.
2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2006-40 § 1, 9-12-2006]
Survey monuments shall be placed at all corners of the subdivision
boundaries and at all block corners, angle points and points of curve in
streets. All boundary corner monuments and at least two (2) block corner
permanent monuments for each block shall be installed prior to recording
the final plat and shall meet the requirements for a permanent monument
as established by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, Division
of Geology and Land Survey. In lieu of installing monuments prior to
recording, such installation may be guaranteed by a performance bond or
escrow agreement.
SECTION 24-18. Street Arrangement — To Provide Free Traffic
Circulation. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, provision shall be made for
the extension of main thoroughfares. Secondary streets shall provide free
circulation within the subdivision. Offset street intersections with offsets of
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet, centerline to centerline, shall not be
permitted.
SECTION 24-19. Relation to Existing Streets and Abutting Land.
[Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in unusual
cases where land use will not justify it or in other unusual cases, shall
connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions; and where
no adjacent connections are platted, shall in general be the reasonable
projections of streets in nearest subdivided tracts and shall be continued
to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may
connect therewith. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council may require that land abutting a highway or thoroughfare be
platted so that the side or rear of lots abut such highway or thoroughfare in
order that traffic hazards are kept at a minimum.
SECTION 24-20. Dead Ends and Cul-De-Sac. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
Except where land use will justify it or in other unusual cases, no deadend
streets will be approved unless such dead-end streets are provided
to connect with future streets in adjacent land; but "places" or cul-de-sac
SECTION 24-16C LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-20
1:478
may be permitted where the contour of the land makes it difficult to plat
with connecting streets. Such "places" or cul-de-sac shall provide proper
access to all lots and shall generally not exceed four hundred (400) feet in
length and a turnaround shall be provided at the closed end with an outside
properly line radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and a curb radius of at
least forty (40) feet. Temporary turnarounds may be required at the end of
those streets extended to the edge of the subdivision for future connection
to adjacent subdivisions.
SECTION 24-21. Required Widths. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2006-41 § 1, 9-12-2006]
All streets — the right-of-way shall be in accordance with APWA standards
and Section 29-38 of the zoning ordinance. Greater widths may be required
by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
SECTION 24-22. Sidewalks and Ada Access Ramps. [Ord. No.
2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2006-36 § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No.
2010-33 § 1, 10-13-2010]
A. Sidewalks shall be installed by the developer on at least one (1) side of
the street, they shall be located in the platted street, one (1) foot from
the property line. They shall be continuous within the block, with no
skipping of lots, and shall be contiguous to any pre-existing sidewalks.
Walks shall also be installed in any pedestrian easements as may be
required by the Planning Commission. Sidewalks shall be not less than
four (4) feet wide and shall have a minimal lateral slope of one-quarter
(1/4) inch.
B. Design For Persons With Disabilities. In order to enable disabled
persons to travel freely and without assistance, access ramps shall be
installed whenever new curbing or sidewalks are constructed or
reconstructed in the City of Lexington. Such ramps shall comply with
the then current requirements of the "Americans with Disabilities Act
Standards" (Department of Justice Title III regulations, ADA Standards
28 CFR Part 36) and "American Public Works Association (APWA)
Sidewalk Ramp Standards (Kansas City Metro)", and be subject to
review and approval by the City Engineer. These standards shall apply
to any City street or connecting street for which curbs and sidewalks
are required by Lexington City Code or on curbs and sidewalks that
have been prescribed by the City Council. In case of conflicts in
requirements between these two (2) standards, ADA Standards shall
prevail. A building permit is required for all new or replacement
sidewalk installations.
SECTION 24-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-23
1:479
SECTION 24-23. Utility Easements. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
Easements of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided on each side
of rear or side lines, where necessary, for public utilities. If necessary for
the extension of main sewer lines or similar utilities or drainage courses,
easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
Easements, where practicable, shall connect with established easements in
adjoining property.
SECTION 24-24. Alleys and Alley Widths. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1,
12-14-2004]
Except in unusual cases, alleys or loading courts must be provided in
business blocks. Alleys are optional in residential districts, but may be
required where alleys of adjoining subdivisions would be closed or shut off
from egress by the failure to provide alleys in the new subdivision. Alleys
shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. In case of intersecting
alleys, a cutoff shall be required of at least five (5) feet measured from the
point of intersection of the alley lines. The resultant connecting lot line shall
be at least five (5) feet in length.
SECTION 24-25. Block Lengths, Intersecting Streets and
Pedestrian Ways. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
In general, intersecting streets determining block lengths shall be provided
at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing
streets or customary subdivision practice in the neighborhood. Where no
existing plats control, the blocks may not exceed twelve hundred (1200)
feet in length. In blocks longer than five hundred (500) feet, pedestrian
ways through the block may be required near the center of the block. Such
pedestrian ways shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
SECTION 24-26. Lot Sizes — Residential Districts. [Ord. No.
2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2012-01 § V, 1-10-2012]
Minimum width at the front building line shall be adequate for the building
according to applicable Section 29-10 zoning regulations. The minimum
depth of a residential lot shall be one hundred ten (110) feet. Corner lots
shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wider than the average lot in the block.
SECTION 24-27. Where Subdivision Consists of Parcels Larger than
Normal Lots. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than normal building lots,
such parcels shall be arranged to permit the opening of future streets and
logical resubdivision.
SECTION 24-23 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-28
1:480
SECTION 24-28. Lot Lines. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
All lots shall have the side lines as nearly at right angles to the street on
which the lot faces or as radial to curved street lines as possible.
SECTION 24-29. Building Lines. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004]
Building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall provide at least the
setback necessary to meet the zoning requirements of the City.
SECTION 24-30. Utilities. [Ord. No. 2004-31 § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord.
No. 2005-35 § 1, 9-13-2005]
A. Sewers. The proprietors of any new subdivision shall be required to
construct all sewers within the new addition, including both main and
lateral sewers and main extensions to new subdivision. The lateral
sewers from the main to the lots in any new subdivision shall be
installed to a point three (3) feet inside of the curb line on the individual
lots in the subdivision. They may connect these sewers with the existing
City sewer system only after the sewers constructed by them have been
approved by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. Upon the
subdivision being accepted and the sewers constructed approved, the
sewer main shall belong to the City.
B. Septic Systems. If sewers are unavailable to the subdivision or cannot
be made available to the subdivision, any septic system installed shall
meet the requirements and approval of the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources and the City and a certificate of approval shall be
registered with the City Engineer or other properly designated official.
C. Water Mains. All water mains installed in new subdivisions shall be
installed in the parkway when possible.
D. Culverts, Curbs, Guttering. Culverts, curbing and guttering, when
required in any new subdivision, shall be installed by the owners of the
subdivision and shall be of acceptable design and size.
E. Fire Hydrants. Will be installed by the developer at such locations as
will meet the requirements of the insurance rating in force for the rest
of the City.
F. Streets. All streets shall be in accordance with Section 29-38 "Layout
and Construction Specifications and Requirements for Residential and
Commercial Streets" of the zoning ordinance.
G. Easements. Proper easements in favor of the City shall be executed by
the proprietor of any new subdivision covering the installation of all
utilities, including sewers. Rights of ingress and egress shall also be
conveyed to the City and no easement shall be designated less than
fifteen (15) feet in width.
SECTION 24-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-30
1:481
H. Street Lights. The developer must put street lights upon the streets of
any new subdivision with the approval of the City Council.
SECTION 24-30 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 24-30
1:482
Chapter 25
TAXATION
Cross Reference — Cigarette tax, § 7-1 et seq.
State Law Reference — Taxation by third class cities, RSMo. § 94.010.
SECTION 24-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 24-30
1:483

ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 25-1. Assessment of Property — How Made; Equalization;
Correction of Books.94
SECTION 25-2. Maximum Tax Rate; Manner of Increasing.95
A. In assessing property, both real and personal, the City Assessor shall,
jointly with the County or Township Assessor, assess all property in the
City, and such assessment, as made by the City Assessor and County or
Township Assessor jointly, and after the same has been passed upon by
the Board of Equalization, shall be taken as the basis from which the
City Council shall make the levy for City purposes. For the purpose of
giving the City representation on the County Board of Equalization,
when the City Board is sitting for the purpose of equalizing the
assessment on such City property, the Mayor and City Assessor shall sit
with the County Board of Equalization when the Board is passing upon
the assessment of such City property, and shall each have a vote in said
Board, and they shall be paid for such service the same amount per day
and out of the same fund as other members of such Board of
Equalization.
B. The assessment of City property as made by the City and County
Assessor shall conform to each other, and after the Board of
Equalization has passed upon such assessment and equalized the same,
the City Assessor's book shall be corrected in red ink in accordance
with the changes made by the Board of Equalization, and so certified by
said Board, and then returned to the City Council.
A. The City may by ordinance, levy and impose annually for municipal
purposes upon all subjects and objects of taxation within the City, a tax
which shall not exceed the maximum rate of one dollar ($1.00) on the
one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation; provided however,
that the rate of tax levy of one dollar ($1.00) on the one hundred dollars
($100.00) assessed valuation for municipal purposes may be increased
for such purposes for a period not to exceed four (4) years at any one
time when such rate and purpose of increase are submitted to a vote of
the qualified electors within the City and two-thirds (2/3) of the
qualified electors voting thereon shall vote therefor, but such increase
so voted shall be limited to a maximum rate of taxation not to exceed
thirty cents ($.30) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed
valuation.
B. The City Council is hereby empowered to call and conduct a special
election under the laws governing such elections as herein
contemplated and to submit thereat a proposition for increase of levy
when in the opinion of such Council the necessity therefor arises and
94.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 94.010.
95.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, see RSMo. § 94.060.
SECTION 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-2
1:485
SECTION 25-3. Levy of Taxes; Authorized Purposes. [Rev. Ord. No.
10, § 1, 10-21-1912]
For the support of the City Government, the payment of the outstanding
debt, and for the advancement, interest and improvement of the City, taxes
shall be levied on all property, real and personal, subject to taxation for
State, County or City purposes.
SECTION 25-4. Restrictions on Use of Tax Revenues. [Rev. Ord. No.
10, § 3, 10-21-1912]
Any tax authorized as a special tax for water and the interest and principal
of the bonded indebtedness of the City shall be set apart and faithfully
appropriated for those purposes and no other.
SECTION 25-5. Persons Liable for Property Taxes. [Rev. Ord. No. 10,
§ 13, 10-21-1912; Ord. of 12-17-1945, § 2]
Every person owning or holding property on January 1, including all such
property purchased on that date, shall be liable for the taxes thereon for the
fiscal or calendar year in which the property is assessed.
SECTION 25-6. Forms, Books for Assessment; Contents; Use. [Rev.
Ord. No. 10, § 8, 10-21-1912]
may submit any such proposition at either a special or regular election,
and such proposition shall be submitted by such Council when
petitioned therefor by qualified electors equaling in number five
percent (5%) or more of the qualified electors of the City voting for the
Mayor at the last City election at which a Mayor was elected.
C. The ballot shall be in substantially the following form:
Shall there be a _____ cent increase in tax levy on one hundred dollars
($100.00) valuation for general municipal purposes for __________ years
in the City of Lexington?
( ) Yes ( ) No
(Place an "X" beside the answer which you wish to vote.)
D. If such increase in levy shall be voted, then such increased levy shall be
effective for the number of years designated, and no longer, but the City
Council may submit any such proposal for continuing such increase of
levy at any time for like period not to exceed four (4) years each.
A. The City Clerk shall provide and furnish for the use of the City Assessor,
all blanks and blank books necessary for use in making assessments,
which shall, as nearly as practicable, be the same as those used by the
County Assessor, and the blanks used in listing the property shall
contain the same oath and be sworn to in the same manner as those
taken by the County Assessor.
SECTION 25-2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-6
1:486
SECTION 25-7. Examination, Approval, Disapproval of Assessment
Book. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 9, 10-21-1912]
The City Assessor's book shall, when completed and verified by affidavit as
required by law, be returned to and deposited in the office of the City Clerk,
who shall lay it before the City Council at its first regular meeting thereafter
for examination and approval. If such book is correctly and properly made,
the Council shall accept and approve it. Should such book be incorrect
or incomplete or not in conformity to law, the Council shall cause it to
be corrected and completed, and any sum necessarily expended for that
purpose shall be deducted from the compensation of the City Assessor.
SECTION 25-8. Extension of Taxes in Assessment Book;
Preservation of Book. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 11, 10-21-1912]
When the City Council shall have received the Assessor's Book, Corrected
and certified from the County Board of Equalization as hereinbefore
provided, and shall have established the rate of taxes to be levied and
collected on the property therein described as provided in Section 25-2, it
shall be the duty of the Clerk to forthwith extend, in appropriate columns
opposite each item of taxable property on the City Assessor's Book the
amount of City taxes, whether general or special, due thereon, and
thereupon, he shall charge the Collector with the full amount of such taxes
levied and to be collected, and said City Assessor's Book shall be carefully
preserved in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 25-9. Preparation, Contents of City Tax Book. [Rev. Ord.
No. 10, § 12, 10-21-1912]
As soon as the City taxes shall have been extended upon the City Assessor's
Book and within thirty (30) days thereafter, the City Clerk shall make out
for the use of the City Collector a correct and true copy thereof with the
taxes extended therein, and said copy shall be certified by the City Clerk
and authenticated by the Seal of the City and shall be known as the "City
Tax Book".
SECTION 25-10. Delivery of Tax Book to City Collector. [Rev. Ord.
No. 10, § 19, 10-21-1912]
As soon as may be after the tax book of each year shall have been completed
as provided in Section 25-9, the City Clerk shall deliver such book to the
City Collector and take his receipt for the aggregate amount of all general
B. The City Assessor, after being provided with the necessary blanks, shall
proceed with the County Assessor between June 1 and January 1 of each
year to make the assessment of all City property as provided by law. He
shall be diligent effort secure from or make complete lists of the
property of all taxpayers within the City, and when so secured shall
neatly and legibly copy the same in alphabetical order in the book
provided for that purpose and known as the City Assessor's Book.
SECTION 25-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-10
1:487
and special taxes due thereon, which receipt shall be filed and carefully
preserved by the City Clerk.
SECTION 25-11. Penalty for Failure to Pay Tax on Time. [Rev. Ord.
No. 10, § 22, 10-21-1912]
If any taxpayer shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the City Collector his
taxes at the time and place required by a statement thereof sent to said
taxpayer, then it shall be the duty of the City Collector after January 1
then next ensuing, to collect and account for as other taxes, an additional
tax, as penalty, of one percent (1%) per month, upon all taxes collected by
him after January 1 as aforesaid, and in computing said additional tax or
penalty, a fractional part of a month shall be counted as a whole month. At
the time of making each monthly and annual settlement, the City Collector
shall file with the City Clerk a statement, under oath, of the amount so
received and from whom received, and the City Clerk shall charge the City
Collector therewith; provided, that said interest shall not be chargeable
against persons who are absent from their homes and engaged in the
military service of this State or of the United States.
SECTION 25-12. Authority of City Collector to Enforce Collection by
Seizure of Property. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 24, 10-21-1912]
The City Collector shall diligently endeavor and use all lawful means to
collect all the taxes which he is required to collect in the City, and to that
end he shall have the power to seize and sell the goods and chattels of the
persons liable for taxes, in the same manner as goods and chattels are or
may be required to be seized and sold under execution issued on judgments
at law, and no property whatever shall be exempt from seizure and sale
for taxes due on lands, lots or personal property; provided, that no such
seizure or sale for taxes shall be made until after the first day of October
of each year, and the City Collector shall not receive a credit for delinquent
taxes until he shall have made affidavit that he has been unable to find any
personal property out of which to make the taxes in each case so returned
delinquent; but no seizure and sale of goods and chattels shall be made until
the City Collector has made demand for the payment of the tax to the party
liable to pay the same, or by leaving a written or printed notice at his place
of abode for that purpose, with some member of the family over fifteen (15)
years of age. Such seizure may be at any time after the first day of October
and before said taxes become delinquent.
SECTION 25-13. Collection of Costs, Interest When Property is
Seized by City Collector. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 25, 10-21-1912]
Whenever taxes shall be collected by seizure or sale of goods and chattels,
in addition to the amount of tax and costs of failure to pay the City Collector,
as provided by this Article, the City Collector shall levy the necessary cost
of the proceeding and the interest on the amount of the tax and costs of said
failure for his trouble.
SECTION 25-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-14
1:488
SECTION 25-14. Distress and Sale in Event of Anticipated Removal
of Taxpayer from City. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 25, 10-21-1912]
If the City Collector has reason to believe that any person charged with the
taxes is about to move from the City without paying his taxes, he may at any
time levy such taxes, with costs and charges, by distress and sale; provided,
that in levying and selling personal property for taxes, the City Collector
shall be governed by the same rules and be entitled to the same fees as
sheriffs are, or may be, for like services upon execution.
SECTION 25-15. Duties of City Collector When Tax is Paid. [Rev.
Ord. No. 10, § 28, 10-21-1912]
Whenever any person shall pay taxes charged on the tax book, the City
Collector shall enter such payment thereon, and give the person paying the
same a receipt, specifying therein the name of the person from whom paid,
the amount paid, what year paid for, and the property and value thereof
on which the same was paid, according to its description on the tax book,
in whole or in part, as the case may be, and the City Collector shall enter
"paid" opposite each lot or tract of land, when he collects the tax due
thereon.
SECTION 25-16. Payment of Tax on Part of Property Charged
Therewith. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 29, 10-21-1912]
The City Collector shall receive taxes on parts of any lot, piece or parcel of
land charged with taxes; provided, the person paying such tax shall furnish
him a particular specification of the part, and if the tax on the remainder of
such lot, piece or parcel of land shall remain unpaid, the City Collector shall
include such specification in his return, to the end that the part on which
the tax remains unpaid may be clearly known. If payment is made on an
undivided share of real estate, the City Collector shall enter on his record
or tax book the name of the owner of such share, so as to designate upon
whose undivided share the tax has been paid.
SECTION 25-17. Monthly Settlement of Revenue Received by City
Collector. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 29, 10-21-1912]
It shall be the duty of the City Collector, at the close of business on the last
weekday of each month, to make with the City Clerk a full and complete
settlement of the City Revenue collected by him, from all sources whatever,
during the preceding month. In such settlement, the City Collector shall
show from what source each amount of revenue was received or has been
collected, keeping each class separate and distinct from all others, to the
end that it may appear in every settlement what amount of revenue the
City has received from each and every source. Every such settlement shall
be entered at large by the City Clerk in a book to be kept by him for
that purpose, which book shall be open at all times for inspection by any
taxpayer of the City.
SECTION 25-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-18
1:489
SECTION 25-18. Payment of Revenue by City Collector After
Monthly Settlement. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 30, 10-21-1912]
Immediately after each monthly settlement as provided in Section 25-17,
the City Collector shall pay into the City Treasury the amount found due
on such settlement. He shall take two (2) receipts from the City Treasurer
for the amount so paid in, one (1) of which he shall file with the City Clerk,
who shall charge the City Treasurer with the amount of such payment, and
credit the City Collector with the same.
SECTION 25-19. Failure of City Collector to Pay Over Revenue
Following Monthly Settlement. [Rev. Ord. No. 10, § 31, 10-21-1912]
If the City Collector shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay into the City Treasury
the amount found due from him on any monthly settlement, and file the
City Treasurer's receipt therefor with the City Clerk, within three (3) days
after such settlement, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If the
Collector withholds such money from the City Treasury for a longer period
than ten (10) days, his office shall become vacant.
SECTION 25-20. Preparation of Tax Lists, Personal and Real. [Rev.
Ord. No. 10, § 32, 10-21-1912]
Whenever the City Collector shall be unable to collect any taxes specified
on the City Tax Book, having diligently endeavored and used all lawful
means to collect the same, he shall make lists thereof, one to be called
the "Tangible Personal Property Delinquent List", in which shall be stated
the names of all persons owing taxes on tangible personal property from
whom taxes cannot be collected, alphabetically arranged, with the amount
due from each person, and the other to be known and called the "Land
Delinquent List", in which shall be stated the taxes on lands and City lots
upon which taxes have not been collected, with a full description of said
land and lots, the name of the owner, if known, and the amount of taxes
due thereon, set opposite each tract of land and City lot and a like list
of all delinquent clerks and other officers required to pay to the Collector
the amount of revenue by them respectfully received, to be called the
"Delinquent List of Officers".
SECTION 25-21. Notice to Deliver List of Tangible Personal
Property. [Ord. No. 2004-09 § 1, 3-9-2004]
A. Required. The City Collector shall cause to be published in one (1) issue
of some newspaper published in the City, at least thirty (30) days before
delinquent taxes on personal property are turned over to a collection
agency, such delinquent personal property taxes, including delinquent
merchants' and manufacturer's taxes, remaining due and unpaid as he
shall deem necessary in his discretion that further action be taken to
collect same by the collection agency.
B. Contents. It shall be sufficient that the publication contain a description
substantially the same as in the personal tax records of the original levy,
SECTION 25-18 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-21
1:490
SECTION 25-22. through SECTION 25-30. (Reserved)
stating the name and address of each person delinquent in the payment
of his personal taxes and stating the aggregate amount of taxes,
including interest, penalty and cost, due and unpaid and the year
delinquent, together with a notice that, unless such delinquent personal
property taxes are paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the
publication, the delinquent personal property taxes remaining due and
unpaid thereafter shall be subject to being turned over to a collection
agency.
C. Proof Of Publication. The City Collector shall obtain a copy of the
advertisement, together with a certificate of the due publication
thereof, from the newspaper in which the same shall have been
published and shall file the copy of the same in his office.
SECTION 25-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-22
1:491

ARTICLE II
Delinquent and Back Taxes
SECTION 25-31. Preparation of Delinquent Land List; Contents,
Certification. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 1]
SECTION 25-32. City Collector to Proceed to Collect Delinquent
Taxes; Right of Parties in Interest to Redeem Land. [Ord. of
3-7-1938, § 2]
The City Collector shall assist the County Collector who shall proceed to
collect the taxes contained in the "Back Tax Book" or recorded list of
delinquent lands and lots, and any person having interest in or the owner
of said lands or lots contained in the "Back Tax Book" may redeem such
tract or any part thereof from the City's lien thereon by paying the amount
of original taxes charged against said land in said "Back Tax Book" with
interest on the same as provided by State law.
SECTION 25-33. Compromise of Delinquent Taxes. [Ord. of
3-7-1938, § 3]
A. On or before the first Monday in March each year the City Collector
shall make out and record a list of all land and lots on which the taxes or
special assessments levied by the City remain due and unpaid, together
with the penalty therefor. The City Collector shall certify the
correctness of the list with the date it was recorded and it shall be
signed by the City Collector or his deputy.
B. The list shall be delivered to the City Clerk who shall compare the list
with the City Collectors records of delinquent lands and lots and who
shall record it in his office and who shall certify thereon that is has been
properly recorded in the City Collectors office and that it is a true copy
of the delinquent land list on file in his office.
C. Thereafter but prior to the first Monday in March the properly certified
list shall be delivered to the County Clerk for inclusion in the "Back Tax
Book".
A. Whenever it shall appear to the City Council that any tract of land in the
"Back Tax Book" is not worth the amount of taxes, interest and cost due
thereon, or that the same would not sell for the amount so charged, it
shall be lawful for the Council to compromise said taxes with the owner
which shall have the effect to release said land from the City's lien. It
shall be the duty of the City Collector to distribute to the various funds
to which taxes are due, in proportion as the amount received bears to
the whole amount charged against such tract or lot. Such compromise
shall only be made in such cases where improvements have been
destroyed, which materially lower the value of the property, after the
assessment is made and before the taxes are collected.
SECTION 25-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-33
1:493
SECTION 25-34. When Proceeds of Sale Exceed Amount Owed City.
[Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 4]
When real estate is sold for taxes by the City Collector for a greater amount
than the debt or taxes and all costs, the balance over shall be paid to the
owner of such land. If such owner cannot be found, then such surplus shall
be paid into the City Treasury to be credited to the General Fund, to be
held in trust for twenty (20) years for the owner or his legal representatives.
At the end of twenty (20) years, if such fund shall not be called for, then
it shall become permanent funds of the City. The City Council shall require
satisfactory proof of any claim before refunding the money, and the City
shall pay no interest to the claimant for any such fund.
SECTION 25-35. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 93-39,
2-22-1994]
SECTION 25-36. Amount of Interest on Delinquent Taxes. [Ord. of
3-7-1938, § 6]
SECTION 25-37. When Property May be Sold; Parties in Interest
Need Not be Notified; Payment Prior to Sale. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 7;
Ord. No. 74-6, § 1, 5-7-1974]
B. The City Council by ordinance, may delegate this authorization to the
City Collector.
A. Each tract of land in the "Back Tax Book", in addition to the delinquent
amount shall be charged with a penalty of eighteen percent (18%) of
each year's delinquency except that the penalty on lands redeemed
prior to sale shall not exceed two percent (2%) per month or fractional
part thereof.
B. For making and recording delinquent tax lists, the Collector and Clerk
shall receive ten cents ($.10) per tract or lot and the Clerk shall receive
five cents ($.05) per tract or lot for comparing and authenticating such
list.
A. All lands and lots on which taxes are delinquent and unpaid shall be
subject to sale to discharge the lien for said delinquent and unpaid
taxes as provided for in this Article on the fourth Monday of August of
each year.
B. No real property shall be sold without judicial proceedings unless the
notice of sale contains the names of all record owners thereof or the
names of all owners appearing on the land tax book and all other
information provided by law. Delinquent taxes, with penalty, interest
and costs, may be paid to the County Collector at any time before the
property is sold for taxes.
SECTION 25-33 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-38
1:494
SECTION 25-38. Publication of Delinquent List; Contents; Costs of
Publication to be Taxed. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 8; Ord. No. 74-6, § 1,
5-7-1974]
SECTION 25-39. Commencement of Sale; Non-Resident Purchasers.
[Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 9]
On the day mentioned in the notice required by Section 25-38, the City
Collector shall commence the sale of such lands, and shall continue the
same from day to day until so much of each parcel assessed or belonging
to each person assessed, shall be sold as will pay the taxes, interest and
charges thereon, or chargeable to such person in the County. The person
offering at said sale to pay the required sum for the least quantity of any
tract shall be considered the purchaser of such quantity; provided, no bid
shall be received from any person not a resident of the State, until such
person shall file with the City Collector an agreement in writing consenting
to the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court of the County and also filing with
the City Collector an appointment of some citizen of the County as agent of
said purchaser, and consenting that service of process on such agent shall
A. The Collector shall cause a copy of the list of delinquent lands and lots
to be printed in some newspaper of general circulation and published in
the County for three (3) consecutive weeks, one (1) insertion weekly,
before such sale, the last insertion to be at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the fourth Monday in August. It shall only be necessary in the printed
and published list to state in the aggregate the amount of taxes, penalty,
interest and cost due thereon, each year separately stated, and the lots
shall be described by number, block, addition, etc.
B. If a part or parts of any forty (40) acre tract or other legal subdivision or
lot is assessed on the tax books to two (2) or more parties as owners
thereof, then, as to such land or lots, such list shall be so prepared and
separated. To such list shall be attached and in like manner so printed
and published a notice that so much of said lands and lots as may be
necessary to discharge the taxes, interest and charges which are due
thereon at the time of sale will be sold at public auction at the County
Courthouse door on the fourth Monday in August next thereafter,
commencing at 10:00 A.M. of such day and continuing from day to day
thereafter until all are offered.
C. The Collector shall, on or before the day of the sale, insert at the foot of
such list on his record a copy of such notice and certify on said record
immediately following such notice the name of the newspaper of the
County in which such notice was printed and published and the dates of
insertions of such notice in such newspaper. The expense of such
printing shall be paid by the purchaser or purchasers of the lands and/
or lots sold and shall not exceed the legal rate as is fixed by State law
and shall be taxed as part of the costs of the sale of any land or lot
contained in such list and disposed of at such sale, and the total cost of
printing such notice shall be pro-rated against all such lands or lots so
sold or redeemed prior to any such sale.
SECTION 25-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-39
1:495
give such Court jurisdiction to try and determine any suit growing out of or
connected with such sale for taxes. All such written consents to jurisdiction
and selective appointments shall be preserved by the City Collector and
shall be binding upon any person or corporation claiming under the person
consenting to jurisdiction and making the appointment herein referred to;
provided further, that in the event of the death, disability or refusal to act
of the person appointed as agent of said non-resident purchaser, the City
Clerk shall become the appointee as agent of said non-resident purchaser.
SECTION 25-40. Procedure When Land is Not Sold at First Sale.
[Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 10]
SECTION 25-41. Procedure When Land is Not Sold for two
Successive Years. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 11]
Whenever any lands have been or shall hereafter be offered for sale for
delinquent taxes, interest, penalty and costs by the Collector for any two (2)
successive years and no person shall have bid therefor a sum equal to the
delinquent taxes thereon, interest, penalty and costs provided by law, then
such City Collector shall at the next regular tax sale of lands for delinquent
taxes, sell the same to the highest bidder, and there shall be no period of
redemption from such sale.
SECTION 25-42. Payment by Purchaser; Failure to Pay. [Ord. of
3-7-1938, § 12]
Where a sale is made pursuant to this Article, the purchaser of such sale
shall immediately pay the amount of his bid to the City Collector, who shall
pay the surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto, or if he has doubt, or
a dispute arises as to the proper person, the same shall be paid into the City
Treasury to be held for the use and benefit of the person entitled thereto.
In case the purchaser fails to pay his bid, the land shall be again forthwith
offered for sale the same as if no sale had been made.
A. If at the first offering of sale of any tract of land or lot under the
provisions of this Article, no person shall bid therefor a sum equal to the
delinquent taxes thereon with interest, penalty and costs, then the
Clerk shall note such fact in his record of the sale and the Collector
shall note such a recital thereof in his record of sale of delinquent lands
and lots, and said tracts of land or lots shall be again offered to sale, at
the next sale of delinquent lands and lots as in this Article provided, if
such lands or lots are at such time delinquent.
B. If at the second offering for sale no person shall bid therefor a sum
equal to the then delinquent taxes thereof with interest, penalty and
costs, then the Clerk shall note such fact upon his record of the sale,
and the Collector shall enter a recital of such fact in his record book
containing the List of Delinquent Lands and Lots.
SECTION 25-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-43
1:496
SECTION 25-43. Issuance of Certificate of Purchase; Contents;
Assignability; Fees. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 13]
SECTION 25-44. Possession of Land Sold. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 14]
The purchaser of any tract or lot of land for sale for delinquent taxes,
homesteads excepted, shall at any time after one (1) year from the date of
sale be entitled to the immediate possession of the premises so purchased
during the redemption period provided for in this Article, unless sooner
redeemed; provided however, any owner or occupant of any tract or lot of
land purchased may retain possession of said premises by making a written
assignment of, or agreement to pay, rent certain or estimated to accrue
A. After payment shall have been made, the City Collector shall give the
purchaser a certificate in writing, to be designated as a Certificate of
Purchase, which shall carry a numerical number and which shall
describe the land so purchased, each tract or lot separately stated, the
total amount of the tax, with penalty, interest and costs, and the year or
years of delinquency for which said lands or lots were sold, separately
stated, and the aggregate of all such taxes, penalty, interest and costs,
and the sum bid on each tract. If the purchaser bids for any tract or lot
of land a sum in excess of the delinquent tax, penalty, interest and costs
for which said tract or lot of land was sold, such excess sum shall also
be noted in the Certificate of Purchase, in a separate column to be
provided therefor. Such Certificate of Purchase shall also recite the
name and address of the owner or reputed owner, if known, and if
unknown then the party or parties to whom each tract or lot of land was
assessed, together with the address of such party, if known, and shall
also have incorporated therein the name and address of the purchaser.
Such Certificate of Purchase shall also contain the true date of a Deed
for said land, if not redeemed as in this Article provided, and the rate of
interest that such Certificate of Purchase shall bear, which rate of
interest shall not exceed the sum of ten percent (10%) per annum. Such
Certificate shall be authenticated by the City Collector, who shall record
the same in a permanent record book in his office before delivery to the
purchaser.
B. Such Certificate shall be assignable, but no assignment thereof shall be
valid unless endorsed on such Certificate and acknowledged before
some officer authorized to take acknowledgment of Deeds and an entry
of such assignment entered in the record of said Certificate of Purchase
in the office of the City Collector.
C. For each Certificate of Purchase issued, including the recording of the
same, the City Collector shall be entitled to receive and retain a fee of
fifty cents ($.50) to be paid by the purchaser and treated as a part of the
cost of the sale, and so noted on the Certificate. For noting any
assignment of any Certificate, the City Collector shall be entitled to a
fee of twenty-five cents ($.25) to be paid by the person requesting such
recital of assignment and which shall not be treated as a part of the cost
of the sale.
SECTION 25-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-44
1:497
during such redemption period of so much thereof as shall be sufficient to
discharge the bid of the purchaser with interest thereon as provided in the
Certificate of Purchase. Any rent collected by the purchaser, his heirs or
assigns, shall operate as a payment upon the amount due the holder of such
Certificate of Purchase, and such amount together with the date paid and by
whom shall be endorsed as a credit upon said Certificate, which sum shall
be taken into consideration in the redemption of such land, as provided for
in this Article.
SECTION 25-45. City Clerk to Act as Clerk of Sale; Duties; Fees.
[Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 15]
The City Clerk shall attend as Clerk of the sale of delinquent land and shall
enter the same in a record book giving a description of the proper tract,
showing how much of each lot or tract was sold, to whom and the price, or
whether the same remains unsold. For such services, the Clerk shall receive
twenty-five cents ($.25) to be added as costs of the sale.
SECTION 25-46. Redemption Generally. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 18]
The owner or occupant of any land or lot sold for taxes, or any other person
having an interest therein, may redeem the same at any time during the
two (2) years next ensuing by paying to the Collector, for the use of the
purchaser, his heirs or assigns, the full sum of the purchase money named
in his Certificate of Purchase and all the costs of the sale together with
interest at the rate specified in such Certificate, not to exceed ten percent
(10%) annually, with all subsequent taxes which have been paid thereon
by the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, with interest at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum on such taxes subsequently paid, and in addition
thereto, the person redeeming any land shall pay the costs incident to
entry of recital of such redemption. Upon deposit with the Collector of the
amount necessary to redeem as herein provided, it shall be the duty of the
Collector to mail to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, at the last post office
address, if known, and if not known, then to the address of the purchaser
as shown in the record of the Certificate of Purchase, notice of such deposit
for redemption. Such notice, given as herein provided, shall stop payment
to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, of any further interest or penalty. In
case the party purchasing said land, his heirs or assigns, fails to take a tax
deed for the land so purchased within six (6) months after the expiration
of the two (2) years next following the date of the sale, no interest shall be
charged or collected from the redemptioner after that time.
SECTION 25-47. Partial Redemptions. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, §§ 16, 17]
A. Any person claiming an undivided share in any land out of which an
undivided part shall have been sold for taxes, may redeem his undivided
share by paying such portion of the purchase money, interest and
penalty and subsequent taxes as he claims of the land sold, and any
person claiming a specific part of any land sold for taxes may redeem
his specific part by paying such proportion of the purchase money,
SECTION 25-44 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-47
1:498
SECTION 25-48. Redemption by Incompetents. [Ord. of 3-7-1938,
§ 19]
Infants, incapacitated and disabled persons as defined in Chapter 475,
RSMo., may redeem any land belonging to them sold for taxes, within two
(2) years after the expiration of such disability in the same manner provided
for redemption by other persons.
SECTION 25-49. Record of Redemptions. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 20]
When lands sold for taxes, or any portion thereof, shall be redeemed, the
City Collector shall insert a memorandum of such redemption on the record
of the Certificate of Purchase applicable thereto, stating the quantity or
description of the portion redeemed, if not the whole, the date thereof,
by whom made, and sign the same officially, and shall likewise give a
Certificate thereof to the person redeeming. The person redeeming shall
then present to the City Clerk the Certificate of Redemption and the City
Clerk shall then enter on his record of sales of land for delinquent taxes the
recital of such redemption, the date thereof and the person redeeming.
SECTION 25-50. Conveyance of Property Upon Failure to Redeem.
[Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 21]
If no person shall redeem lands sold for taxes within two (2) years from
the sale, at the expiration thereof, and on production of the Certificate of
Purchase, and in case the Certificate covers only a part of a tract or lot of
land, then accompanied with a survey or description of such part, made by
the City or County Surveyor or Engineer, the City Collector shall execute to
the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, in the name of the State, a conveyance
of the real estate sold, which shall vest in the grantee an absolute estate
in fee simple; subject, however, to all claims for unpaid taxes, except such
unpaid taxes existing at the time of the purchase of said lands and the lien
for which taxes was inferior to, to the lien for taxes for which said tract
or lot of land was sold. In making such conveyance, when two (2) or more
parcels, tracts or lots of land are sold for the nonpayment of taxes to the
same purchaser or purchasers, or if the same person or persons shall in any
wise become the owner of the Certificates thereof, all of such parcels shall
be included in one (1) Deed.
interest, penalty and subsequent taxes as his quantity of ground shall
bear to the whole quantity sold.
B. In every case where a partial redemption is asked for, the City Collector,
upon the application of the redemptioner, after notice to the holder of
the Certificate, shall determine the proportion to be paid by the party
applying to redeem and his decision shall be final thereon. For his
services in stating the proportion, the redemptioner shall pay him fifty
cents ($.50). In every case of a partial redemption, the quantity sold
shall be reduced in proportion to the amount paid on such partial
redemption and the City Collector shall convey the land accordingly.
SECTION 25-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-51
1:499
SECTION 25-51. Deed to Unredeemed Property; Execution, Form,
Recording Fee. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 22]
The conveyance provided for in Section 25-50 shall be executed by the
City Collector, under his hand and Seal, witnessed by the City Clerk and
acknowledged before the County Recorder or any other officer authorized
to take acknowledgements and the same shall be recorded in the Recorder's
office before delivery. A fee for recording shall be paid by the purchaser
and shall be included in the cost of sale. Such Deed shall be prima facie
evidence that the property conveyed was subject to taxation at the time
assessed, that the taxes were delinquent and unpaid at the time of the
sale, of the regularity of the sale of the premises described in the Deed,
and of the regularity of all prior proceedings, that said land or lot had not
been redeemed and that the period therefor had elapsed, and prima facie
evidence of good and valid title in fee simple in the grantee of said Deed.
The City Collector shall be entitled to demand and receive from the person
applying therefor, for each tax Deed, one dollar fifty cents ($1.50), which
shall include the acknowledgment.
SECTION 25-52. Certificate Holder to Pay Accrued Taxes Prior to
Entitlement to Deed. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, § 23]
SECTION 25-53. Invalid Sales. [Ord. of 3-7-1938, §§ 24-26]
A. Every holder of a Certificate of Purchase shall before being entitled to
apply for Deed to any tract or lot of land described therein pay all taxes
that have accrued thereon since the issuance of said Certificate, or any
prior taxes that may remain due and unpaid on said property, and the
lien for which was not foreclosed by sale under which such holder
makes demand for Deed, and any purchaser that shall suffer a
subsequent tax to become delinquent and a subsequent Certificate of
Purchase to issue on the same property included in the Certificate, such
first purchaser shall forfeit his rights of priority thereunder to the
subsequent purchaser, and such subsequent purchaser shall at the time
of obtaining his Certificate redeem said first Certificate of Purchase
outstanding by depositing with the City Collector the amount of said
first Certificate with interest thereon to the date of said redemption and
the amount so paid in redemption shall become a part of said
subsequent Certificate of Purchase and draw interest at the rate
specified in said first Certificate, but not to exceed ten percent (10%)
per annum from the date of payment.
B. The holder of a Certificate of Purchase permitting a subsequent
Certificate to issue on the same property shall on notice from the City
Collector surrender said Certificate of Purchase on payment to him of
the redemption money paid by the subsequent purchaser.
A. Whenever the City Collector shall discover, prior to the conveyance of
any land sold for taxes, that the sale was for any invalid cause whatever,
he shall not convey such lands, but the purchase money and the interest
SECTION 25-51 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-53
1:500
SECTION 25-54. When Person Entitled to Deed Dies. [Ord. of
3-7-1938, § 27]
In all cases of sale of land for taxes, if the purchaser or his assigns shall die
before a Deed shall be executed on such sale, the Deed may be executed by
the City Collector, to his heirs at law or devisees.
SECTION 25-55. Delinquent Personal Taxes; Bills; Suit for
Collection; Attorney Fees. [Ord. No. 12-1-1941, §§ 1-3]
thereon shall be refunded out of the City Treasury to the purchaser,
his representatives or assigns, on the order of the City Council. Such
invalid sale shall suspend for the period intervening between the date
of the sale and the discovery of its invalidity the running of the statutes
of limitations. In such cases, the City Collector shall make an entry
opposite to such tracts or lots in the record of Certificates of Purchase
issued or redemption record that the same was erroneously sold, and
the cause of invalidity, and such entry shall be prima facie evidence of
the fact therein stated. He shall notify the City Clerk of such action,
whose duty it shall be to make a like entry upon his sale record.
B. No sale or conveyance of land for taxes shall be valid if at the time of
being listed such land shall not have been liable to taxation, or, if liable,
the taxes thereon shall have been paid before the sale, or if the
description is so imperfect as to fail to describe the land or lot with
reasonable certainty and for the first two (2) enumerated causes, the
money paid by the purchaser at such void sale shall be refunded, with
interest, out of the City Treasury on order of the City Council.
C. The sale of land for taxes shall not be invalid on account of such land
having been listed or charged on the tax book in any other name than
that of the rightful owner.
A. The City Collector shall make out delinquent personal tax bills and
properly certify the same, and deliver the same to the City Attorney to
file suit on such tax bills to enforce the payment thereof for all personal
taxes remaining unpaid upon the delinquent personal tax books of the
City.
B. The City Attorney shall file suit upon all such tax bills delivered to him
by the City Collector.
C. The City Attorney may receive for services rendered by him in filing
such suits ten percent (10%) of the amount sued for and collected, said
fees to be charged as other costs in the case and under no
circumstances shall the same be paid by the City.
SECTION 25-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-55
1:501

ARTICLE III
Utilities Occupation Tax
SECTION 25-56. Gas Tax. [Ord. No. 82-4 §§ 1-3, 2-2-1982; Ord. No.
93-10 § 1, 7-13-1993]
SECTION 25-57. Light and Power Company Tax. [Ord. No. 79-9
§§ 1-3, 2-3-1979; Ord. No. 93-10 § 1, 7-13-1993]
A. Every gas company, and every other person, firm or corporation, their
successors and assigns, owning, operating, controlling, leasing or
managing any gas plant or system, manufacturing, selling, distributing
or transmitting natural or manufactured gas, shall, in addition to all
other taxes, payments or fees now or hereafter required by law or
ordinance, pay to the City of Lexington, Missouri, an occupation tax in
an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts derived from
the sale of gas within the present or future limits of the City of
Lexington, Missouri, during the period of such occupation.
B. The said occupation tax shall be based upon the sale of gas for domestic
and commercial consumption and not for resale, but not including any
revenue for gas to the City of Lexington, Missouri.
C. Said gas company shall pay the occupation tax herein provided
quarterly within thirty (30) days after January 1, April 1, July 1, and
October 1, of each year, to be computed upon the basis of gross revenue
during the preceding three (3) months' period. The said company shall
file a statement notifying said City of the amount of gross revenue
subject to the payment of the said tax, and at the time of filing such
statement shall pay to the said City the tax due.
A. Every light and power company, and every other person, firm or
corporation, their successors and assigns, owning, operating,
controlling, leasing or managing any electric plant or system
generating, manufacturing, selling, distributing or transmitting electric
energy and power, shall, in addition to all other taxes, payments or fees
now or hereafter required by law or ordinance, pay to the City of
Lexington, Missouri, an occupation tax in an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts derived from the sale of electric
energy within the present or future limits of the City of Lexington,
Missouri, during the period of such occupation.
B. The said occupation tax shall be based upon the sale of electric energy
for domestic and commercial consumption and not for resale, but not
including any revenue for electric service to the City of Lexington,
Missouri.
C. Said light and power company shall pay the occupation tax herein
provided monthly, and said tax shall be computed upon the basis of
gross revenue from the first day through the last day of each month
beginning on September 14, 1979. The said company shall calculate the
SECTION 25-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-57
1:503
SECTION 25-58. through SECTION 25-61. (Reserved)
tax due the said City monthly, and within sixty (60) days after the last
day of each month file a statement notifying said City of the amount
of gross revenue subject to the payment of the said tax which was
received during the month, and at the time of filing such statement shall
pay to the City the tax due.
SECTION 25-57 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-58
1:504
ARTICLE IV
City Sales Tax
SECTION 25-62. Imposition of City Sales Tax. [Ord. No. 78-3 § 1,
4-4-1978]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of Section
94.500 to 94.570, RSMo., a tax for general revenue purposes is hereby
imposed upon all sellers for the privilege of engaging in the business of
selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail
to the extent and in the manner provided in Sections 144.010 to 144.510,
RSMo., and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue issued
pursuant thereto. The rate of the tax shall be one percent (1%) on the
receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable
services at retail within the City of Lexington, Missouri, if such property
and taxable services are subject to taxation by the State of Missouri under
the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510, RSMo. The tax shall become
effective as provided in Subsection (4) of Section 94.510, RSMo., and shall
be collected pursuant to the provisions of Sections 94.500 to 94.570, RSMo.
SECTION 25-63. Imposition of Capital Improvement Sales Tax.
[Ord. No. 91-17 §§ 1-2, 12-17-1991]
SECTION 25-63.1. Commission to Facilitate Financing of Capital
Improvements. [Ord. No. 97-13 §§ 1 — 7, 7-8-1997]
A. A half cent ($.005) capital improvement sales tax is hereby imposed as
authorized and prescribed in Section 144.032, RSMo., upon all retail
sales to residential customers of metered water services, electricity,
electrical current and natural, artificial or propane gas, wood, coal, or
home heating oil for domestic use only.
B. The taxation rate herein prescribed and imposed shall be one-half
percent (0.5%) on all such retail sales made in the City of Lexington in
accord with the amount prescribed and authorized under Section
94.577, RSMo.
A. Public Purpose. The City Council of the City hereby finds and
determines that the formation of the Corporation and the issuance of
revenue bonds by the Corporation on behalf of the City to finance the
costs of making capital improvements to public facilities of the City will
promote the public welfare by improving and enhancing the ability of
the City to provide quality facilities and services to citizens residing in
the City, and that the Corporation will be performing activities which
otherwise would be the responsibility of the City.
B. Approval Of Formation Of The Corporation. The City Council hereby
approves the formation of the Corporation for the purposes set forth in
its articles of incorporation.
SECTION 25-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-63.1
1:505
SECTION 25-64. Park Improvements Tax.96 [Ord. No. 95-32 §§ 1 — 2,
1-9-1996; Ord. No. 96-01 §§ 1 — 2, 4-9-1996]
There shall be a sales tax increase of one-half of one percent (0.5%) in
addition to other sales taxes as provided by law on retail sales made in the
City for the purpose of funding City Parks Improvements.
C. Approval Of Articles Of Incorporation And Bylaws Of The Corporation.
The City Council hereby approves the articles of incorporation and the
bylaws of the Corporation in substantially the forms attached to this
ordinance and on file in the City offices.
D. Approval Of Board Of Directors. The City Council hereby approves the
initial Board of Directors of the Corporation as set forth in the articles
of incorporation which is on file in the City offices.
E. Issuance Of Obligations By The Corporation. The Corporation shall
issue no bonds, notes or other obligations with respect to financing
capital improvements to public facilities of the City until, in each case,
the City Council adopts an ordinance approving each specific issuance
of obligations. Any bonds, notes or other obligations of the Corporation
shall not be a debt of the City and the City shall not be liable thereon. In
no event shall any bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the
Corporation be payable out of any funds or properties other than those
acquired for the purpose of such financing, and such bonds, notes and
obligations shall not constitute an indebtedness of the City within the
meaning of any constitutional or statutory debt limitation or restriction.
F. Costs And Expenses. The City Council hereby authorizes the Mayor and
such officers and employees as the Mayor may designate, to proceed
with the planning and design work for proposed capital improvements
and authorizes the City, subject to prior approval of the City Council, to
advance the funds necessary for such purposes. Any funds advanced by
the City as aforesaid shall be promptly reimbursed to the City by the
Corporation, to the extent such reimbursement is permitted by law,
from the proceeds of any obligations issued by the Corporation to
finance the capital improvements.
G. Further Authority. The Mayor and such officers, employees and
representatives of the City as he/she may direct, are hereby authorized
and directed to proceed with the necessary negotiations and the
preparation of the legal documents relating to the capital
improvements to public facilities contemplated hereby and the issuance
of bonds, notes or other obligations by the Corporation to finance such
improvements; provided however, that all documents whose execution
and delivery are contemplated by the provisions hereof, including but
not limited to, the terms of any bonds, notes or other obligations and of
the sale of the same, shall be approved by the City Council.
96.Editor's note — This tax will be effective October 1, 1996.
SECTION 25-63.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-65
1:506
SECTION 25-65. Show Me Green Sales Tax Holiday. [Ord. No.
2010-06 §§ 1 — 4, 2-9-2010]
SECTION 25-65.1. Local Use Tax.97 [Ord. No. 2017-19 §§ 1 — 2,
5-23-2017]
A. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean:
APPLIANCE — Clothes washers and dryers, water heaters, trash
compactors, dishwashers, conventional ovens, ranges, stoves, air
conditioners, furnaces, refrigerators and freezers.
ENERGY STAR CERTIFIED — Any appliance approved by both the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Department of Energy as eligible to display the energy star label, as
amended from time to time.
B. By enacting this Section the City of Lexington hereby elects to allow the
Show Me Green Sales Tax Holiday established by Section 144.526,
RSMo., to apply to its local sales taxes so that there shall be exempted
from local sales taxes all retail sales of any energy star certified new
appliance, up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per
appliance, during a seven (7) day period beginning at 12:01 A.M. on
April nineteenth (19th) and ending at Midnight on April twenty-fifth
(25th) commencing in 2010 and effective for each subsequent year until
revocation.
C. This Section shall not apply to any retailer when less than two percent
(2%) of the retailer's merchandise offered for sale qualifies for the sales
tax holiday. Such retailer shall offer a sales tax refund in lieu of the sales
tax holiday.
D. The Clerk shall take any and all steps necessary to notify the Missouri
Department of Revenue not less than forty-five (45) calendar days prior
to the beginning date of the sales tax holiday of the adoption of this
Section and the election to allow the Show Me Green Sales to Holiday to
apply within the City.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by, and subject to, the provisions of
Sections 144.600 through 144.761, RSMo., a use tax for general
revenue purposes is imposed for the privilege of storing, using or
consuming within the City any article of tangible personal property.
This tax does not apply with respect to the storage, use or consumption
of any article of tangible personal property purchased, produced or
manufactured outside this State until the transportation of the article
has finally come to rest within this City or until the article has become
co-mingled with the general mass of property of this City.
B. The rate of the tax shall be two point five percent (2.5%). If any City
sales tax is repealed or the rate thereof is reduced or raised by voter
97.Editor's Note: This tax was approved by a majority of the qualified voters at an election
held 8-8-2017.
SECTION 25-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-65.1
1:507
approval, the City use tax rate also shall be deemed to be repealed,
reduced or raised by the same action repealing, reducing or raising the
City sales tax.
SECTION 25-65.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-65.1
1:508
ARTICLE V
Enhanced Enterprise Zone
SECTION 25-66. Enhanced Enterprise Zone. [Ord. No. 2009-45 §§ 1
— 5, 11-24-2009]
A. The City of Lexington hereby appoints seven (7) members to the
Lexington Enhanced Enterprise Zone Board of Directors.
B. The Board of Directors will meet as needed, however, not less than once
per year, to review all completed Enhanced Enterprise Zone
applications for approvals.
C. Each member of the Board will serve without compensation and, upon
establishment, elect a Chairperson.
D. Initial appointment of the Board members shall be made on a staggered
term basis with one (1) member serving a two (2) year term, two (2)
members serving a three (3) year term and two (2) members serving a
four (4) year term. The school district and effected taxing jurisdiction
members will serve a term of five (5) years. Thereafter, members
appointed shall serve five (5) years, except all vacancies shall be filled
for unexpired terms in the same manner as with the original
appointment.
E. The Board's responsibilities include advising the City Council on the
designation of the Enhanced Enterprise Zone and any other advisory
duties as determined by the City Council; review and assess
applications within the Enhanced Enterprise Zone; and submit an
annual report to the Missouri Department of Economic Development
regarding the status of the zone and business activity therein.
SECTION 25-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 25-66
1:509
Chapter 26
VEGETATION
Cross References — Garbage and trash, §§ 11-1 et seq.; Health, §§ 12-1 et
seq.; Building inspector/code enforcement officer — authorized to enforce
ch. 26, § 2-209.
SECTION 25-66 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 25-66
1:510
ARTICLE I
In General
SECTION 26-1. Hedges Adjacent to Public Ways to be Trimmed.
[Rev. Ord. No. 28, §§ 1,2, 10-21-1912]
SECTION 26-2. through SECTION 26-12. (Reserved)
A. Every person owning a hedge fence, composed of any kind of bushes or
plants, and being along or adjacent to any public street, alley, avenue or
public thoroughfare within the City is hereby required to cut or trim
such hedge to the height of not more than four (4) feet from the ground,
and shall trim all branches or roots so that they shall not extend over or
onto the line of any such street, alley, avenue or public thoroughfare in
the City. Any such hedge or bushes causing an obstruction to the view of
persons operating motor vehicles is prohibited.
B. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this Section within
ten (10) days from the date of the service of notice on such owner shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Such notice shall be served by the
City Marshal by order of the City Council.
SECTION 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 26-2
1:511

ARTICLE II
Weeds98
SECTION 26-13. Certain Weeds and Other Vegetation Declared a
Nuisance; Duty of Property Owners to Cut and Remove. [Ord. of
8-5-1963, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-24 § 1, 6-13-2006]
Weeds, grass and other vegetation which are allowed to grow and stand
upon any lot, adjoining right-of-way or tract of ground within the City, or
having been cut and permitted to remain where cut in a decaying condition
upon such lot, right-of-way or tract, are hereby deemed and declared to be
a menace to the health and a public nuisance, and the owners, occupants,
lessee and agents of the owners or occupants of such lots, rights-of-way or
tracts are hereby required to keep such weeds, grass and other vegetation
cut to a height not to exceed eight (8) inches and when cut to remove the
same.
SECTION 26-14. Violation — Notice to Cut Weeds — Abatement by
City. [Ord. No. 91-8 § 2, 8-13-1991]
Any person within the City who shall own or occupy property upon which
weeds, grass or other such similar ground vegetation as described in
Section 26-13 is permitted or allowed to reach a height in excess of eight
(8) inches shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance offense in violation of this
Code and punishable as prescribed under Section 1-8 of the Municipal Code
for the City of Lexington. If such person shall fail to cut or remove such
vegetation within ten (10) days of the receipt of a written notice from the
City to do so, the City shall also be authorized to abate such nuisance in the
manner otherwise provided by Missouri law or the City's ordinances.
SECTION 26-15. (Repealed) [Repealed by Ord. No. 91-8 § 1,
11-13-1991]
SECTION 26-16. Right of Entry of City for Abatement Purposes.
[Ord. of 8-5-1963, § 3]
The City shall have full authority to enter upon any premises for the purpose
of abating any nuisance created by the unlawful growth or accumulation of
weeds, grass or other vegetation.
SECTION 26-17. Expenses Incurred by City to be Billed to Owner.
[Ord. of 8-5-1963, § 4]
Any expense incurred by the City in removing weeds, grass and other
vegetation from any premises shall be billed to the owner, occupant, or
agent of the owner or occupant of such premises and shall constitute a lien
on the premises.
98.State Law Reference — Weed control, RSMo. § 263.190.
SECTION 26-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 26-17
1:513

ARTICLE III
Regulation of Debris As a Nuisance
SECTION 26-18. Debris as a Nuisance. [Ord. No. 2003-01,
1-14-2003]
A. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any lot or land to have
on it debris of any kind. The term "debris" may include, but is not
limited to:
1. Weed cuttings.
2. Cut and fallen trees and shrubs.
3. Overgrown vegetation and noxious weeds which are seven (7)
inches or more in height.
4. Rubbish and trash.
5. Lumber not piled or stacked twelve (12) inches off the ground.
6. Rocks or bricks not piled or stacked twelve (12) inches off the
ground.
7. Tin not piled or stacked twelve (12) inches off the ground.
8. Steel not piled or stacked twelve (12) inches off the ground.
9. Parts of derelict cars or trucks.
10. Broken furniture.
11. Any flammable material which may endanger public safety.
12. Any material which is unhealthy or unsafe.
B. If the designated officer of the City believes that a nuisance as herein
set out exists on any property within the City, such officer shall send to
the owner, occupant or person in control of such property an abatement
notice which shall contain the following:
1. A description of the location and nature of the alleged nuisance,
2. A statement of the acts necessary to abate the alleged nuisance,
3. An order establishing the time for beginning and completing
abatement of the alleged nuisance but not longer than seven (7)
days from date of notice and requiring that abatement activities
continue without unreasonable delay,
4. Information on the right and manner of requesting a hearing to
contest the enforcement official's abatement notice, and
5. A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as ordered, and if no
request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the City
SECTION 26-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 26-18
1:515
may abate the alleged nuisance and assess the cost against the
property owner and the property.
C. Service Of Abatement Notice.
1. The enforcement official shall serve the abasement notice on the
property owner by first class mail or by personal service in the
same manner as legal process is served under any Missouri Statute
or court rule. Mailed notice shall be presumed received three (3)
days after it is mailed.
2. If the enforcement official is unable to obtain service by either of
the above methods, service may be obtained by publishing the
abatement notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City and by posting the abatement notice on the property where the
alleged nuisance exists. Notice shall be considered given on the
date the notice is published or the notice is posted, whichever is
later.
D. Request For Hearing. The owner of property on which the nuisance is
alleged to exist may contest the abatement notice by requesting a
hearing within seven (7) days of service of the abatement notice. The
request for hearing must be either hand delivered to the City or sent to
the City by United States mail, facsimile machine or electronic mail.
The request for hearing must state an address to which notice of
hearing may be sent.
E. Notice Of Hearing. At least ten (10) days' written notice of the hearing
shall be given to the property owner except in cases where the public
health, safety or interest shall make a shorter time reasonable. Notice
shall be hand delivered to the property owner or mailed to the address
provided by the property owner in the request for hearing. Notice shall
be presumed received three (3) days after it is mailed.
F. Hearing And Decision. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing
and enter a decision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
536, RSMo. If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists as
charged in the abatement notice, the officer may enter an order of
abatement directing that the nuisance be abated under such conditions
and within such time as the hearing officer deems appropriate under
the circumstances.
G. Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the hearing officer may be made
to the Circuit Court of Lafayette County in accordance with Chapter
536, RSMo.
H. In the event the person so notified fails to abate such nuisance as
directed in the notice or by a hearing officer and the City is required to
remove and abate such nuisance, then the cost of such removal shall be
certified to the City Clerk who shall cause the certified cost to be
included in a special tax bill or added to the annual estate tax bill, at the
collecting official's options, for the property and the certified costs shall
SECTION 26-18 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 26-18
1:516
be collected by the City Collector or other official collecting taxes in
the same manner and procedure for collecting real estate taxes. If the
certified costs are not paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent,
and the collection of delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws
governing delinquent and back taxes. The tax bill from the date of its
issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall
also be a lien on the property until paid.
I. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same within the required time shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction punished by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation of
this Section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 26-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 26-18
1:517
Chapter 27
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Cross Reference — Motor vehicles and traffic, § 15-1 et seq.
SECTION 26-18 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 26-18
1:518
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs99
SECTION 27-1. License Required.100 [Ord. of 12-3-1945, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the City a taxicab
or motor vehicle for the transportation of persons for hire without first
procuring from the City Clerk a license therefor.
SECTION 27-2. Liability Insurance Required. [Ord. of 12-3-1945,
§ 2]
The applicant for a license to operate a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire
shall file with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State, which insurance policy
shall bind the obligors thereunder to make compensation for injuries to
persons and loss or damage to property resulting from the negligent
operation of such taxicab or motor vehicle, to the minimum extent provided
by State law. No license required by this Article shall be issued unless such
policy of insurance is first filed in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 27-3. through SECTION 27-10. (Reserved)
99.State Law Reference — Authority to license and regulate taxicabs, RSMo. § 94.270.
100. Cross Reference — For fees, see § 13-4 (81)
SECTION 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 27-3
1:519
Chapter 28
WATER AND SEWERS
Cross References — Fire, water and police committee established, § 2-249;
Buildings and building regulations, § 6-1 et seq.; Fire prevention and
protection, § 9-1 et seq.; Health, § 12-1 et seq.; Stagnant and foul water
declared a nuisance, § 18-100; Throwing substances into watercourses and
drains declared a nuisance, § 18-101; Subdivisions, § 24-1 et seq.; Building
inspector/code enforcement officer — authorized to enforce ch. 28, § 2-209.
SECTION 27-3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 27-3
1:520
ARTICLE I
Sewers101
101. State Law Reference — Authority To Establish And Regulate A General Sewer System,
RSMo. § 88.832 Et Seq.
SECTION 28-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 27-3
1:521

DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 28-1. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 2; Ord. of
11-6-1972, § 2]
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) Centigrade
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trades or businesses as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of goods that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SECTION 28-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-1
1:523
SEWERAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5)
times the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of wastewater treatment plan
and/or water pollution control of the City, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNAUTHORIZERD PERSON — Anyone failing to have a master plumber
license and/or equivalent experience as certified by the City.[Ord. No.
2014-30 § I, 12-9-2014]
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
SECTION 28-2. Damaging, Tampering With Property of Sewerage
Works. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 7]
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage works.
SECTION 28-3. General Powers of Superintendent and Other City
Employees in Regard to Inspections, Testing, Etc. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 8]
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The
Superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
SECTION 28-1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-4
1:524
SECTION 28-4. Duty of City Employees to Observe Safety
Requirements While on Private Property. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 8]
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
this Chapter, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the City
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.
SECTION 28-5. Inspection, Repair, Etc., of Sewerage Works Lying
within Easements. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 8]
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works
lying within said easement. All entries and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
SECTION 28-6. Office of Wastewater Treatment Plant
Superintendent. [Ord. of 9-3-1963, § 1]
There is hereby created the office of Wastewater Treatment Plant
Superintendent.
SECTION 28-7. Duties of Wastewater Plant Superintendent.102 [Ord.
of 9-3-1963, § 2]
The Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent shall be responsible for
the operation and maintenance of the City Sewage Disposal Plant and the
grounds surrounding said Plant, shall be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of all sewage lift stations in the City and shall keep the sewage
lift stations in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
SECTION 28-8. Assistant Wastewater Treatment Plant
Superintendent. [Ord. No. 73-16, §§ 1,2, 8-7-1973]
A. There is hereby created the office of Assistant Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent.
B. The duties of the said Assistant Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
shall be as follows:
1. He shall be responsible for assisting in the operation and
maintenance of the City Sewage Disposal Plant, and the grounds
surrounding the plant, and in addition thereto shall assist in the
operation and maintenance of all sewage lift stations in the City
limits in the said City of Lexington;
102. Cross Reference — Street commissioner to perform disposal plant operator's duties when
wastewater treatment plant superintendent on vacation, § 2-93.
SECTION 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-8
1:525
SECTION 28-9. City Council to Establish Sewer Service Charges.
[Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 1]
The City Council shall require such sewer service charges to be charged and
collected for the use and service of the sewage system of the City, including
any services furnished after the sewer system shall be extended, in such
amounts as the City Council shall establish by ordinance.
SECTION 28-10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 9;
Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 9; Ord. No. 2004-23 § 1, 7-13-2004]
SECTION 28-11. Sewer Sinking Account. [Ord. No. 82-31 §§ 1-8,
10-5-1982]
2. He shall assist in maintaining said Sewage Disposal Plant and
sewage lift stations in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Article, except
Division 4 and Division 6, shall be served by the City with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
A. A Sinking Account is established for the purpose of having a ready
supply of liquid funds and assets to construct new sewer lines and to
maintain, rebuild and repair old, established sewer lines, as well as all
contingencies associated therewith.
B. The account shall be entitled "Sewer Sinking Account" and shall be
effective immediately.
C. The account shall be made up of and funded by the setting aside into
the said account the following monies, funds or assets: [Ord. No.
2017-20 § 1, 5-23-2017]
1. Four thousand seven hundred dollars ($4,700.00) received each
month from the sewer revenues.
2. All sewer tap-on or hook-up charges.
SECTION 28-8 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-11
1:526
SECTION 28-12. through SECTION 28-24. (Reserved)
D. The account shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) in principal assets exclusive of accrued interest and like
increases. Upon the accomplishment of such principal total, no further
monies shall be paid into, set aside or deposited into the said account.
E. The monies shall be prudently invested in safe government securities or
insured bank accounts so as to gather interest, remain liquid and
maintain safety from loss.
F. The monies in this account may be withdrawn for valid government
purposes or governmental projects as voted by a majority of the City
Council present at any duly called regular or special meeting, assuming
a quorum is accounted for.
G. The intent of the Council and Mayor at the passing of the ordinance
establishing this Section is to provide funds and monies for the
purchase of equipment, labor and materials for the municipal sewer
system of Lexington, Missouri, including, but not limited to:
1. Equipment; and
2. Tools; and
3. Inventory; and
4. Labor; and
5. Other costs of materials, goods or services for the installation and
construction of new sanitary sewer systems and lines as well as the
maintenance, reconstruction, rebuilding and repair of established
sewer lines and all contingent or associated business or matters
necessary to accomplish and complete these objectives.
H. None of these monies shall be spent for work, labor or materials in, to
or on private property; specifically, there shall be no work upon or
payment for any item on customer laterals off the main City owned
sewer lines.
SECTION 28-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-12
1:527

DIVISION 2
Building Sewers and Connections Generally
SECTION 28-25. When Connection to Public Sewers Required. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 3; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 3]
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, within ninety (90) days after the date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two
hundred (200) feet, (30.5 meters), of the property line.
SECTION 28-25.1. Annexed Areas — When Connection to Public
Sewers Required. [Ord. No. 98-37 § 1, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 2001-53
§ 1, 9-11-2001]
Structures on property within the annexed areas, as defined by the Plan of
Intent dated October 6, 1998, shall not be required to connect to available
sewer unless the structures' existing sewage system fails or connection is
required by Department of Natural Resources. Vacant platted lots within
subdivisions at the time of annexation shall have one (1) year from the
passage of this Section (September 11, 2001) to begin construction on said
platted lot and the cost of the sewer system installation shall be incurred by
the City. The property owner shall incur all costs of the sewer if construction
has not begun one (1) year after the passage of this Section (September 11,
2001).
SECTION 28-26. Permit Required. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5; Ord. of
11-6-1972, § 5]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
SECTION 28-27. Classes of Permits — Application — Fee. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 5; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 5; Ord. No. 2014-30 § I,
12-9-2014]
A. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits as follows:
1. For residential service.
2. For commercial service and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.
B. In the case of either class of permit, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The application shall
SECTION 28-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-27
1:529
SECTION 28-28. Costs and Expenses to be Borne by Owner —
Indemnification of City. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5; Ord. of 11-6-1972,
§ 5; Ord. No. 2001-53 § 1, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2003-27 1, 12-9-2003;
Ord. No. 2004-23 § 1, 7-13-2004]
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner if a sewer main line is available.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
The City reserves the right to make any decision in the best interest of the
City regarding sewer installation.
SECTION 28-29. Standards Applicable to Connections — Deviations.
[Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code of the City or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
SECTION 28-30. Separate Building Sewers Required for Each
Building — Exception. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5; Ord. of 11-6-1972,
§ 5]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.
SECTION 28-31. When Old Building Sewers May be Used. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 5; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 5]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when the are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet
all requirements of this Article.
SECTION 28-32. Specifications for Sewer Pipe. [Ord. of 10-17-1972,
§ 5; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 5]
The size and type of sanitary sewer lines of sewer drains carrying the
domestic waste of sewage from the foundation and extending to the lateral
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per sewer permit shall be paid
to the City at the time the application is filed.
SECTION 28-27 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-32
1:530
or main sanitary sewer to which the connection is to be made shall be as
follows:
SECTION 28-33. Alignment and Grade of Service Lines. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 5]
All four-inch service lines shall be laid to a straight line and at a grade of not
less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. A six-inch service line may be laid
at not less than one-eight (1/8) inch per foot. Any deviation in alignment or
grade of twenty percent (20%) or more shall require special fittings.
SECTION 28-34. Specifications and Installation of Pipe Joints. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 5]
Pipe joints shall be ASTM designation, C425-60 and any additions or
corrections thereto shall apply. Cast-iron pipe joints, other than slip joints
or mechanical joints, shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled
with molten lead not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one
(1) pouring and caulked tight. Reasonable care shall be exercised in making
all joints either for cast-iron or clay pipe.
SECTION 28-35. Sewer to be Kept Clean During Construction. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 5]
All service lines must be kept thoroughly clean and free from any material
which might obstruct the free flow of sewage. All service lines shall be
plugged at night and until final connections to the house plumbing system
is made.
SECTION 28-36. Trench Excavation. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
Immediately prior to installing the pipe, the trench bottom shall be
accurately shaped and graded by hand and bell holes shall be excavated
so that the pipe will be continuous and have uniform contact with a
1. The connection shall be of cast-iron soil pipe with mechanical or rubber
"slip" joints, or vitrified clay sewer pipe with polyvinyl chloride coupling
joints. The inside diameter of all such pipe shall not be less than four (4)
inches. No building or house sewer for a commercial building or
multiple dwelling shall be less than six (6) inches in diameter. The castiron
soil pipe at the foundation to which the connection is to be made
shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet outside the foundation wall.
2. All clay pipes used shall be salt vitrified clay sewer pipe conforming to
the latest specifications for "Standard Strength" clay pipes, Designation
C-13, of the American Society for Testing Materials, or where extra
strength pipe is specified or required, the latest specifications for
"Extra Strength" clay pipe, Designation C-200, or the pipe shall be of
extra heavy pattern cast-iron soil pipe.
3. Plastic pipe.
SECTION 28-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-36
1:531
longitudinal bearing on undisturbed earth along its entire barrel length.
Bell holes shall be excavated by the pipe layer immediately prior to laying
the pipe and shall be of such depth that the pipe bell does not come in
contact with the bottom of the bell hole. All sewer pipe shall be laid with
the bell and upgrade. Where the floor of the trench at the proper grade
is of hard or rock material, the floor shall be excavated four (4) inches or
more below grade and backfilled with fine gravel or material approved by
the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent or his designee. Where the
floor of the trench at the proper grade is of unstable material, the same
treatment as described above shall be done.
SECTION 28-37. Trench Backfill. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
All sewer pipe shall have adequate bottom and lateral support by
thoroughly, carefully and adequately tamping and ramming suitable and
proper backfill material beneath, around and to the top of the pipe between
the bell holes and sewer joints exposed. All material used for pipe
embedment and tamped backfill shall be free of stones, sticks, large clods,
lumps of earth, debris, or similar material. When backfill is made in and
across roadway ditches or other watercourses, it shall be protected from
surface erosion by adequate means. The plumber shall backfill with dirt and
tamp by hand to a depth of six (6) inches over the pipe. The remainder of the
trench shall be backfilled and tamped with gravel or screenings approved
by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent or his designee. All
excess dirt will be removed by the plumber immediately and before the
permit is approved by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent or
his designee.
SECTION 28-38. Watercourse Crossings. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
No sewer connections shall be laid so that it is exposed when crossing any
stream, drain or watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity
be crossed and where there is any danger of undermining or settlement,
cast-iron soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in
concrete shall be required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend
at least six (6) inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast-iron pipe or encased
clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either end.
SECTION 28-39. Notification When Building Sewer is Ready for
Connection; Supervision of Connection. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his representative.
SECTION 28-36 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-40
1:532
SECTION 28-40. Barricades and Lighting; Restoration of Property.
[Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the
expense of the installer.
SECTION 28-41. Prerequisites to Sewer Connection — Preparation
of Basement or Crawl Space. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
No connection for any residence, business or other structure with any
sanitary sewer of the City shall be made unless the basement floor is
poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless
the ground floor is installed and the area adjacent to the foundation of
such building is cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill shall be well
compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the foundation.
Prior to the time the basement floor is poured or the first floor is installed
in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the plug
shall be sealed by the City Inspector or his authorized representative.
Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement during the
construction and prior to connection to the sanitary sewer shall be removed
by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer.
SECTION 28-42. Prerequisites to Sewer Connection — Preparation
of Basement or Crawl Space — Backfilling Around Foundation. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 5]
Backfilling around foundation walls must be tight and shall be maintained
at an elevation at the wall line not less than six (6) inches above the finished
grade of the yard at a line five (5) feet out from the wall line.
SECTION 28-43. Requirements for Downspouts and Roof Drains.
[Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
Each downspout or roof drain shall be provided with an elbow fitting
permanently attached to its lower end which shall discharge onto a precast
reinforced concrete splash block or through a leader pipe of the same
diameter extending not less than three (3) feet into the yard.
SECTION 28-44. Building Sewer to be Below Grade of Basement
Floor; When Lifts are Required. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
SECTION 28-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-45
1:533
SECTION 28-45. Prohibited Connections to Laterals and Mains.
[Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any septic tank laterals,
downspouts, gutters, eve drains or cisterns into any lateral or main sewer
of the City, either directly or indirectly, nor shall any such connection be
made with the sanitary sewer or sewer system of any residence, business
or other structure which discharges into the City sewer main. Only one
(1) structure, store or residence shall be eligible for service through this
service connection unless a specific permit therefor is granted.
SECTION 28-46. Prohibited Connections to Building Sewers. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 5]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
SECTION 28-47. Plumbers to be Licensed. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 5]
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City unless
licensed as a master plumber under the provisions of the ordinance of
the City relating to plumbers and plumbing in the City of Lexington. No
plumbing work, unless excepted in this Chapter shall be undertaken prior to
the issuance of a permit therefor by the City Clerk. A permit shall be issued
to a licensed master plumber or his agent.
SECTION 28-48. Failure To Repair Sewer After Notification. [Ord.
No. 2015-16 §1, 6-23-2015]
If the City must notify the property owner of a sewer issue at his or her
property and the issue is not corrected within seventy-two (72) hours of
receipt of notification, the City may shut off water service to the property
until the problem is corrected, with all fees and penalties incurred with
reconnecting water service borne by the owner of the property.
SECTION 28-49. Fire Lines. [Ord. No. 2015-16 §1, 6-23-2015]
A fire line protecting any building within the City limits is the responsibility
of the property owner. Any property owner wishing for an employee of the
City's Water Department to operate said fire line must submit a signed letter
to City Hall relieving the City of responsibility of any damage that may occur
while operating any valves or other components of the fire line.
SECTION 28-50. through SECTION 28-60. (Reserved)
SECTION 28-45 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-50
1:534
DIVISION 3
Connections Outside of City
SECTION 28-61. Authorized; Application to City Council. [Ord. of
2-7-1955, § 1]
Any group of property owners residing outside of the City limits who are so
situated that their properties may be served by a lateral sewerage system,
may apply to the City Council for permission to connect to the sanitary
sewerage system of the City by presenting the Council with detailed plans
and specifications of the lateral to be built, along with the necessary
easements granted to the City. The easements shall include all of the ground
to be occupied by the lateral and shall provide that the employees of the
City shall have free access for inspecting or stopping the use of the lateral
or any connection thereto.
SECTION 28-62. Cost of Constructing and Maintaining Laterals to
be Borne by Property Owners; Plans to be Approved by City. [Ord. of
2-7-1955, § 1]
Any group of property owners constructing a lateral pursuant to this
Division, shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of the
same and the payment thereof, but the entire project shall be built
according to the plans approved by the City.
SECTION 28-63. Inspection of Plumbing and Plumbing Fixtures
Prior to Connection to Lateral; Inspection Fee. [Ord. of 2-7-1955,
§ 1]
Before a property owner shall connect his sewer to the lateral, the plumbing
in the home or building to be connected and the plumbing fixtures shall
be inspected and approved by the City. The fee for the inspection shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
SECTION 28-64. When Request for Connection and Connection May
be Made. [Ord. of 2-7-1955, § 1]
After an inspection has been made pursuant to Section 28-63, the property
owner shall then make a written request to the City to make the connection.
Written permission shall be given by the Mayor.
SECTION 28-65. (Reserved)103
SECTION 28-66. (Reserved)104
103. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 99-18 § 1 adopted May 11, 1999, repealed § 28-65 which formerly
derived from ord. of 2-7-1955 §§ 2,3. At the editor's discretion this section has been left
reserved for the city's future use.
104. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 99-18 § 1 adopted May 11, 1999, repealed § 28-66 which formerly
derived from City Code § 28-66. At the editor's discretion this section has been left
reserved for the city's future use.
SECTION 28-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-67
1:535
SECTION 28-67. through SECTION 28-78. (Reserved)
SECTION 28-67 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-67
1:536
DIVISION 4
Use
SECTION 28-79. Prohibited Discharges Into Public Services. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 6]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
SECTION 28-80. Prohibited Discharges into Sanitary Sewers. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 6]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling waters or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
SECTION 28-81. Prohibited Discharges into Natural Outlets. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 3]
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the City or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with the provisions of this Division.
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the Sewage Treatment
Plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as
CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five-point-five (5.5), or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewerage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups and milk containers,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
SECTION 28-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-82
1:537
SECTION 28-82. Discharge of Unpolluted Water. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 6]
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or into a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling
waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
SECTION 28-83. Discharges Which May be Prohibited by the
Superintendent. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 6]
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property or constitute a nuisance:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit.
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty-two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
(150°) Fahrenheit.
3. Any garbage that has not been property shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or
greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for
such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste, or odor,
producing substances in such concentrations as to exceed limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the State, Federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for
such discharge into the receiving waters.
SECTION 28-82 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-83
1:538
SECTION 28-84. Discharges Which May be Prohibited by the
Superintendent — Conditional Acceptance of Discharges. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 6]
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life of concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine-point-five (9.5).
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
b. Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs".
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that
the Sewage Treatment Plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge into the
receiving waters.
B. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of the wastes enumerated
in this Section, the Superintendent will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, the materials of construction of the sewers, the
nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity of the Sewage
Treatment Plant, the degree of treatability of wastes in the Sewage
Treatment Plant and other pertinent factors.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 28-83,
and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewerage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
1. Reject the wastes;
SECTION 28-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-84
1:539
SECTION 28-85. Interceptors. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 6; Ord. No.
2001-24 § 1, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 2007-37 § 1, 10-9-2007]
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of this Article.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for proper handling
of wastes containing grease, any flammable waste, sand or other
harmful ingredients, except that such interceptions shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
Grease trap shall be provided and properly maintained in food
preparation areas of all restaurants, hospitals, school kitchen, hotel
kitchen, cafeterias, nursing home kitchens and other type commercial
kitchens.
All grease traps and interceptors shall be designed using acceptable
design standards. Whenever grease traps are required, they shall be
located where they are easily accessible for cleaning, inspection and
maintenance. In the sizing and location of the grease traps and
interceptors, the standard of the International Plumbing Code shall
govern. Interior grease traps shall be cleaned as necessary but no less
often than monthly. When cleaning the grease trap, the full volume of
water and grease present shall be removed and disposed of properly.
Exterior interceptors shall be pumped by a commercial grease disposal
contractor. The proof of pumping or cleaning shall be kept on the
premises and made available for inspection. If the interceptors are
pumped by a grease contractor, such proof shall consist of a signed and
dated invoice or other manifest. All cleaning of interior grease traps
shall be recorded by the operator or owner of the property. All records
shall be dated and signed each time the unit is cleaned.
Existing facilities that we have determined to need a grease trap or
interceptor shall have ninety (90) days from the date of notice by the
City to complete an approved installation.
All new facilities proposing to discharge to the City sanitary sewer
system shall have an approved trap or interceptor installed prior to
connecting to the City sewer system.
SECTION 28-84 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-85
1:540
B. It is provided, however, that one (1) trap may serve a set of not more
than three (3) single compartment sinks or laundry tubs of the same
depth or three (3) lavatories immediately adjacent to each other and in
the same room if the waste outlets are not more than thirty (30) inches
(762 mm) apart.
Horizontal Distance of Trap Arms
Slope One-Fourth (1/4) Inch Per Foot (20.9 mm/m)
(Except for water closets and similar fixtures)*
Trap Arm
Distance Trap to
Vent Trap Arm
Distance Trap to
Vent
Inches Feet — Inches MM MM
1 — 1 1/4 3 feet 6 inches 32 1067
1 — 1 1/2 5 feet 0 inches 38 1524
2 8 feet 0 inches 51 2438
3 10 feet 0 inches 76 3048
4 and
larger
12 feet 0 inches 102 and larger 3658
* The developed length between the trap of a water closet or similar
fixture (measured from the top of the closet ring (closet flange) to
the inner edge of the vent) and its vent shall not exceed six (6) feet
(1,829 mm).
Determine the size of the grease interceptor by following procedure:
Method of Sizing Interior Grease Traps
1. Determine total capacity of sink/s including all compartments in
cubic inches.
2. Divide cubic inches by two hundred thirty-one (231) to determine
the capacity in gallons.
3. Multiply total capacity by seventy-five percent (75%) to determine
the actual drainage load in gallons.
4. Determine the flow rate for a one (1) minute drainage period by
dividing the actual drainage load by the drainage period (one (1)
minute) to get PGM.
5. Select the grease interceptor by choosing the next largest size
when the flow rate is between two (2) sizes.
6. Two (2) pounds retention capacity is equal to one (1) GPM flow
rate.
SECTION 28-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-85.1
1:541
SECTION 28-85.1. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2001-24 § 1, 4-10-2001]
Business licenses will be revoked or not issued if the business does not
comply with the International Plumbing Code or with current City
ordinance.
SECTION 28-86. Maintenance of Preliminary Treatment of Flow
Equalizing Facilities. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 6]
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
SECTION 28-87. Control Manholes. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 6]
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
SECTION 28-88. Standards for Tests and Measurements. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 6]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Waters and Wastewaters", published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect
of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's
are determined from periodic grab samples.
SECTION 28-89. Special Agreements for Acceptance of Wastes
Authorized. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 6]
No statement contained in this Division shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
SECTION 28-85.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-89
1:542
be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.
SECTION 28-90. (Reserved)105
SECTION 28-91. (Reserved)106
SECTION 28-91.1. Sewer Use and Service Fee, Collections,
Disconnections, Etc. [Ord. No. 91-14, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 2000-20
§ 1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 2004-23 § 1, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-17
§ 1, 4-12-2005]
SECTION 28-92. (Reserved)107
A. No sewerage services shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to
any person.
B. All property served by the sewerage system of the City shall be charged
for the use and services of such system. Such charges shall commence
from the date the property is connected to the now-existing sewer
system or ninety (90) days after said property can be connected to the
now-existing sewer system, whichever comes first. The words "property
served by the sewerage system" shall be construed to mean that
property which, in the opinion of the Mayor or City Administrator, can
be connected to the existing sewer system.
C. When charges for sewer are in arrears for more than two (2) months
and after the City sends written notice to both the occupant and the
owner of the premises receiving the service by certified mail, the City
shall have the authority at its discretion to disconnect the sewer line
from the City's line until such time as the sewer charges and all related
costs of termination and re-establishment of sewer services are paid.
The City may also require the party charged with the delinquency to
prepay a reasonable deposit to be applied toward any future sewer use
fees that may accrue at the premises upon which the delinquency arose
prior to effectuating any reconnection or restoration of sewer service.
105. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 98-31, adopted September 8, 1998, deleted section 28-90 without
provisions for replacement. Said former section derived from ord. no. 86-108, 1-14-1986
and ord. no. 95-05 § I, 4-11-1995. The user charge system is now covered under chapter
28, article II, sections 28-136 through 28-141. We have left this section reserved for the
city's future use.
106. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 98-31, adopted September 8, 1998, deleted section 28-91 without
provisions for replacement. Said former section derived from ord. no. 86-108, 1-14-1986.
The user charge system is now covered under chapter 28, article II, sections 28-136
through 28-141. We have left this section reserved for the city's future use.
107. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 98-31, adopted September 8, 1998, deleted section 28-92 without
provisions for replacement. Said former section derived from ord. no. 86-108, 1-14-1986
and ord. no. 95-05 § II, 4-11-1995. The user charge system is now covered under chapter
28, article II, sections 28-136 through 28-141. We have left this section reserved for the
city's future use.
SECTION 28-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-93
1:543
SECTION 28-93. Water and Sewer Board of Review – Membership.
[Ord. No. 86-108, 1-14-1986; Ord. No. 95-05 § III, 4-11-1995; Ord.
No. 2001-62 § 1, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2017-28 § I, 8-8-2017]
A. There will be a Water and Sewer Board of Review whose membership
shall be five (5), consisting of the City Collector, one (1) member of the
City Council appointed by the majority vote of the City Council for a
one-year term, and three (3) City residents who shall be appointed for
two-year terms by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
Initial appointments of citizens to this Board shall be for varying terms
to establish staggered membership terms. Vacancies shall be filled by
the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose
office becomes vacant. The members shall not serve more than two (2)
complete terms consecutively, however, they may be reappointed after
a one-year absence.
B. Citizen members appointed to the Board shall be residents of the City of
Lexington for one (1) year prior to their appointment, and not in arrears
for any City tax, fee, charge or lien.
C. The Supervisor of the City of Lexington Water and Wastewater
Treatment plants shall serve only in an advisory and consulting capacity
to the Board and will have no vote on any matter coming before the
Board.
D. A voting member of the Board who fails to attend three (3) successive
Board meetings without a reasonable, valid reason, upon
recommendation of the Board to the Mayor and City Council, may be
removed from the Board by majority vote of the City Council. Vacancies
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unoccupied term of
any member whose office becomes vacant.
E. The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from its membership,
each of whom shall serve for a term of one (1) year. Three (3) members
of the Board duly assembled shall constitute a quorum, and may act
effectively by majority vote.
F. All citizen members of the Water and Sewer Board of Review shall serve
without compensation.
G. The Mayor and/or the City Administrator and/or the Board Chairman
are authorized to call meetings of the Water and Sewer Board of Review
for any purpose reasonably related to its designated duties at any time
upon actual notice to the members of the Board. Notice of all meetings
shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, with such
meeting being open to the general public, pursuant to the Missouri
Sunshine Law, Section 610.010 et. seq., RSMo.
H. All meetings of the Water and Sewer Board of Review shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, including membership attendance and the
vote upon each question. Copies of these minutes shall be promptly
SECTION 28-93 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-93
1:544
SECTION 28-94. Board of Review May Make Adjustment. [Ord. No.
86-108, 1-14-1986]
The Board of Review may make an adjustment to the monthly charge on
application of a representative of the City or a user upon a majority vote.
SECTION 28-94.1. Appeals of Water/Sewer Use Charges. [Ord. No.
2004-23 § 1, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2017-28 § II, 8-8-2017]
Any person, including the user, may petition the Water and Sewer Board of
Review to reconsider water and sewer use surcharges within fifteen (15)
working day of first billing.
SECTION 28-95. Adjustments — Upon Good Cause. [Ord. No.
86-108, 1-14-1986]
The Board of Review may adjust the monthly bill only upon good cause
shown. Good cause shall consist of, but is not limited to:
SECTION 28-96. Adjustments — Application for Review. [Ord. No.
86-108, 1-14-1986]
Any party aggrieved by a determination, may within ten (10) days of the
decision, make application to the whole Council for review. It will take a
majority of the members of the City Council to reverse the decision of the
Board of Review.
SECTION 28-97. (Reserved)108
filed with the City Clerk and shall be public record, pursuant to the
Missouri Sunshine Law, Section 610.010 et seq., RSMo.
1. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administration appeal.
2. In the petition, the appealing party must indicate the portion of the
water or sewer use surcharges objected to and the reasons for this
objection.
3. The charges and penalty shall not be stayed pending the appeal
process.
1. A showing that the water used did not enter the sewer system;
2. An unforeseen natural occurrence causing an excessive water bill for
that month;
3. That the charge would work an extreme hardship on the user;
4. The user was not occupying the dwelling when the rate was set.
SECTION 28-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-98
1:545
SECTION 28-98. Delinquent Charges — Notice of Delinquency.
[Ord. No. 86-108, 1-14-1986; Ord. No. 2004-23 § 1, 7-13-2004]
Any user charges, connection fees or other charges levied by the City shall
be due at such time as specified by the City, if not paid by the due date it
shall become delinquent and shall bear penalty from the date of delinquency
until paid. Upon the bill being delinquent for three (3) months a lien shall
be placed upon any land owned by the property owner or by the user. The
City Clerk will file a notice of delinquency with the Recorder of Deeds of
Lafayette County, Missouri.
SECTION 28-99. City May Enforce Lien. [Ord. No. 86-108,
1-14-1986]
The City may enforce the lien by suit or foreclosure and shall have their
sewer charge, interest, recording fees and attorney's fees.
SECTION 28-100. City Clerk to File Notice Releasing Lien. [Ord.
No. 86-108, 1-14-1986]
When the use charge, interest, recording fees and attorney's fees have been
paid in full, the City Clerk will file with the Recorder of Deeds of Lafayette
County a notice releasing the lien.
SECTION 28-101. Delinquent More Than Two Months; Deposit
Required. [Ord. No. 86-108, 1-14-1986; Ord. No. 2005-17 § 1,
4-12-2005]
Any single-family dwelling user that has been delinquent more than two (2)
months in the previous twelve (12) month period shall place a one hundred
dollar ($100.00) deposit with the City and multiple-family dwellings and
commercial users shall place a deposit with the City an amount not less that
two (2) times the monthly charge.
SECTION 28-102. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 86-108,
1-14-1986]
The City Council shall have the power to promulgate regulations to
implement the administration of this Chapter. If any Section of this Chapter
is determined to be unconstitutional, or not authorized by State Statutes,
the other provisions of this Chapter shall not be affected by that
determination.
SECTION 28-103. through SECTION 28-110. (Reserved)
108. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 99-18 § 1 adopted May 11, 1999, repealed § 28-97 which formerly
derived from ord. no. 86-108, 1-14-1986. At the editor's discretion this section has been
left reserved for the city's future use.
SECTION 28-98 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-103
1:546
DIVISION 5
Private Sewage Disposal
SECTION 28-111. When Prohibited. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 3]
Except as otherwise provided in this Division, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
SECTION 28-112. When Required. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of
11-6-1972, § 4]
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 28-25, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this Division.
SECTION 28-113. Permit Required; Application; Fee. [Ord. of
10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
Before commencing the construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the City at the time
the application is filed.
SECTION 28-114. Applicant for Permit to Furnish Material to State
Commission. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
Each applicant for a permit required by this Division shall submit a copy of
all material to the Missouri Clean Water Commission where treatment is off
of the owner's property.
SECTION 28-115. Permit Not Effective Until Work Completed;
Inspection; Notice of Readiness for Inspection. [Ord. of 10-17-1972,
§ 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection which shall be
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
SECTION 28-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-116
1:547
SECTION 28-116. Compliance With Recommendations of State
Department of Health. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972,
§ 4]
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Public
Health.
SECTION 28-117. Discharges into Natural Outlets Prohibited. [Ord.
of 10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
SECTION 28-118. Maintenance of Facilities. [Ord. of 10-17-1972,
§ 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
The owner of private sewage disposal facilities shall operate and maintain
the facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City.
SECTION 28-119. Additional Requirements Imposed by Health
Officer. [Ord. of 10-17-1972, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
No statement contained in this Division shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
SECTION 28-120. When Private System is to be Abandoned and
Connection to Public Sewer is to be Made. [Ord. of 10-17-1972; § 4;
Ord. of 11-6-1972, § 4]
A. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 28-25, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this Article and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
B. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer within ninety (90) days and the private
sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean
bank run gravel or dirt.
SECTION 28-116 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-120
1:548
DIVISION 6
Operation and Maintenance
SECTION 28-121. Maintenance — Generally. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 1,
3-3-1981]
That all sanitary sewer disposal systems, laterals, septic tanks, or other
means of waste disposal of all kinds now existing or hereinafter constructed
shall be operated, maintained and used in a manner so as not to create
a health hazard, be injurious to the public welfare, cause the omission of
odiferous fumes, or create or contribute to create standing, stagnant or
polluted streams or pools of water.
SECTION 28-122. Written Complaint. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 2, 3-3-1981]
That once written and signed complaint is received by the City of Lexington,
the City shall cause each complaint to be investigated no later than five (5)
days after receipt of same, by any Wastewater Treatment Plant employee or
Police Officer of the City.
SECTION 28-123. Main Trunk Lines Maintained by City. [Ord. No.
81-05 § 3, 3-3-1981]
All of the main sewer lines, also known and described as main trunk lines,
which are wholly within the dedicated public rights-of-way, streets, alleys,
roads and thoroughfares, shall be maintained by the City of Lexington,
Missouri.
SECTION 28-124. Lateral Sewer Lines Maintained by Property
Owner. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 4, 3-3-1981; Ord. No. 2001-53 § 1,
9-11-2001]
All lateral gravity sewer lines running generally from the above-described
main truck lines to individual outlets, hookups, meters, taps or connections
shall be maintained by the individual property owner of the adjacent,
contiguous property whether said lateral line is on privately owned property
or within the dedicated public rights-of-way. All lateral lines running
generally from the STEP system receiver tank to individual outlets,
hookups, meters, taps or connections shall be maintained by the individual
property owner whether said lateral line is on privately owned property or
within the dedicated public rights-of-way. The STEP system receiver tank
shall be maintained by the City.
SECTION 28-125. Maintenance to Include What. [Ord. No. 81-05
§ 5, 3-3-1981]
Maintenance shall include all repairs, cleaning, clearing, vegetation
removal and upkeep.
SECTION 28-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-126
1:549
SECTION 28-126. Notice Sent to Owner. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 6,
3-3-1981]
If said inspection reveals that any of the aforesaid conditions is present
and are caused or contributed to be caused by sanitary sewage disposal
systems, septic tanks or lateral systems, or any other waste disposal system,
the City shall send by registered mail a notice to the owner of said property
and the operator of the system in question, and said notice shall inform
the owner and operator of the complaint, investigation, finding of said
investigation, the ordinance violation, and giving the aforesaid owner and
operator thirty (30) days from the receipt of said notice to remedy the
condition(s) enumerated in said notice.
SECTION 28-127. Conditions to be Remedied in Thirty Days. [Ord.
No. 81-05 § 7, 3-3-1981]
If the aforesaid condition(s) are not remedied within thirty (30) days after
receipt of said notice the owner of the property or the operator of the
system in question, the City shall or may cause a complaint to be issued and
served upon said owner or operator.
SECTION 28-128. Penalty. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 8, 3-3-1981]
Any individual, company, corporation or public utility found to have violated
Sections 28-111 to 28-127 of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not less
than five dollars ($5.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each day found to be in violation thereof.
SECTION 28-129. City May Abate Nuisance. [Ord. No. 81-05 § 9,
3-3-1981]
In addition to the above provisions, the City, no sooner than thirty (30)
days after the complaint of the City has been served upon the owner or the
occupant of the premises, may abate said nuisance so as to remedy any of
the conditions listed in Section 28-121 and the expense for abating the same
may be assessed against the owner or operator of the system, and against
the property upon which said system is located, and a special tax bill may
be issued against said property for said expenses.
SECTION 28-130. through SECTION 28-135. (Reserved)
SECTION 28-126 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-130
1:550
ARTICLE II
User Charge System
SECTION 28-136. Purpose. [Ord. No. 97-35 Art. I, 11-25-1997]
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the City
to collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City's
treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for
the purpose of operating, maintaining, and retiring the debt for such public
wastewater treatment works.
SECTION 28-137. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-35 Art. II, 11-25-1997]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this Article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20° C),
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than three hundred thirty-four (334) milligrams
per liter (mg/l) and a suspended solids concentration of not more than two
hundred seventy-eight (278) milligrams per liter (mg/l).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All expenditures during the useful life
of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which
are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve
the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes replacement.
SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
SS (denoting suspended solids) — The solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any devices and systems for the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic
sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include interceptor sewers, outfall
sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power,
and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear
well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of land that will be
SECTION 28-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-137
1:551
an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal
of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting
sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage
of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application);
or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste,
including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which the treatment works
will be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment
works.
WATER METER — A water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by the private water utility or furnished and/or
installed by a user and approved by the private water utility.
SECTION 28-138. User Charge Accounts. [Ord. No. 97-35 Art. III,
11-25-1997]
A. The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to
pay the costs of annual operation and maintenance including
replacement and cost associated with debt retirement of bonded capital
associated with financing the treatment works which the City may by
ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge system. That portion
of the total user charge which is designated for operation and
maintenance including replacement of the treatment works shall be
established by this Article.
B. That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for
the operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as
established in Section 28-139 shall be deposited in a separate nonlapsing
fund known as the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement
Fund and will be kept in two (2) primary accounts as follows:
1. The operation and maintenance account shall be an account
designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and
maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works.
Deposits in the operation and maintenance account shall be made
monthly from the operation and maintenance revenue in the
amount of two hundred seventy-one thousand eight hundred sixtyseven
dollars ($271,867.00) annually (four hundred twenty-five
thousand eight hundred seventy-two dollars ($425,872.00) in
estimated annual expenses less four thousand two hundred dollars
($4,200.00) annual required replacement deposit less one hundred
forty-nine thousand eight hundred five dollars ($149,805.00)
estimated annual debt service).
SECTION 28-137 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-138
1:552
SECTION 28-139. User Charge Rates. [Ord. No. 97-35 Art. IV,
11-25-1997; Ord. No. 2000-20 § 1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 2002-23 § 1,
6-11-2002; Ord. No. 2003-15 § 1, 5-13-2003; Ord. No. 2004-23 § 1,
7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-16 § 1, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 2006-15 § 1,
4-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12 § 1, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 2008-17 § 1,
5-13-2008; Ord. No. 2009-11 § 1, 3-24-2009; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 1,
3-27-2012]
2. The replacement account shall be an account designated for the
purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the
treatment works. Deposits in the Replacement account shall be
made monthly from the replacement revenue in the amount of four
thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) annually.
C. Fiscal year end balances in the operation and maintenance account and
the replacement account shall be carried over to the same accounts in
each subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes
that those designated for these accounts. Monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to
their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user
charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user
charge rate(s) shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be
returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following
the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.
A. Sewer service shall be deemed to be furnished to both the owner and
occupant of the premises receiving such service based on the usage of
the treatment works as determined by the water meter(s) acceptable to
the City. The City shall have the power to sue the owner and/or
occupant of such real estate to recover any sums due for such services,
plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court.
B. Monthly user charges will be based on average monthly water usage
during the months of January, February and March. (Water usage for
these months includes little use for such activities as lawn watering, car
washing and other seasonal consumptive uses.) If a contributor has not
established a January, February and March average, their monthly bill
shall be calculated by averaging any other three-month period when the
subject property is actively occupied. For appeal or exception situations
such period may be determined by the Sewer Board of Review, while for
policy rate matters the City Council or its appropriate committee(s) will
make the determinations.
C. The minimum charge per month shall be twenty-two dollars and ninety
cents ($22.90) up to the first 700 gallons of water (or wastewater). In
addition each contributor shall pay a user charge for operation and
maintenance, including replacement, of point six two seven cents
($.627) per one hundred (100) gallons of water (or wastewater) after
the first 700 gallons up to 6,000 gallons and point six eight three
($.683) per one hundred (100) gallons of water (or wastewater) after
SECTION 28-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-139
1:553
SECTION 28-140. Billing. [Ord. No. 97-35 Art. V, 11-25-1997; Ord.
No. 99-12 § 1, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 2000-20 § 1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No.
2001-59 § 1, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-17 § 1, 4-12-2005]
All property owners shall be billed monthly. Payments are due and payable
upon receipt. Any payment received after 3:00 P.M. on the due date of the
billing month shall be considered delinquent and a penalty shall be applied.
The penalty shall be at a rate of fifteen percent (15%) per billing month on
the actual sewer usage charges.
SECTION 28-141. City to Review User Charge System. [Ord. No.
97-35 Art. VI, 11-25-1997; Ord. No. 2000-20 § 1, 9-12-2000]
SECTION 28-142. through SECTION 28-150. (Reserved)
6,000 gallons as determined in the preceding Subsection. [Ord. No.
2014-11 § 1, 5-13-2014; Ord. No. 2015-14 § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord.
No. 2017-07 § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-01 § 1, 1-9-2018109]
D. Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City's
treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which
singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable
increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the
treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each
such user shall be as determined by the responsible superintendent of
the wastewater plant and approved by the City Council.
E. The user charge rates established in this Article apply to all users of the
City's treatment works, regardless of the user's location.
A. The City shall review the user charge system annually and revise user
charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance
including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including
replacement costs among users and user classes.
B. The City will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance,
including replacement of the treatment works.
109. Editor’s Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2018.
SECTION 28-139 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-142
1:554
ARTICLE III
Water Regulations
SECTION 28-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-142
1:555

DIVISION 1
Generally
SECTION 28-151. Extension and Replacement Specifications for
Water Distribution Systems. [Ord. No. 2002-48 § 1, 1-14-2002; Ord.
No. 2006-05 § 1, 2-14-2006]
A. All water line, construction and material used in the City shall conform
to the latest Standard Specifications and Design Criteria, Chapter 2900,
of the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Work
Association. Poly (Vinyl Chloride) PVC pipe shall as a minimum be class
DR 14, two hundred (200) psi rating. Higher classes of pressure ratings
may be required for special occasions for firefighting capacity or
otherwise in the best interest of the City. All plastic pipes shall be
provided with a trace line for location of the pipe. The minimum size
water main to install shall be six (6) inches within the City. Pipes shall
conform to the latest edition of the AWWA, ASTM, Plastic Pipe Institute
(PPI) or Unibell Pipe Association standard or recommendations.
B. All water mains and service lines shall be laid with a minimum cover of
forty-two (42) inches from the top of the pipe to finished ground surface
grade.
C. All fire hydrants shall conform to the most current American Water
Works Association Standard. Fire hydrants shall have two (2) two and
one-half (2 1/2) inch nozzles and one (1) four and one-half (4 1/2) inch
pumper nozzle with national standard fire hose coupling screw threads.
Nozzle caps shall be provided for all outlets with suitable gaskets to
provide a tight seal with the nozzles. Caps shall be securely chained to
the barrel of the fire hydrant. Cap nuts shall have the same dimensions
as the operating nut of the fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be one that
is specified by the Water Department. Fittings, valves and fire hydrants
shall conform to the latest standards issued by AWWA and shall be
certified by the NSF for use in drinking water.
D. In water systems serving residential subdivisions, fire hydrants shall be
installed as such locations that there will be at least one (1) fire hydrant
within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest wall of any structure.
Fire hydrants along streets which residences of such subdivisions front
shall be spaced not more than six hundred (600) feet apart.
E. In commercial, industrial and apartment house areas, fire hydrants
shall be provided so that in no case shall more than three hundred (300)
feet of fire hose be required to reach any point at the base of any
exterior building wall from the nearest fire hydrant or from each to the
fire hydrants required to provide the stipulated fire flow.
F. Water Demand Estimates. The water and main estimate shall comply
with minimum standards established by Missouri Department of
Natural Resources (MDNR).
SECTION 28-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-151
1:557
G. The water distribution system and any extension of the distribution
system shall comply with the standard of MDNR.
H. The fire protection requirements shall comply with National Fire
Protection Association regulations. The placement of fire hydrants shall
be approved by the City fire supervisor before construction begins.
I. It shall be unlawful within the City of Lexington to install any water
distribution system or a part thereof that does not comply with the
design criteria and standards contained in this Section and its
Subsections or to deliver water to residential or non-residential homes,
customer or businesses that is not delivered in compliance with or in
excess of the standards and criteria by the Section and its Subsections.
Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
J. The violation of any such provision contained herein shall be punished
by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or such
imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Furthermore, the violation of any such provision
contained herein shall be deemed a nuisance and, as such, shall be
actionable under Section 18-89 (Nuisances), and all of the provisions
under said ordinances are applicable to the nuisance and its abatement.
SECTION 28-151 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-151
1:558
DIVISION 2
Rules And Regulations For Use And Service Of The Water
Distribution System
SECTION 28-152. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 1, 7-26-2011]
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this Section, except where the content clearly indicates a different
meaning:
APPLICANT — A person, firm, corporation, governmental body, or other
entity which has applied for water service; two (2) or more applicants may
make one (1) application for a main extension.
AWWA — American Water Works Association.
CITY — The City of Lexington, Missouri.
CITY SERVICE LINE — The pipeline connecting the main to the meter
setting. The City service line is installed, owned, operated and maintained
by the City.
CUSTOMER — A person, firm, corporation, governmental body, or other
entity which has contracted for water service or is receiving water service
from the City, or whose facilities are connected for utilizing such service and
is responsible for paying periodic bills. Each customer shall be serviced by
a separate water service line and meter setting.
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — The pipeline connecting the meter setting
to the premises, the customer service is installed, owned, operated and
maintained by the customer.
DEVELOPER — A person, firm, corporation, partnership or any other entity
that, directly or indirectly, holds title to, sells or leases, or offers to sell or
lease, or advertises for sale or lease any lots in a subdivision.
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE — The intentional cessation of service by
the City not requested by the customer.
LEAD FREE — Less than two-tenths percent (0.2%) for the solder and
fluxes, and not more than a weighted average of twenty-five hundredths
percent (0.25%) lead when used with respect to the wetted surfaces of
pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and fixtures, and added exemptions
for non-potable uses.[Ord. No. 2017-06 § 1, 2-28-2017]
METER — The device used to measure and record the quantity of water that
flows through the service line, and is installed in the meter setting and is
owned and maintained by the City.
METER SETTING — The meter box, meter yoke, lid, helmet and all
appurtenances necessary to install and operate a meter, all of which is
outdoors, located as close to the property line as reasonably possible and
shall be owned, operated and maintained by the City.
MDNR — Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
SECTION 28-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-152
1:559
PREMISES — Each residential dwelling structure, each living unit in multitenant
building, or structures, whether residential or commercial, leased,
rented, or owned.
PROPERTY OWNER/OCCUPANT — A person, firm, corporation,
governmental body, or other entity which has contracted for water service
or is receiving water service from the City, or whose facilities are connected
for utilizing such service and is responsible for paying periodic bills. Each
property owner/occupant shall be serviced by a separate water service line
and meter setting.[Ord. No. 2016-06 § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 2016-15
§ 1, 6-28-2016]
TERMINATION OF SERVICE — The cessation of service requested by the
customer.
WATER DEPARTMENT — The department of the City of Lexington, Missouri
responsible for the operation of the City's water system.
WATER MAIN — A pipeline which is owned and maintained by the City,
located on public property or in private easement, and used to transport
water throughout the service area of the City.
SECTION 28-153. General Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No.
2011-30 § 2, 7-26-2011]
A. Every applicant, upon signing an application for any water service
rendered by the City, or any customer upon taking of water service,
shall be considered to have expressed consent to be bound by these
rules and regulations.
B. After the effective date of these rules and regulations, all new facilities,
construction contracts and written agreements shall conform to these
rules and regulations. Pre-existing facilities that do not comply with
applicable rules and regulations may remain, provided that their
existence does not constitute a service problem or improper use, and
reconstruction is not practical.
C. A written application of service, signed by the applicant, stating the
type of service requested and accompanied by any other pertinent
information, will be required from each applicant before service is
provided to any premises. Every applicant, upon signing an application
for any service rendered by the City, or upon taking of service shall be
considered to have expressed consent to the City's rules and regulation.
The City must be notified immediately if a water bill does not accurately
reflect the name of the intended customer.
D. The City shall have the right to reject any application. The City may
further refuse to provide water service through facilities that do not
comply with the City's rules and regulations pertaining to the nature
and location of service lines or any other water facilities owned by the
customer. Any person or entity requesting water service connection
must secure all necessary permits prior to requesting said connection.
SECTION 28-152 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-153
1:560
SECTION 28-154. Water Service Lines. [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 3,
7-26-2011]
E. If service is requested at a point not already served by a main of
adequate capacity, a main of adequate size may be extended as
necessary according to the City's rule for extension of water mains.
F. When an order to provide water service in which a main extension is
required, the City will require a written contract. Said contract will
include the obligations upon the City and the applicant.
A. The City will provide water service at the outdoor meter setting, and
each premises shall be served through separate service lines and
proper meter settings. The City will construct, own, operate and
maintain the service line from the main to the meter setting.
Applications for service lines larger than one (1) inch must be
submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance.
B. All new or replacement customer service lines shall not be less than
three-fourths (3/4) inch nor shall it be constructed of galvanized steel
pipe, black iron pipe or black steel pipe. The service must be installed at
least forty-two (42) inches below finished grade. City water service
lines will be installed at right angles from the main. Every customer
water service line must have a brass or bronze stop and waste valve, to
be installed by the customer, at the location the service line enters the
structure.
C. Each water service line must be installed in a separate trench. The
undisturbed earth between the separate trenches shall not be less in
width than the depth of the water service line below finished grade. A
shelf cut into the side of a sewer drain trench is not a separate trench
within the meaning and requirements of this rule.
D. A customer's water service line and inside piping will be of material
conforming to recognized standards for potable water and AWWA
specifications, and shall have a pressure rating of at least one hundred
sixty (160) psi working pressure.
E. Neither water service lines nor service connections may be extended
along or across public streets or roadways, or through property of
others, when connecting to the City's mains. Service lines may extend
through the water main easement and roadway easements, as
necessary, in order to be connected to a main located across or adjacent
to a street to serve property fronting on either side of the street or
roadway.
F. Any customer having a plumbing arrangement, or a water usage device
that could allow backsiphonage of any chemical or water from a
questionable supply or other substance that could create a health
hazard, or any customer plumbing classified as an actual or potential
backflow hazard in the regulations of the Missouri Department of
SECTION 28-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-154
1:561
SECTION 28-155. Meters and Meter Installation. [Ord. No. 2011-30
§ 4, 7-26-2011]
SECTION 28-156. Extension of Water Mains. [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 5,
7-26-2011]
Natural Resources, 10 CSR 60-11 shall be required to install and
maintain a backflow prevention device.
A. All service connections will be metered. The City installed meter will be
the standard for measuring water used to determine the bill. Should the
meter fail to register the quantity of water used, the amount billed will
be the amount of water used during the corresponding period of the
preceding six (6) months.
B. All meters and meter installations shall be furnished, owned, operated
and maintained by the City. Customers or their agents shall not remove,
operate, turn on or off meters. Any damage to the meter setting by the
neglect of the customer will be assessed against the customer and
payment for such repairs will be enforced as allowed by these rules and
regulations, or by civil suit.
C. Meter settings will be installed at or near the property at a site
determined by the City. Plumbing appurtenances, such as pressure
reducing valves, auxiliary shutoff valves, gauges, backflow preventers,
etc., or other construction, shall not interfere with the installation,
removal, operation, servicing or reading of the meter.
D. No person except a duly authorized employee of the City shall make any
connection or disconnection to a water main, meter or meter
attachment.
E. In the case of an existing indoor meter setting, should the customer fail
to cooperate with the City to obtain a meter reading by providing access
at scheduled reading times or by paying for and requesting a meter
reading appointment, the City may discontinue service.
F. The Water Department employees shall have access to the premises of
any customer at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and
testing any water meter and reading the records thereof.
A. Upon receipt of a written application for a main extension, the City will
provide the applicant with an itemized estimate of the cost of the
proposed extension. Such estimate will include cost of pipe, valves,
fittings, blocking, labor, booster station, storage facilities,
reconstruction of existing mains and direct cost of supervision,
engineering, permits and bookkeeping. All main extensions must be
approved by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, and the
associated cost of such approval will be the responsibility of the
applicant.
SECTION 28-154 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-156
1:562
SECTION 28-157. Lead Ban Rule/Backflow Prevention Rule. [Ord.
No. 2011-30 § 6, 7-26-2011]
SECTION 28-158. Improper or Excessive Use. [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 7,
7-26-2011]
B. Applicants shall enter into a contract with the City for the installation of
said extension and shall tender to the City a contribution in aid of
construction equal to the estimated cost of construction.
C. Should the actual cost of the extension be less than the estimated cost,
the City shall refund the difference.
D. The extensions made under this rule will remain the property of the City
and the City reserves the right to further extend the main and to
connect mains on intersecting streets and easements.
E. If easements are required on private roads, streets, through private
property, a proper easement must be furnished to the City without cost
to the City before an extension will be made.
A. Lead.
1. All material used by the City or any customer in the construction,
expansion, modification, improvements or maintenance of the
City's water system shall be free of lead. This section does not
apply to leaded joints necessary for the repair of cast-iron pipes.
The City reserves the right to remove meters from, or otherwise
sever the service to, any customer's water system found to contain
materials that are not lead free.
2. It is intended by this rule that the City and all customers be aware
of, and governed by, the definitions and restrictions imposed by 10
CSR 60-10.040 of the Missouri Code of State Regulations, and
Section 1417 of the Safe Drinking Water Act of United States Code,
42 U.S.C. 300g-6.
B. Backflow.
1. The customer shall have the rights, duties and responsibilities set
forth in Missouri Code of State Regulation Section 10 CSR
60-11.010(7), subject to the additional provisions of Section 10 CSR
60-11.010 in general.
2. The City shall have the rights, duties and responsibilities set forth
in Missouri Code of State Regulation Section 10 CSR 60-11.010(8),
subject to the additional provisions of Section 10 CSR 60-11.010 in
general.
A. No customer shall be wasteful of the water supplied to the unit by his
willful action or inaction. It shall be the responsibility and duty of each
SECTION 28-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-158
1:563
SECTION 28-159. Discontinuance of Service by City. [Ord. No.
2011-30 § 8, 7-26-2011]
SECTION 28-160. Billing for Service. 110 [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 9,
7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2016-06 § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 2016-15 § 1,
6-28-2016]
customer to maintain all piping and fixtures at the unit in a good and
efficient state of repair at all times.
B. No customer shall make, or cause to be made, a cross-connection
between the potable water supply and any source of chemical or
bacterial contamination or any other water supply. The City shall deny
or discontinue service where a customer's water service line or inside
piping may, in the opinion of the City, cause a cross-connection with
non-potable water, or otherwise jeopardize the health and safety of
other customers or the City's facilities.
C. No customer shall make or cause to be made any connection to a device
that will result in excessive water demand or excessive shock to the
City's distribution system.
D. No customer shall tamper with, remove, or willfully damage a water
meter or attempt to operate the shutoff cock on the meter yoke, or allow
any such action. Customers shall not attempt to take unmetered water
from the City's water mains, either by an unauthorized tap or direct
connection to the service line or connection, nor by connection to a fire
hydrant pursuant to Section 28-162.
E. Customers shall not supply water in any way to premises other than the
service address, nor permit others to use their hose or attachments.
A. The City may discontinue service for any of the following reasons:
1. Non-payment of a delinquent bill.
2. Failure to post a security deposit at time of reconnection.
3. Unauthorized interference, diversion or use of the utility service.
4. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a settlement
agreement.
5. Refusal to grant access at reasonable times to equipment installed
upon the premises.
B. In any case of discontinuance of service, all monies due, including turnon
fees, delinquent amounts and additional deposits, shall be paid in full
prior to restoration of service.
110. State Law Reference: Chapter 250, RSMo.
SECTION 28-158 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-160
1:564
A. Services Deemed Furnished Both To Occupant And Owner Of Premises
— Payment Delinquency, Notice Of Termination Sent To Both Occupant
And Owner Of Premises — Applicability — Unapplied For Utility
Services, Defined.
Sewerage services, water services, or water and sewerage services
combined shall be deemed to be furnished to both the occupant and
owner of the premises receiving such service. If the service has been
diverted or interfered with and/or discontinued for non-payment, the
property owner is solely responsible. However, except as otherwise
provided in Subsection (2) of this Subsection, the City shall have the
power to sue the occupant or owner, or both, of such real estate in a
civil action to recover any sums due for such services less any deposit
that is held by the City for such services, plus a reasonable attorney's
fee to be fixed by the court.
1. When the occupant is delinquent in payment for thirty (30) days,
the City shall make a good faith effort to notify the owner of the
premises receiving such service of the delinquency and the amount
thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the
contrary, when an occupant is delinquent more than ninety (90)
days, the owner shall not be liable for sums due for more than
ninety (90) days of service. Any notice of termination of service
shall be sent to both the occupant and owner of the premises
receiving such service.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply only to residences that
have their own private water and sewer lines. In instances where
several residences share a common water or sewer line, the owner
of the real property upon which the residences sit shall be liable for
water and sewer expenses.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
water provider who terminates service due to delinquency of
payment by a consumer shall not be liable for any civil or criminal
damages.
4. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to unapplied for utility
services. As used in this Subsection, "unapplied for utility services"
means services requiring application by the property owner and
acceptance of such application by the utility prior to the
establishment of an account. The property owner is billed directly
for the services provided, and as a result, any delinquent payment
of a bill becomes the responsibility of the property owner rather
than the occupant.
B. Charges for water service shall be those rates and charges as approved
by the City Council.
C. Property owners and occupants must make application for water
service and shall be responsible for all charges until service is
terminated or discontinued, subject to the provisions in Subsections
SECTION 28-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-160
1:565
SECTION 28-161. Rebates, Adjustments, Payments of Disputed
Water Bills. [Ord. No. 2011-30 § 10, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2017-28 §
III, 8-8-2017]
(A)(1) and (A)(2), above. In the event there is a delinquent water or
sewer bill due and unpaid by either the owner or the occupant of such
property, to which water service has been furnished at the time of the
sale or rental of the property, the water shall not be turned on so as to
furnish water to the property, unless the purchaser, occupant or seller
of the property shall pay all said delinquent and unpaid water bills due
at the time of the sale or transfer of said property, notwithstanding the
provisions in Subsection (A) above. No water or sewer service shall be
furnished to any person who has an outstanding sewer or water bill still
due and owing on any property in the City of Lexington until all such
outstanding bills are paid in full.
D. The City shall require a security deposit as a guarantee of payment by
the property owner. No water service shall be provided until said
deposit, as set by City Council, is made with the application for service.
Water service deposit, less any amounts still due the City for water
service, shall be refunded without interest to the property owner when
said water service is discontinued and water meter is removed at the
request of the property owner.
E. All payments will be made to City Hall. Payments received after 3:00
p.m. will be posted the following day. Employees of the City, other than
those authorized collectors at City Hall, are not permitted to accept
payments.
F. Monthly bills shall be sent to the occupant, and landlords shall receive
monthly reports of their properties' water charges. Bills shall be due on
the twenty-fifth (25th) day of each month, unless such a date falls on a
weekend, a holiday or a day when City Hall is closed, in which case the
due date shall be extended to the next business day. Bills unpaid after
the stated due date will be delinquent and subject to a fifteen percent
(15%) delinquent fee. Services will be discontinued if the account is
sixty (60) days delinquent.
G. Property owner is responsible for furnishing the City with a correct
address. Failure to receive a bill is not considered an excuse for nonpayment,
nor reason to request an extension when an account is
delinquent.
H. Neither the City, property owner or occupant shall be bound by a bill
rendered by mistake of fact as to the quantity of service rendered or as
a result of clerical error.
A. Adjustments.
1. No adjustment shall be made for water leaks on the customer
service lines without the approval of a majority of the members of
SECTION 28-160 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-161
1:566
SECTION 28-162. Unlawful to Tamper with Water Mains or Meters
— Make Unauthorized Connections to Water. [Ord. No. 2011-30
§ 11, 7-26-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water main, or change
any water meter, or to make any connection to the waterworks system
without written permission from the City, or to reconnect service when it
has been disconnected for non-payment of a bill for service, until such bill
has been paid in full, including the shutoff and reconnection fee. Any person
violating this Section shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. Any person
violating this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in jail, or both fine and imprisonment.
the Water and Sewer Board of Review, where all members have
been notified of such meeting.
2. Any adjustment for a City water customer and/or City business
customer will never be for less than the customer's previous
twelve-month average water usage and/or average monthly usage
of record, if less than twelve (12) months' history is available. The
adjustment shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of any amount over
the previous twelve-month average, if new copper line is installed.
B. Disputed Water Bills - Procedure.
1. Where the Water and Sewer Board of Review has allowed an
adjustment due to a leak, dispute or discrepancy, a homeowner,
renter, or business owner may be allowed up to three (3) equal
monthly installments to pay the disputed amount, as long as their
current water bills during that three-month period are paid in full
in accordance with Section 28-160.
2. Any adjustment refunds shall be applied as a credit on future water
bills of such customer.
SECTION 28-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-162
1:567

DIVISION 3
Rates For Use And Service Of Water Distribution System
SECTION 28-163. Water Rates for User within the City Limits
Generally. [Ord. No. 2011-29 § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2013-25 § 1,
8-7-2013; Ord. No. 2015-08 § I, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 2017-12 § 1,
3-28-2017]
All residents and owners of property within the corporate limits of the City
having a connection with any mains or pipes used in connection with the
City water system shall pay the following rates per month for water used:
Rates Water consumed
5/8 Meter size $19.32 First 700 gallons
1 Meter size $28.04 First 700 gallons
1 1/2 Meter size $42.60 First 700 gallons
2 Meter size $60.05 First 700 gallons
User Charges $0.540 701 — 2,000 gallons per 100
gallons
$0.619 2,001 — 7,500 gallons per 100
gallons
$0.764 7,501 — 15,000 gallons per 100
gallons
$0.841 Above 15,001 gallons per 100
gallons
Meter Charge $10.00
Fire Protection $1.03
Sprinkler System Rates (Paid Annually)
4" Tap Size $60.27
6" Tap Size $135.60
8" Tap Size $241.07
Each contributor shall pay a user charge for operation and maintenance,
including replacement, as determined in the above water rate schedule.
Each contributor shall pay the meter charge and fire protection fee as
determined in the above water rate schedule.
SECTION 28-163.1. Rates for Water Supplied to Party Outside City.
[Ord. No. 2011-29 § 2, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2013-25 § 2, 8-7-2013]
The rate to be charged for water supplied through a meter and water line
which furnishes water to a resident, party or any entity outside the City
limits shall be in accordance with Section 28-163.
SECTION 28-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-163.2
1:569
SECTION 28-163.2. Water Rates for Multiple Dwellings and Mobile
Home Units. [Ord. No. 2011-29 § 3, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2013-25 § 3,
8-7-2013]
The rate to be charged for water supplied through a compound meter for
water per unit that is supplied in the corporate limits of the City shall be
determined by establishing an average usage per unit per month being
supplied through the compound meter. After such average consumption per
unit is determined, the rates shall be in accordance with Section 28-163 and
billed to the party responsible for the water hookup.
SECTION 28-163.3. Customers' Deposits. [Ord. No. 2017-13 § 1,
4-11-2017; Ord. No. 2017-28 § IV, 8-8-2017]
A. The City of Lexington will require of any applicant for continuing or
starting service a deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) which
shall be paid to the City Collector to secure the performance of the
customer of the terms and conditions of the utilities department under
which water service is supplied.
B. Any contractor or builder applying for installation of water service shall
first deposit with the City Collector the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). The
deposit shall be retained by the City as security against any or all water
usage during construction by the builder so long as the builder
continues to do construction work in the City. No builder shall be
required to put up more than one (1) deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
property.
C. Sewer service charges shall not be assessed on construction water.
D. The City will refund tenant-customer and business deposits without
interest, less any charges due on the final bill of the customer's
account:
1. When service is discontinued at the request of the customer; or
2. After twenty-four (24) months of continued service without
disconnection.
E. Builder's deposits will be refunded only after the building has passed
the final occupancy inspection. Request for refunds of deposits must be
made to the City Collector.
F. Customers whose service has been terminated for non-payment shall be
required to deposit another one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and
such deposit will be refunded under the provisions of this Section.
SECTION 28-163.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-164
1:570
SECTION 28-164. Water Connection Fees. [Ord. No. 2014-31 § I,
12-9-2014111]
All new connections to the City's water lines shall be required to pay the
following fees. Approval of the City Administrator and Superintendent is
also required.
Size Fees
3/4 inch tap $750
1-inch tap $1,500
Over 1-inch up to and including
2-inch tap
$6,500
Any tap over 2 inches Shall be at the customer's cost; City
will inspect only
SECTION 28-164.1. Classes of Permits — Application — Fee. [Ord.
No. 2014-31 § I, 12-9-2014]
SECTION 28-164.2. When Consumer Must Run Own Water Line.
[Ord. No. 2014-31 § I, 12-9-2014]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to connect with said municipal
waterworks system whose property within the City limits does not abut on
any street or alley where a water line exists, or will exist after said system
is fully constructed, may, in discretion of the City of Lexington, Missouri,
be required to run their own water line from said premises to a point to be
designated by the City.
SECTION 28-164.3. Supervision of Installation. [Ord. No. 2014-31
§ I, 12-9-2014]
The installation of all water service connections up to two (2) inches shall
be made by and under the supervision of such personnel of the City of
A. There shall be two (2) classes of building water permits as follows:
1. For residential service.
2. For commercial service and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.
B. In the case of either class of permit, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per water permit shall be paid
to the City at the time the application is filed.
111. Editor's Note: Section III of this ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former
§§ 28-164, 28-165 and 28-166 as §§ 28-163.1, 28-163.2 and 28-165, respectively.
SECTION 28-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-164.3
1:571
Lexington, Missouri, and all connections shall be supervised and inspected
by City personnel. No dual or interconnections by the water service users
shall be, at any time, permitted.
SECTION 28-165. Review of Rates and Charges. [Ord. No. 2013-25
§ 4, 8-7-2013]
The City will at least on an annual basis review the rates and charges
for the use of the water system to determine whether such rates maintain
sustainability of operations and compliance with financing documents.
SECTION 28-166. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2014-31 § I, 12-9-2014; Ord.
No. 2017-28 § V, 8-8-2017]
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating the provisions
of Section 28-164 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. In addition to any other fees, charges, or amounts due the City, a
returned check charge may be made against a customer's account, as a
result of a check issued by a customer, in payment of an amount due the
City, and being returned to the City by the customer's bank for any
reason. In such an instance, the City may require payment in cash for
all amounts due. Additionally, the customer's utility service may be
subject to discontinuance for failing to redeem the check returned by
the bank.
SECTION 28-164.3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 28-166
1:572
Chapter 29
ZONING
Cross References — As to adult business regulations, see §§ 13-31 — 13-35;
as to community lake park use, see §§ 19-26 — 19-29; As to building
inspector/code enforcement officer — authorized to enforce ch. 29, see
§ 2-209.
SECTION 28-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 28-166
1:573

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
SECTION 29-1. Citation. [Ord. No. 80-22, Art. I, § 1, 12-2-1980]
This Chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by the General
Assembly of the State of Missouri in Section 305.170, Section 79.370 and
Chapter 89, RSMo., shall be a part of the Comprehensive City Plan of the
City of Lexington, Missouri, and shall be known as the Lexington Zoning
Ordinance and may be cited as such.
SECTION 29-2. Purpose and Necessity. [Ord. No. 80-22, Art. I, § 2,
12-2-1980]
The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most
appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property;
to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public
health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to
prevent undue concentration of population; to create a comprehensive and
stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water
supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities, and other facilities. In
interpreting and applying the provisions of this Chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
SECTION 29-3. Nature of Zoning Plan. [Ord. No. 80-22, Art. I, § 3,
12-2-1980]
This Chapter classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and
structures within the City limits of Lexington, State of Missouri, as
hereinafter set forth. The regulations contained herein are necessary to
promote the health, safety, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants by
dividing the City into zones and regulating therein the use of the land
and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the
coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, density
of population and location of buildings.
SECTION 29-4. Regulation of Use, Height, Area, Yards, and Open
Spaces. [Ord. No. 80-22, Art. I, § 4, 12-2-1980]
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no
building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed,
moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or
intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except
in accordance with the requirements established in the district in which
such land, building, structure or improvement is located, and in accordance
with the provisions of the Articles contained herein relating to any or all
districts.
SECTION 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-5
1:575
SECTION 29-5. Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 80-22, Art. I, § 5,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § 1, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 2007-08 § 1,
3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-22 § 1,
5-27-2008]
A. The City of Lexington is hereby divided into zones as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, dated May 8, 2008, filed with the City Clerk. The
map as amended and all explanatory material thereon is hereby made a
part of this Chapter as if fully set out herein and is on file in the City
Clerk's office.
B. Zones shall be designated as follows:
1. Agricultural.
"A-1" General Agricultural District.
2. Residential.
"R-1" Single-Family Residential District
"R-2" Two-Family Residential District
"R-3" Low Density Multiple-Family Residential District
3. Commercial.
"C-1" Neighborhood Commercial District
"C-2" General Commercial District
"C-3" Central Business District
"C-4" Office Commercial District
"H-C" Highway Commercial
4. Industrial.
"I-1" Light Industrial District
"I-2" Heavy Industrial District
5. Historic Upon designation, a landmark or district shall receive the
supplemental classification "H" for historic. This designation is
designed to preserve features of historical and cultural significance
in the City. The historic restriction is established to provide
conditions and regulations for the protection, enhancement and
perpetuation of buildings, structures, areas, places or works of art
in the City which have special historic and cultural value for the
general welfare of the public and community.
6. Planned unit developments. Any of the zoning districts designated
in Subsections (B)(2) through (B)(5) above may be designated as a
Planned Unit Development District by adding the designation "PD"
SECTION 29-5 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-5
1:576
SECTION 29-6. Definitions. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. I § 6, 12-2-1980;
Ord. No. 88-6 § 1, 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 93-22 § 1, 11-9-1993; Ord.
No. 2001-02 § 1, 1-9-2001; Ord. No. 2005-31 § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No.
2006-10 § 1, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-34 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No.
2012-01 § II, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-22 § 1, 6-12-2012]
such as "R-PD-1". The purpose is to allow development of tracts of
land to their fullest extent and at the same time observe the general
intent and spirit of these regulations. The uses permitted in any
planned district shall be the same as in the corresponding regular
district. For example, "R-PD-1" shall be the same as in "R-1". The
procedures of the regulations relating to zoning amendments shall
be followed for a planned district zoning designation.
C. Specific district regulations are set forth in Article II of this Chapter.
A. This Section presents the general rules for interpreting language and
definitions of terms within the zoning ordinance.
1. Rules for interpreting language. For the purpose of this Chapter,
certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows:
a. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular.
b. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
c. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust company, or corporation, government bodies
or agencies and all other legal entities, as well as an individual.
d. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended",
"designed" or "arranged to be used or occupied" as well as
"constructed", "altered", "converted", "rented", "leased" or
"intended to be used".
e. The word "lot" includes the words "parcel", "tract", "site" and
"space".
f. The word "Board" means the Board of Adjustment.
g. The word "City" means the City of Lexington, Missouri.
h. The words "Governing Body" means the City Council of
Lexington, Missouri.
i. The word "Commission" means the City of Lexington Planning
and Zoning Commission.
B. Definitions Of Terms. For the purposes of understanding, administering
and enforcing this Chapter, the following terms shall have specific
definition or meaning as indicated herein. All words not specifically
SECTION 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:577
defined herein shall have a meaning as found in Webster's Seventh New
Collegiate Dictionary.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building customarily
incidental and appropriate and subordinate to the main building or use
and located on the same lot with the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental, appropriate and
subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located on the
same premises.
ADULT — A person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — (Also see adult
business regulations, §§ 13-31 thru 13-47. In case of conflict between
this definition and 13-31 thru 13-47, the more restrictive Section shall
prevail.)
Any business, premises or establishment including, without limitation,
adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult motion picture theaters,
adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult cabarets, adult live
performance theaters which has any of the following:
An amount less than thirty percent (30%) of its annual gross
receipts derived from:
The offering of entertainment, performances, scenes, visual
representations or other presentations which are
characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas"
as herein defined, or
a.
The offering of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic materials which
are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas"
as herein defined, and instruments, devices or paraphernalia
designed for use in connection with "specified sexual
activities" as herein defined; or
b.
1.
An amount less than thirty percent (30%) of its inventory on hand
at any time consisting of stocks in trade of books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic materials
which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas"
as herein defined, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection
with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined; or
2.
An amount less than thirty percent (30%) of its floor area at any
time allocated to:
3.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:578
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT, ENHANCED — Any
business, premises or establishment including, without limitation, adult
bookstores, adult video stores, adult motion pictures theaters, adult
mini-motion picture theaters, adult cabarets, adult live performance
theaters which has any of the following:
Entertainment, performances, scenes, visual representations
or other presentations which are characterized by emphasis
on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of
"specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, or
a.
The offering, display and storage of stocks in trade of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic materials which are characterized by emphasis
on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, and
instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined,
and instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined.
Specified anatomical areas: Any of the following:
Less than completely or opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breast area below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; or
(a)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
(b)
(1)
Specified sexual activities: Any of the following:
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or
(a)
Actual or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy or oral copulation; or excretory
functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this
definition.
(b)
(2)
b.
Thirty percent (30%) or more of its annual gross receipts derived
from:
The offering of entertainment, performances, scenes, visual
representations or other presentations which are
characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas"
as herein defined; or
a.
1.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:579
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE — Any sign, device or structure
of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for advertising
purposes. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing,
posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving
or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner
whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure other than a sign shall
be determined as the area of the largest cross section of such structure.
Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted by public officials
in the course of their public duties or merchandise or materials being
offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose
of this definition.
AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING — Biodiesel, feed
plant, ethanol plan.
The offering of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic materials which
are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas"
as herein defined, and instruments, devices or paraphernalia
designed for use in connection with "specified sexual
activities" as herein defined; or
b.
Thirty percent (30%) or more of its inventory on hand at any
time consisting of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic materials which are
characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein
defined, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with
"specified sexual activities" as herein defined; or
2.
Thirty percent (30%) or more of its floor area at any time allocated
to:
Entertainment, performances, scenes, visual representations
or other presentations which are characterized by emphasis
on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of
"specified anatomical areas" as herein defined; or
a.
The offering, display and storage of stocks in trade of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic materials which are characterized by emphasis
on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, and
instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined,
and instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined.
b.
3.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:580
AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING — The initial processing of crop-based
agricultural products that is reasonably required to take place in close
proximity to the site where such products are produced. Typical uses
include grain mills.
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE — An establishment primarily
engaged in the sale, purchase or rental of farm tools and implements,
feed and grain, tack, animal care products and farm supplies. This
definition excludes the sale of large implements, such as tractors and
combines, but includes food sales and farm machinery repair services
that are accessory to the principal use.
AGRICULTURAL USE — Any one (1) or combination of the following
uses: the growing of farm or truck garden crops, dairying and
pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, or animal/poultry
husbandry. Agriculture encompasses the farmhouses and accessory
uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural activities
together with the operation of equipment, machinery and vehicles to
perform the above activities or uses.
AGRICULTURE — The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided
however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. The operation of
commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction yards for cattle or hogs
shall be deemed an industrial and not an agricultural use. The planting,
cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants commonly
grown in Lafayette County on parcels greater than forty (40) acres.
AGRICULTURE, GENERAL — The use of land for the production of
livestock, dairy products, poultry or poultry products.
AGRICULTURE, LIMITED — The use of land for the production of row
crops, field crops, tree crops or timber.
AIRPORT OR AIRSTRIP — Any public or privately owned or operated
ground facility designed to accommodate landing and takeoff
operations of aircraft, including all taxiways, aircraft storage and tiedown
areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION — Any addition, remodel, extension or change to, or
rearrangement of, a building's structural parts, exterior surface of a
main building or accessory building.
ANIMAL CARE, GENERAL — A use providing animal care, veterinary
services or boarding. See "ANIMAL CARE, LIMITED" and "KENNEL".
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:581
ANIMAL CARE, LIMITED — A use providing animal care, boarding and
veterinary services for household pets, with no outside animal runs. See
"ANIMAL CARE, GENERAL" and "KENNEL".
ANIMAL FEED PROCESSING AND STORAGE — An animal feed mill.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — An establishment for the care and treatment of
small animals, including household pets.
APARTMENT — A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house
arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single
family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit. (Also see "DWELLING, MULTIPLE- FAMILY".)
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multiple-family dwelling. (See "DWELLING,
MULTIPLE".)
APPLICANT — The owner or duly designated representative of land
proposed to be subdivided or for which a special permit, amendment,
variance, construction permit or certificate of occupancy has been
requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.
APWA — American Public Works Association.
ARMED FORCES RESERVE CENTERS — A service center for armed
service recruitment.
ASPHALT OR CONCRETE PLANT — An establishment engaged in the
manufacture, mixing, batching or recycling of asphalt, asphaltic
cement, cement or concrete products.
ASSISTED LIVING — Multi-family dwelling units used or designed to
be used by older persons, persons with disabilities or other persons
needing or desiring assistance with day-to-day living matters, but not
including group homes, group housing, hospitals or convalescent care
facilities. Typical uses include retirement communities in which
housekeeping services, common dining facilities and recreational and
social activities are offered to residents.
ATHLETIC FIELD — A wide stretch of open land used for outdoor
games such as baseball, football, and soccer.
AUDITORIUM OR STADIUM — An open, partially enclosed or fully
enclosed facility used or intended to be used primarily for spectator
sports, entertainment events, expositions and other public gatherings.
Typical uses include convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas and
amphitheaters.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM) — A mechanized consumer
banking device operated by a financial institution for the convenience
of its customers, whether outside or in an access-controlled facility.
Automatic teller machines (ATM) located within a building shall be
considered accessory to the principal use unless the ATM is likely to be
an independent traffic generator.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:582
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled vehicle designed for use on streets
and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not
limited to, the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters
and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but
not butane or propane fuels, and which may or may not include facilities
for lubricating, washing, cleaning or otherwise servicing automobiles,
but not including the painting thereof.
AUTOMOBILE WASH OR LAUNDRY — A structure designed primarily
for washing automobiles with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaner,
high pressure spray or other mechanical device.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR SALVAGE YARD — An area outside of a
building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked, or
where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor
vehicles are stored.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES — Any building, structure, improvements or
land used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles,
trucks, trailers or similar vehicles including, but not limited to, body,
fender, muffler or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, painting,
tire service and sales, or installation of CB radios, radios, car alarms,
stereo equipment or cellular telephones.
BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Establishments engaged in
deposit banking. Typical uses include commercial banks, savings
institutions and credit unions. "Banks and financial institutions" also
include automated teller machines.
BAR OR TAVERN — An establishment in which the primary function
is the sale and serving of alcoholic and cereal malt beverages for
consumption on the premises, including establishments commonly
known as cocktail lounges and nightclubs.
BASEMENT — A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of
height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when
more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of
the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or
dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises.
BASIC INDUSTRY — An establishment engaged in the basic processing
and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from
extracted or raw materials. Typical uses include distilleries, pulp
processing and paper products manufacturing; glass manufacturing;
brick manufacturing; steel works; tanneries; acid manufacturing;
cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturing; fertilizer or
chemical manufacturing; and petroleum refineries.
BATHHOUSE — An establishment or business which provides the
services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of
hydrotherapy, unless operated or supervised by a medical or
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:583
chiropractic practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by
the State Board of Healing Arts.
BED AND BREAKFAST — RESIDENTIAL — A single-family home,
including attached or unattached structures, occupied as a permanent
dwelling place by the proprietor or manager, in which sleeping
accommodations of not more than four (4) rooms and breakfast is
offered for transient guests in a twenty-four (24) hour period for
compensation. Any establishment with sleeping rooms in excess of four
(4) shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this Section and
subject to the requirements of Missouri Statute Chapter 315, RSMo.
BED AND BREAKFAST IN "C-3" CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT —
An area on the second (2nd) floor or above of a commercial building
in which sleeping accommodations of not more than four (4) rooms
and breakfast is offered for transient guests for time-limited durations
of twenty-four (24) hours for compensation. Any establishment with
sleeping rooms in excess of four (4) shall be defined as a hotel under
the terms of this Section and subject to the requirements of Missouri
Statute Chapter 315, RSMo.
BLOCK — A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is
incomplete or disconnected, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
the outline of the block.
BOARDING HOUSE — A dwelling other than a hotel occupied as a
single housekeeping unit where, for compensation and by prearrangement
for definite periods, lodging or meals are provided for five
(5) or more but not exceeding twelve (12) persons, but not for the public
or transients.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established by the City to hear
and determine appeals and variances.
BUILDING — Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure
of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by the
building. The building area shall include all over-hanging roofs.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average line of
the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the
building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of
a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch
or hip roof.
BUILDING LINE — A line beyond which building and structures may
not be located except as otherwise provided.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling
shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:584
BUILDING SITE — A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a building or structure.
CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE — Temporary or permanent buildings, tents
or other structures established or maintained as a temporary living
quarter, operated continuously for a period of five (5) days or more for
recreation, religious, education or vacation purposes.
CARNIVAL OR CIRCUS — Any aggregation of shows or riding devices,
games of skill or chance, or any combination of shows and riding
devices, or any combination of several enterprises, such as revolving
wheels, merry-go-rounds, giant swings, panoramas, musical and
theatrical entertainments, or riding devices, whether carried on or
engaged in or conducted in any field, park or in a building or enclosure,
and whether carried on, engaged in or conducted as one (1) enterprise
or by several concessionaires, and whether one (1) admission fee is
charged for admission to all such shows or entertainments, or separate
fee for admission is charged for each amusement.
CARPORT — A permanent roofed structure permanently open on at
least two (2) sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger
vehicles.
CAR WASH — An establishment primarily engaged in cleaning or
detailing motor vehicles, whether self-service, automatic or by hand.
CATERING — An establishment engaged in the preparation of food
and beverages for consumption at another location. Catering shall
not include the manufacturing of food as defined in "FOOD/BAKERY
PRODUCT MANUFACTURING".
CEMENT MANUFACTURING — A cement plant.
CEMETERY, CREMATORY, MAUSOLEUM — Land used or intended to
be used for burial or cremation of the dead, whether human or animal,
including a mausoleum or columbarium.
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL MANUFACTURING — A chemical
production facility.
CHILD CARE CENTER — Any place, home or institution which receives
four (4) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not
of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal
guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time
for compensation; provided however, this definition shall not include
public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the
laws of this State, custody of children fixed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree, or religious or public institutions caring for children within
the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are
attending services or meetings or classes or engaged in church
activities.
CHURCHES, CHAPELS, TEMPLES AND SYNAGOGUES — See the
definition of "RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY".
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:585
CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL — Inspects and approves building projects
within the City of Lexington. May also provide various engineering
services to the City.
CITY ENGINEER — See "CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL".
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL — A facility including, but not limited
to, dental and doctors' offices, for the examination and treatment of ill
or afflicted human outpatients; provided however, that patients are not
kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
CLUBS AND LODGES, PRIVATE — An organization and its premises
catering exclusively to members and their guests for social, intellectual,
recreational or athletic purposes that are conducted for profit.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — The arrangement of buildings or
structures in groups around common courts, driveways, parks or other
unique features of the land permitting more latitude and flexibility in
placement and design. The lots, buildings or structures in a cluster
development must meet the requirements of the appropriate planned
districts.
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY — An institution of higher education
offering undergraduate or graduate degrees.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT INN IN "C-3" CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT — An area on the second (2nd) floor or above of a commercial
building in which sleeping accommodations of not more than four
(4) rooms without meals are offered for transient guests for timelimited
durations of twenty-four (24) hours for compensation. Any
establishment with sleeping rooms in excess of four (4) shall be defined
as a hotel under the terms of this Section and subject to the
requirements of Missouri Statute Chapter 315, RSMo.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An area of land or water planned for passive
or active recreation such as swimming pools or tennis courts but not
including roadways.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — Commercial AM/FM radio, television,
microwave and cellular telephone transmission towers, electronic
emission of any wave length and accessory equipment and buildings.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building to be used as a place of meeting,
recreation or social activity and not operated for profit and in which
neither alcoholic beverages or meals are normally dispensed or
consumed.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility that is designed and used for
transforming food, yard wastes and other organic material into soil or
fertilizer by biological decomposition.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive plan made and adopted
by the Planning Commission and the Lexington City Council which,
through a combination of text, charts and maps, sets forth proposals for
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:586
general locations of various land uses, including streets, parks, schools,
public buildings and utilities.
CONCENTRATED FEEDING OPERATION — A lot or building or
combination of lots and buildings intended for the confined feeding,
breeding, raising or holding of animals and specifically designed as
a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the
concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be
maintained within the enclosure. Open lots used for feeding and rearing
of poultry (poultry ranges) and barns, dairy farms, swine facilities, beef
lots and barns, horse stalls, mink ranches and zoos shall be considered
to be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that would not be appropriate generally
throughout a zoning district because of potential danger, smoke, noise
or odor, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation
to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to public health, safety,
morals or general welfare.
CONDOMINUM — A single dwelling unit under individual ownership
within a multiple dwelling unit structure. A multi-family structure with
two (2) condominiums shall be considered a two-family dwelling and a
structure with more than two (2) condominiums shall be considered a
multi-family dwelling.
CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICE — An establishment engaged
in the retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of
buildings or other structures, and the outdoor storage of construction
equipment or materials on lots other than construction sites. Typical
uses include lumberyards, home improvement centers, lawn and
garden supply stores, electrical, plumbing, air conditioning and heating
supply stores, swimming pool sales, construction contractors' storage
yards and construction equipment rental establishments.
CONVALESCENT CARE — An establishment providing bed care and
inpatient services for persons needing regular medical attention, meals
and continuing nursing care, but excluding facilities for the care and
treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, narcotics addiction, emergency
medical services or communicable disease. Typical uses include
nursing homes.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY — A facility providing housing and care for
individuals confined for violations of law.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space, other than yard, bounded on
three (3) or more sides by exterior walls of a building or by exterior
walls of a building and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
CULTURAL SERVICE — A facility providing cultural and educational
services to the public. Typical uses include museums, art museums,
observatories, planetariums, botanical gardens, arboretums, zoos and
aquariums.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:587
CURB LEVEL — The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or, in case
of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is
the highest.
DAY CARE CENTER — See "CHILD CARE CENTER".
DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL — A day care establishment conducted in
a private residence that provides care, protection and supervision for
more than ten (10) individuals at any one (1) time, excluding those
persons related to and residing in the home of the day care provider. A
use that provides care, protection and supervision for individuals on a
regular basis away from their primary residence for less than twentyfour
(24) hours per day.
DAY CARE, LIMITED — A day care establishment conducted in a
private residence that provides care, protection and supervision for five
(5) or less individuals at any one time, excluding those persons related
to and residing in the home of the day care provider. A use that provides
care, protection and supervision for individuals on a regular basis away
from their primary residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day.
DEDICATION — Intentional transfer by the developer to the public of
ownership of, or an interest in, land for public purpose. Dedication may
be effected by compliance with Statutes relating to dedication of land,
by formal deed by conveyance, or by any other method recognized by
the laws of the State of Missouri.
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES — The Missouri Department
of Natural Resources (MDNR).
DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT — The appointed director
of the Economic Development Department of the City of Lexington.
DISTRICT — Any section of the City of Lexington within which the
zoning regulations are uniform.
DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THRU — Establishment where the product or
service is delivered to customers in motor vehicles either parked
nearby or directly through a window.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any establishment where food, frozen
dessert and/or beverage is sold to the customer and where motor
vehicle parking space is provided and where such food, frozen dessert
and/or beverage is intended to be consumed in a motor vehicle parked
upon the premises or anywhere on the premises outside of the building.
DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDRY — Any place, building or portion thereof
available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying,
extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth,
fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of an appliance which is
operated primarily by the customer.
DUPLEX — A single lot used for two (2) dwelling units within a single
building, other than a manufactured home.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:588
DWELLING — A building designated or used exclusively for residential
occupancy for one (1) or more families, but not including house trailers,
mobile homes, travel trailers, manufactured homes, hotels or motels.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling having any portion of the
structure in common with adjoining dwellings.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling having no portion of the
structure in common with another dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living independently of each other,
exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, mobile home parks, hotels
or resort type hotels.
DWELLING, ROW HOUSE OR TOWN HOUSE — Three (3) or more
dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a
separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be
owned by one (1) family.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion of a building that contains
living facilities for not more than one (1) family and that includes
provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
EASEMENT — A grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation
or a person(s) of the use of a recorded strip of land for certain specified
purposes.
EXTERIOR SETBACK — A required setback that fronts on a public
street.
FAMILY — One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as
a single housekeeping unit, all but two (2) of whom are related to each
other by birth, adoption or marriage, as distinguished from a group
occupying a residential group home as defined in this Section.
FARM IMPLEMENT SERVICES — Large-scale farm supply
establishment.
FARM-RELATED SERVICES — Small-scale farm service store.
FENCE — An enclosure or barrier constructed of posts, supports,
boards, wires, stakes, bricks, stones or rails that impairs the visibility
and wind flow.
FENCE HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the side of the
fence that is exterior to the property or from the lowest adjacent ground
level to the top of the fence material. In the case of wire fencing, height
shall be measured by the width of the material used, providing that
when installed, the material is directly adjacent to the ground level.
FERTILIZER SALES AND STORAGE — Ag-related chemical sales.
FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan submitted for site plan review
as required by these regulations for single-family, two-family, multifamily,
commercial and industrial development proposals.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:589
FLAG LOT — A lot, tract or parcel having frontage or access to a street
or place by a strip of land narrower than the lot or parcel width, having
the appearance of a flag on a pole.
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENCE — The use of a residence exclusive of
garage, carport, porch or basement.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES — Warehousing and distribution
facility.
FOOD STORE — An establishment where food and prepackaged
beverages are sold on site for consumption off site. A limited amount of
food preparation on site may also be allowed, such as a delicatessen or
bakery.
FOOD/BAKERY PRODUCT MANUFACTURING — A use engaged in the
manufacture of food and food products, including non-retail bakeries,
canning facilities and creameries.
FREIGHT TERMINAL — A building or area in which freight brought by
truck, rail or air is processed for continued shipment by truck, rail or
air.
FRONTAGE — The distance along a street line from one intersecting
street to another or from one intersecting street to the end of a deadend
street.
FUNERAL HOME — An establishment engaged in preparing the human
deceased for burial or cremation and arranging and managing funerals.
GARAGE APARTMENT — A dwelling unit for one (1) family erected
above a private garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a main building
used for storage of vehicles used solely by the occupants and their
guests of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building, other than a private garage,
available to the public, where automobiles are parked or stored for
remuneration, hire or sale.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or portion thereof designed or used for
the storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles and which is
operated for commercial purposes.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building or portion thereof, except those
defined as a private, a repair or a community garage providing storage
for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services.
GAS AND FUEL SALES/STORAGE — The use of a site for bulk storage
and distribution and sales of flammable liquid, gas or solid fuel,
excluding below-ground storage that is clearly ancillary to an allowed
principal use on the site.
GAS SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for dispensing, sale at
retail of automobile fuels, oils or accessories, but not including major
repair work.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:590
GOLF COURSE — A facility providing private or public golf recreation
services and support facilities. This definition shall exclude miniature
golf courses and golf driving ranges except those that are clearly
accessory uses. See "RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT,
OUTDOOR".
GOVERNING BODY — That body having jurisdiction in the zoning area.
GOVERNMENT SERVICE — Buildings or facilities owned or operated
by a government entity and providing services for the public, excluding
utilities and park and recreation services. Typical uses include
administrative offices of government agencies and utility billing offices.
GRADE — The average level of the finished surface of the ground for
buildings.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION) — The lowest point of
elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior
wall of a building and a point five (5) feet distant from said wall, or the
lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between
the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five
(5) feet distant from said wall. In case walls are parallel to and within
five (5) feet of a public sidewalk, alley or other public way, the grade
shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.
GRAIN ELEVATOR — A tall building for storing grain.
GREENHOUSE, NURSERY — An establishment where flowers, trees
and other products that are commonly used as landscaping in and
around buildings are grown and sold.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area designed for
tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines
and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from the
centerline of joint partitions and from the exterior surface of outside
walls.
GROUP HOME — A residential home providing twenty-four (24) hour
care in a protected environment for eight (8) or less unrelated persons
with mental or physical disabilities; further, and pursuant to Section
89.020.2, RSMo., such home may include two (2) additional qualified
persons acting as house parents or guardians who need not be related
to each other or to any of the mentally or physically handicapped
persons residing in the home. A "qualified person" shall mean a person
qualified by education, training and experience, or any combination
thereof, for the position which they hold in the residential group home.
Group homes for occupants eighteen (18) years old or under shall be
licensed by the Missouri Department of Social Services.
GROUP RESIDENTIAL — The use of a site for occupancy by groups
of more than five (5) persons, not defined as a family, on a weekly
or longer basis. Typical uses include fraternity or sorority houses,
dormitories, residence halls. The term "group residential" does not
include "group homes".
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:591
HARD SURFACED ROAD — An all-weather surface improved with
asphalt, concrete, asphaltic concrete or similar material designed to
City of Lexington street standards.
HAZARDOUS OPERATION — Activities that present the potential for
serious hazards to human life and health. Typical uses include arsenals,
atomic reactors, explosives and fireworks manufacture, hazardous
waste disposal, medical waste disposal and radioactive waste handling.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Any substances or materials that, by
reason of their toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious
properties, may be detrimental or harmful to the health of any person
handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or
substance.
HEALTH CLUB — A facility where members or non-members use
equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USES — Industry that creates external effects of
noise and odors.
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — The vertical distance
from the average ground level abutting a building or structure to the
highest point of a building or highest point of any permanent part of
a structure other than a building. Height, where not regulated by feet,
shall be regulated by stories and a story shall be equal to twelve (12)
feet for purposes of measuring structures other than buildings.
HELIPORT OR HELIPAD — An area, either on the ground or on a
building, used as a landing pad for helicopters to pick up or discharge
passengers or cargo.
HOMES ASSOCIATION — An incorporated non-profit organization
operating under recorded land agreements through which:
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or profession carried on by the
inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character
thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory
buildings; provided that no trading in merchandise is carried on, and
no mechanical equipment is used or activity is conducted which creates
any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of
the lot on which said occupation is conducted.
The conducting of a beauty or barber shop, tea room, or restaurant, rest
home, clinic, doctor or dentist office, child care center, tourist home
(but see "BED AND BREAKFAST"), insurance office, real estate office,
Each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit or other described
land area is automatically a member; and
1.
Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate
share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as
maintaining a common property, and
2.
3. The charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:592
cabinet, metal or auto repair shop, or other such uses shall not be
deemed a home occupation.
HOSPITAL — An institution that:
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings under one (1) ownership
containing five (5) or more sleeping rooms occupied, or intended or
designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place
of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation,
including motels or motor inns, but not including an auto or trailer
court or camp, sanatoriums, hospital, orphanage or building where
persons are housed under restraint.
IMPROVEMENTS — See "PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS".
INSTITUTION — A non-profit establishment for public use.
INTERIOR SETBACK — A required setback that does not front on a
public street.
JUNK YARD — See "AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD" and "SALVAGE
YARD".
KENNEL — Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more adult dogs
and cats over the age of four (4) months of age are kept.
LANDFILL — A disposal facility, licensed by the State of Missouri,
employing an engineered method of disposing of solid waste, including
demolition and construction debris.
LAUNDRY PLANT — An establishment that is primarily engaged in the
large-scale washing or cleaning of laundry, rugs and similar materials.
This definition does not include laundromats or dry cleaning pickup
stations.
LIBRARY — A publicly-operated establishment housing a collection
of books, magazines, audio and video tapes and other material for
borrowing and use by the public.
LIFE CARE FACILITIES — Assisted living housing and related support
services.
Offers service more intensive than those required for room, board,
personal services and general nursing care;
1.
Offers facilities and beds for use beyond twenty-four (24) hours by
individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury,
deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease or pregnancy; and
2.
Regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory services,
diagnostic X-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or
obstetrical care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar
extent. Hospitals may include offices for medical and dental
personnel, central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical
laboratories and other related uses.
3.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:593
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES — A use engaged in the manufacture,
predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products,
but excluding basic industrial processing.
LOADING SPACE — A space having a minimum dimension of ten (10)
feet by twenty-five (25) feet and a vertical clearance of fourteen (14)
feet within the main building or on the same lot providing for the
standing, loading or unloading of trucks.
LODGING ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, group of buildings,
structure, facility, place, or places of business where guest rooms are
provided, which is owned, maintained, or operated by any person and
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public
for hire which can be construed to be a hotel, motel, motor hotel,
apartment hotel, tourist court, resort, cabins, tourist home, bunkhouse,
dormitory, bed and breakfast or other similar place by whatever name
called, and includes all such accommodations operated for hire as
lodging establishments for either transient guests, permanent guests,
or for both transient and permanent guests. This definition shall not
apply to dormitories and other living or sleeping facilities owned or
maintained by public or private schools, colleges, universities, or
churches unless made available to the general public and not used
exclusively for students and faculty, school-sponsored events, baseball
camps, conferences, dance camps, equitation camps, football camps,
learned professional society meetings, music camps, retreats,
seminars, soccer camps, swimming camps, track camps, youth
leadership conferences, or church-sponsored events. (Mo DHSS title
19CSR 20.3.050]
LOT (SOMETIMES ZONING LOT) — A parcel of land lawfully platted
in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City of Lexington.
Provided however, that where there exists real property within the City
which has not been subdivided, then lot (sometimes zoning lot) shall
be defined as a parcel of land under common ownership occupied or
intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Chapter, including
one (1) main building, together with its accessory buildings, the yards,
parking and loading spaces required herein and having its principal
frontage upon a street.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:594
Figure 1 — Lot Types And Setbacks
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut
for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the
intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five
degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH — The average distance from the front street line of the lot
to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the
lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting
on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat
of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds or
a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this Chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot at the building setback line.
LOT, ZONING — A parcel or tract of land used, developed or built upon
as a unit under single ownership or control. Said parcel or tract may
consist of one (1) or more lots of record, one (1) or more portions of a
lot or lots of record or any combination thereof.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure which bears a seal indicating
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction And
Safety Standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 5401 and
constructed on or after June 15, 1976.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:595
MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) — A factory-built structure
or structures which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or
more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected
on site, contains three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet,
equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to
be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a
permanent foundation.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — Any area, piece, parcel, tract or plot
of ground equipped as required for support of manufactured homes
and offered for use by the owner or representative for manufactured
home park purposes and/or ground upon which three (3) or more
manufactured homes are parked, whether for compensation or not,
including all accessory uses thereof. The term "manufactured home
park" does not include sales lots of which unoccupied manufactured
homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME — RESIDENTIAL DESIGN — A manufactured
home which is designed with the same appearance of an on-site,
conventionally built, single-family dwelling and satisfies the criteria
established in use regulations.
Figure 2 Manufactured Home Residential Design
Residential
Character:
Architectural
Details:
Manufactured Home
Features:
Covered entry Window elements Horizontal lap siding
Front porch Permanent masonry
foundation
Landscaping Double-wide manufactured
home
Pitched roof
MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — An establishment primarily
engaged in the display and sale of manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY — Establishments engaged in the
manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:596
treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products, but excluding "basic industry".
MASSAGE SHOP — An establishment which has a fixed place of
business having a source of income or compensation sixty percent
(60%) or more of which is derived from the practice of any method of
pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulation of external parts of the human body
with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electric apparatus or
appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other
similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to
whom the treatment is provided or some third (3rd) person on his or
her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity;
provided that this term shall not include any establishment operated
or supervised by a medical or chiropractic practitioner or professional
physical therapist licensed by the State of Missouri.
MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility in which source
separated co-mingled recyclable materials, such as newspapers, glass,
metals and plastic containers, are stored, flattened, crushed and/or
bundled prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to
manufacture new products.
MEDICAL SERVICE — An establishment providing therapeutic,
preventive or corrective personal treatment services on an outpatient
basis by physicians, dentists, and other practitioners of the medical
or healing arts, and the provisions of medical testing and analysis
services. Typical uses include clinics and offices for doctors of
medicine, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, blood
banks and medical laboratories.
MILITARY SERVICE — A facility used or intended to be used by a
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, including military reserves.
MINING OR QUARRYING — The extraction of metallic and non-metallic
minerals, excluding oil or natural gas. Typical uses include sand and
gravel pit operations, quarries and mines.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home larger than three
hundred twenty (320) square feet in floor area designed to be used as a
year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective for all mobile home construction on June
15, 1976. In traveling mode, the structure is eight (8) body feet in width
or forty (40) body feet or more in length.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any development, site, parcel or tract of
land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose
of providing long-term accommodation of more than thirty (30) days
for placement of two (2) or more mobile homes and shall include
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:597
all buildings used or maintained for the use of the residents of the
development.
MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business which provides
for a fee or compensation the services of modeling on premises for the
purpose of reproducing the human body wholly or partially in the nude
by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise.
This does not apply to public or private schools wherever persons are
enrolled in a class.
Figure 3 Modular Home
Residential
Character: Architectural Details: Modular Features: Permanent Features:
Pitched roof Eave projection Modules for on-site
construction
Walkway and stairs
Covered entry
Enclosed garage
Varying depths
Ornamental windows
Formal landscaping
MODULAR HOME — A manufactured residential structure built to a
nationally recognized and accepted construction standard published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.
(BOCA) or the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO)
that is inspected and certified at the factory so that it meets said
standard. A modular home shall have exterior structure materials and
appearance similar to the customary single-family structures, as
required of a manufactured home — residential design, and shall be
permanently situated on a concrete foundation.
MOTEL — See HOTEL.
MOTOR INN — See HOTEL.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL — The use of a site for three (3) or more
dwelling units within a single building. Typical uses include triplexes,
four-plexes, apartments and residential condominiums.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure whose size, dimensions or location was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this Chapter, but which would be
prohibited or further restricted as to type or number under the terms of
this Chapter. This may include, but is not limited to, failure to conform
to use, height, area, coverage or off-street parking requirements.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:598
NON-CONFORMING LOT — A lot whose area, dimensions or location
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Chapter,
but which would be prohibited or further restricted under the terms of
this Chapter.
NON-CONFORMING USE — The use of land or a building, or a portion
thereof, that does not conform with the use regulations of the district in
which it is situated.
NON-TRANSIENT LODGING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment
as defined under "lodging establishment" designed for occupancy by
a person or persons who pay rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping
purposes and which are advertised or held out to the public as a place
regularly rented to guests for periods of thirty (30) consecutive days or
more.
NURSING HOME — A building or buildings in which elderly, chronically
ill and disabled persons who are patients therein will be provided
full support living facilities including twenty-four (24) hour nursing
supervision.
OCCUPIED — A structure, building, mobile home, vehicle, or other
place suitable for human occupancy which has a person/persons living
in, dwelling in, inhabiting, residing in, or working in said structure,
building, mobile home, vehicle, or other place, and such structure,
building, mobile home, vehicle, or other place is legally connected to
and using all of the following:[Ord. No. 2013-26 § I, 8-13-2013]
OFFICE, GENERAL — An establishment providing executive,
management, administrative or professional services, but not medical
or dental services or the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to
a permitted use. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, law,
architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar offices.
OIL OR GAS DRILLING/REFINING — The subsurface extraction or
refining of oil or natural gas.
PARCEL — A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
PARKING AREA, OFF-STREET — An all-weather surface (concrete,
asphaltic concrete or other comparable surface) enclosed or
unenclosed for the short-term storage of automobiles..
An approved and functioning method of wastewater treatment and
disposal;
1.
2. The public electrical system;
3. An approved and functioning water supply.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:599
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL — Area used or intended to be used
for off-street parking of operable motor vehicles on a temporary basis,
other than as accessory parking to a principal use.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or
unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) motor vehicle together
with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking spaces
with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of a motor
vehicle.
PARKS AND RECREATION — A park, playground or community facility
owned by or under the control of a public agency or homeowners'
association that provides opportunities for active or passive
recreational activities.
PAVED SURFACE OR PERMANENT SURFACE — A permanently sealed,
non-dust producing surface such as poured concrete, asphalt, brick or
paving stones. Rock, gravel, sand and shale are not considered suitable
materials for a paved or permanent surface.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — A poured concrete, concrete block or
brick foundation that extends thirty-six (36) inches below grade or a
poured concrete slab with a continuous perimeter footing that extends
thirty-six (36) inches below grade.
PERMANENT GUEST — Any person who rents and occupies a guest
room in a lodging establishment for a period of thirty (30) consecutive
days or more. A permanent reservation for any room is not synonymous
with permanent resident. A permanent resident is not subject to tax on
their lease or rental payments.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic and including any
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
PERSONAL SERVICES — An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed
services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited
to, beauty and barber shops, shoe repair shops and tailor shops.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A development planned in
accordance with the provisions of Article IV of this Chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Commission appointed by the
Governing Body to administer the planning and zoning regulations as
stipulated by the Governing Body and the Statutes of the State.
POST OFFICE — A facility used for the collection, sorting and
distribution of U.S. mail among several zip code areas and having
limited retail services for the public, such as the sale of stamps,
postcards and postal insurance.
PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A preliminary site plan that
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to submission of
the final site plan.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:600
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING — The production of books, magazines,
newspapers and other printed matter, and record pressing and
publishing, engraving and photoengraving, but excluding businesses
involved solely in retail photocopying, reproduction, photo developing
or blueprinting services.
PRINT SHOP — A facility for the custom reproduction of written or
graphic materials on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses.
Typical processes include, but are not limited to, photocopying,
blueprint, and facsimile sending and receiving, and including offset
printing.
PRIVATE CLUB — A non-profit association of persons whose members
organized for some purpose and whose facilities are restricted to
members and their guests; not including groups organized to render a
service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — The installation, construction, addition or
betterment of any existing or new physical development dedicated to or
intended for public use including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
parks, sewers, storm water control, street lighting and other utilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Utilities such as electric, gas, water, telephone,
cable, etc., providing services to the general public.
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR — An establishment
offering recreation, entertainment or games of skill to the public for
a fee or charge and that is wholly enclosed in a building. Typical
uses include bowling alleys, indoor theaters, bingo parlors, pool halls,
billiard parlors and video game arcades. Does not include those uses
considered as parks and recreation.
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR — An establishment
offering recreation, entertainment or games of skill to the public for
a fee or charge, wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the
open. Typical uses include archery ranges, batting cages, golf driving
ranges, drive-in theaters and miniature golf courses. Does not include
those uses considered as parks and recreation.
RECREATION VEHICLE — Any of the following vehicles which are
licensed for travel on the highway: travel trailer (a vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation, or one permanently
identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer); pickup
coach (a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation); motorhome
(as a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and
vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle);
and camping trailer (as a canvas material or metal folding structure,
mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation
use).
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:601
RECREATION VEHICLE PARK — Land used or intended to be used
for occupancy by recreational vehicles for transient living purposes,
including the use of camping spaces for tents.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A facility which is not larger
than one thousand (1,000) square feet in size and is designed for
the collection of aluminum and steel cans, glass, plastic containers,
papers and other usable materials for their redistribution for sale or
reutilization. This definition does not include processing equipment or
storage.
RECYCLING PROCESSING CENTER — A facility designed for the
purpose of collecting, redistributing and processing recyclable
materials. Activities may include the receipt, separation, storage,
conversion, bailing and/or processing of paper, iron, metal, glass,
newspaper, and other non-biodegradable materials. Hazardous and
biodegradable materials, as determined by the Missouri Department
of Natural Resources, including, but not limited to, food, beverages,
drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes,
syringes, needles, pesticides, and other similar materials, shall not be
brought into or handled by a recycling processing center.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY — A site used by a religions group primarily
or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services,
including a place of worship, retreat site or religious camp.
REPAIR SERVICE — An establishment primarily engaged in the
provision of repair services to individuals and households, but
excluding "vehicle repair" services. Typical uses include appliance
repair shops.
RESEARCH SERVICE — An establishment engaged in conducting basic
and applied research, including production of prototype products when
limited to the minimum scale necessary for full investigation of the
merits of a product, excluding production of products used primarily or
customarily for sale or for use in non-prototype production operations.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A use primarily engaged in the sale
of food and non-alcoholic beverages in a ready-to-consume state and
where the design or principal method of operation is that of a fastfood
or drive-in restaurant offering quick food service, where orders
are generally not taken at the customer's table, where food is generally
served in disposable wrapping or containers, and where food and
beverages may be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle.
RESTAURANT, GENERAL — A building wherein food is prepared and
served in ready-to-eat form to the public for human consumption. The
term restaurant shall include cafe, cafeteria, grill, pizza or chili parlor,
diner, snack shop, hamburger shop and steak house.
RETAIL — Refers to the sale of commodities and services directly to
customers, when such commodities and services are used or consumed
by the customer and not purchased primarily for the purpose of resale.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:602
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE — An establishment engaged in the
sale or rental of goods and services including, but not limited to,
antique shops, apparel and accessory stores, art and supply stores,
bicycle shops, book and stationery stores, barber and beauty shops,
candy and ice cream stores, cigar and tobacco stores, dressmakers and
tailors, flower and gift shops, hobby shops, interior decorators, jewelry
stores, key shops, leather goods and luggage stores, music instrument
sales and repair, photocopying services, shoe repair and shoe shine
stores, sporting and athletic goods, toy stores and department stores;
excluding uses more specifically defined.
ROADSIDE STAND — A structure erected for the display and sale
of agricultural products that may or may not be located on a zoning
lot where the principal use is agricultural. Requires appropriate
commercial zoning and must comply with all site and structure
provisions of the applicable zoning district and may sell up to five
(5) products not of an agricultural nature. Products sold are generally
grown off the zoning lot where such stand is located.
ROOMING HOUSE AND TOURIST HOME — See "BED AND
BREAKFAST".
SAFETY SERVICE — A facility for conduct of public safety and
emergency services, including fire and police protection services and
emergency medical and ambulance services.
SALVAGE YARD — An area where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are sold, exchanged, stored, baled, parked, disassembled,
handled or prepared for recycling, including auto and building salvage
yards.
SANATORIUM — An institution providing health facilities for inpatient
medical treatment or treatment and recuperation using natural
therapeutic agents.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE OR HIGH — A public, private or
parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and/or
senior high school levels in the branches of learning and study required
to be taught in the public schools of the State.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — Any school other than a public school, including
schools owned and operated by a business establishment, a foundation
or an institution, as well as private or parochial elementary, junior or
senior high schools.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any school operated by a public school district or
by a City, County, State or Federal Government agency.
SCHOOLS FOR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Schools with
specific charter for disabled students.
SCREENING — Screening and enclosure required for permitted
outdoor storage shall be by means of a fence, wall or berm, in
combination with landscaping, designed to create a minimum of
seventy-five percent (75%) opacity. Crates, boxes, trailers or other
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:603
temporary storage facilities shall not be considered appropriate
screening materials.
SERVICE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of a building exclusive of
stairways, restrooms, storage rooms, hallways or other areas which are
not regularly used by visitors, clients, customers, patients or patrons in
their normal everyday use of the building.
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOTIVE — A use primarily engaged in the
retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuels primarily to automobiles and
passenger vehicles, along with accessory activities such as the sale of
lubricants, accessories or supplies, the lubrication of motor vehicles,
and the minor adjustment or repair of passenger motor vehicles. Uses
involved primarily in the sale of diesel fuel, gasoline or other fuels to
tractor trucks and uses that feature parking, storage or servicing of
tractor trucks or semi-trailers shall be classified as "truck stop service
stations."
SERVICE STATION, TRUCK STOP — A use primarily engaged in the
sale of diesel fuel, gasoline or other fuels to tractor trucks, along
with accessory activities such as the sale of lubricants, accessories or
supplies, or the servicing of tractor trucks or semi-trailers. A truck
stop service station may include, as an accessory use, the parking and
storage of tractor trucks and semi-trailers.
SETBACK — The distance that is required by this zoning ordinance
to be maintained in an unobstructed state between a structure and
the property line of the lot on which the structure is located. (Note:
The term "setback" refers to a required minimum area, while the term
"yard" refers to the actual open area.)
SHOOTING RANGE — An indoor or outdoor facility used or intended to
be used for the discharge of firearms at targets.
SIGHT TRIANGLE/SIGHT LINE — A triangular area including parkway
at a street intersection that must remain clear of sight obstructions and
in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet and eight (8) feet above the crowns of the
adjacent roadways.
Figure 4 — Sight Triangle Minimum Standards
SIGN — Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks
by which information is made known to the public outside a building.
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:604
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, ATTACHED — The use of a site for
two (2) or more dwelling units that are constructed with common or
abutting walls and with each dwelling unit located on its own separate
lot. Typical uses include town houses and twin homes.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, DETACHED — The use of a lot for
only one (1) principal dwelling unit that is not connected to any other
dwelling unit. This definition shall include, as defined by these
regulations, "manufactured homes — residential design" and "modular
homes" but shall exclude "manufactured homes".
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan drawn at a scale of not less
than one hundred (100) feet equals one (1) inch which shows the
topographic characteristics of the site at a contour interval of not more
than five (5) feet; the location and dimensions of buildings, yards,
courts, landscape, pedestrian and vehicular circulation and parking,
fences and screening; service driveway connecting the parking space
with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an
automobile. For purposes of this Chapter, the size of a parking space
for one (1) vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions
of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet plus adequate area for
ingress and egress.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION/PROCESSING — Recycling collection
centers, incinerators, processing facilities, materials recovery facilities,
solid waste transfer stations or any facility where municipal solid
wastes are salvaged, sorted, processed or treated.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION — A facility where solid waste
or recyclable material is transferred from collection vehicles (some
sorting may occur) to long distance hauling vehicles for transportation
to a central solid waste management facility for processing, disposal,
incineration or resource recovery.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — Any building where horses, mules or ponies
are sheltered, fed and/or kept for hire.
STABLE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building for the keeping of
horses, mules or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and
not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A stable, other than a private stable, with a
capacity for more than two (2) horses or mules.
STOCKYARD — A non-farm-based facility used or intended to be used
for selling or holding livestock.
STORY — That portion of a building, located completely above grade,
included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between
the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet
above the top floor level and in which space not more than sixty percent
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:605
(60%) of the floor area is finished for use. A half-story may be used for
occupancy only in conjunction with and by the occupants of the floor
immediately below.
STREET — All property dedicated or intended for public or private
street, highway, freeway or roadway purposes or subject to public or
private easements thereon. Any public thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING — Any street which joins another street
whether or not it crosses the other.
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land
and a contiguous street, business, industrial or residential areas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns,
beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground including, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, backstops for
tennis courts and pergolas.
STUDIO, RADIO, TELEVISION, FILM OR MUSIC — An establishment
primarily engaged in the provision of recording or broadcasting
services accomplished through the use of electronic mechanisms.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A recreation facility designed and
intended for water contact activities that is operated as a private pool
on the premises of a private residence, above or below ground, capable
of retaining more than two (2) feet of water.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A recreation facility designed and
intended for water contact activities that is operated as a business
or as a club unless such club is associated with a neighborhood club
or similar organization. The same as private pool but operated as a
commercial business. Public swimming pools shall conform to County
Health Department requirements.
TEMPORARY USES — A use which is only allowed for a specified
period of time. Typical temporary uses include, but are not limited to,
Christmas tree sales, garage sales, road stands, etc.
TOTAL FLOOR AREA — The square foot area of a building, including
accessory buildings, measured from outside wall surfaces and including
garages, porches, utility rooms, stairways, recreation rooms, storage
rooms, but excluding unroofed balconies and patios.
TOURIST CABIN — See definition of "HOTEL/MOTEL".
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit located in a group of three (3) or more
attached town house dwelling units with no other dwelling unit located
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:606
above or below another and with each dwelling unit having at least one
(1) interior common wall and a private exterior entrance.
TOWN HOUSE SITE — A town house, the total land area beneath the
town house and the facilities associated with the town house.
TOWN HOUSE STRUCTURE — A grouping of three (3) or more
townhouses.
TRAILER, HAULING — A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile
or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or
commodities, including boats.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR CAMPING — A portable or mobile living unit
used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence
of the occupants.
TRANSIENT GUEST — Any person who rents and occupies a guest
room in a lodging establishment for a period of less than thirty (30)
days.
TRANSIENT LODGING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment as
defined under "lodging establishment" designed for occupancy by a
person or persons who pay rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping
purposes and which are advertised or held out to the public as a place
regularly rented to guests for periods of less than thirty (30) days.
TRANSITIONAL LIVING FACILITY — A State licensed group care home
for juvenile delinquents, halfway houses providing residence,
rehabilitation and counseling to persons on release from a more
restrictive custodial confinement and residential rehabilitation
treatment centers which also may provide outpatient rehabilitation for
alcohol and other drug abuse, community re-entry training and aid for
independent living. No more than ten (10) persons, including staff, shall
reside in the center at one time.
No transitional living center shall be located within one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) feet of any other transitional living center or
substance abuse treatment facility, nor shall a transitional living center
be located within three hundred (300) feet of any school, church or an
"R-1", "R-2", "R-3" zoned property.
USED CAR LOT OR SALES — The annual sale of more than four
(4) used vehicles not in conjunction with an automotive sales
establishment.
UTILITY, MAJOR — Generating plants; electrical switching facilities
and primary substations; water and wastewater treatment plants; water
tanks; and radio, television and microwave transmission towers; and
similar facilities of agencies that are under public franchise or
ownership to provide the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam,
communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection or other
similar service. The term "utility" shall not be construed to include
corporate or general offices; gas or oil processing; manufacturing
facilities; postal facilities or other uses defined in this Section.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-6
1:607
UTILITY, MINOR — Services and facilities of agencies that are under
public franchise or ownership to provide services that are essential to
support development and that involve only minor structures, such as
poles and lines.
VARIANCE — A variation from a specific requirement in this Chapter,
as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning.
VEHICLE, MOTOR — Any self-powered vehicle moving on wheels or
runners used as a means of transport.
VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SALES — An establishment engaged in
the retail or wholesale sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized
vehicles or equipment, along with incidental service or maintenance
activities. Typical uses include new and used automobile and truck
sales, automobile rental, boat sales, motorcycle sales, moving trailer
rental, and farm equipment and machinery sales and rental.
VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARD — An outdoor area used or
intended to be used for long-term storage of vehicles and equipment,
other than a "commercial parking lot" or accessory parking to a
principal use.
VEHICLE REPAIR, GENERAL — An establishment primarily engaged in
painting of or body work to motor vehicles or heavy equipment. Typical
uses include paint and body shops.
VEHICLE REPAIR, LIMITED — A use providing automobile repair or
maintenance services within completely enclosed buildings, but not
including "general vehicle repair" services.
VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICES — Garages specializing in vehicle repair,
including body shops.
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL — A use providing education or training in
business, commercial trades, language, arts or other similar activity
or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a "college or
university" or "school".
WAREHOUSE, RESIDENTIAL STORAGE — An enclosed storage facility
containing independent, fully enclosed bays that are leased to
individuals exclusively for dead storage of their household goods or
personal property.
WAREHOUSING AND WHOLESALE — An establishment primarily
engaged in the storage or sale of materials, equipment or products
or sale to wholesalers or retailers. Typical uses include cold storage,
warehousing and dead storage facilities, but exclude "residential
storage warehouses" and sale of goods to the general public.
WELDING OR MACHINE SHOP — A workshop where machines,
machine parts or other metal products are fabricated. Typical uses
include machine shops, welding shops and sheet metal shops.
YARD — An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining
lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
SECTION 29-6 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-6
1:608
SECTION 29-7. Interpretation of District Boundaries. [Ord. No.
80-22 Art. I § 7, 12-2-1980]
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply.
from the ground upward except where otherwise specifically provided
for in this Chapter that an accessory building may be located in a
portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for
the purpose of determining the width of the side year, the depth of the
front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the least horizontal distance
between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT — A yard located in front of the front elevation of a
building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and
being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line
and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured
between lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between
the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections
other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On
corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street
upon which the lot has its least dimension. The rear yard shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the building and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the
minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the
main building or any projections other than steps.
ZONE OR DISTRICT — A section of the zoning area for which uniform
regulations governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use of
structures, land and open space are herein established.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The person designated by the City to
enforce and administer the provisions of this Chapter or their duly
appointed representative(s).
ZONING AREA — The area to be zoned as set out on the official Zoning
Map filed of record.
ZONING REGULATIONS — The term "zoning regulations" or "these
regulations" shall mean the requirements stipulated in the regulations
herewith attached and shall mean the lawfully adopted zoning
ordinances of the City of Lexington.
1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets or highways, street lines of highway right-of-way
lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
SECTION 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-7
1:609
SECTION 29-8. Vacation of Public Easements. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. I
§ 8, 12-2-1980]
Whenever any street, alley, or other public easement is vacated, the district
classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land accrue
shall become the classification of the vacated land.
SECTION 29-8.1. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2003-06 § 1,
3-11-2003]
SECTION 29-8.2. Requirements and Standards. [Ord. No. 2003-06
§ 1, 3-11-2003]
2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets, or the center lines
or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
4. Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line such
boundary shall be deemed to be located on the easement line to which it
is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad
easement unless otherwise designated.
A. The proponents of a planned development shall prepare and submit to
the Planning Commission for review and approval by the City Council
for the purpose of zoning or rezoning a tract of development plan with
at least the following elements:
1. The boundaries of the area to be zoned or rezoned and the
development of property adjacent to the area and within two
hundred (200) feet thereof.
2. The existing topography with contour intervals not greater than
five (5) feet unless waived by the Council.
3. Proposed specific uses, location, number and arrangement of
buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed streets,
drives, open spaces, play areas and other reasonable information
required by the Commission. The plan shall be accompanied by a
plat giving full legal description of the boundaries of the property.
B. The uses permitted in any Planned District shall be the same as in the
corresponding regular district. For example, "R-P-1" shall be the same
as in "R-1".
A. The amount of open space, buffer zone, yard, parking, play areas,
density and height requirements shall be determined by the City
SECTION 29-7 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-8.2
1:610
Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission after
review of the proposed plan. The Council and Planning Commission
shall use the requirements and standards found in the corresponding
district as detailed in these regulations as a guide in making their
determination but may permit variances from these requirements and
standards in the interest of efficient land development and utilization.
In reviewing such development plan the maximum heights of buildings
and structures within such Planned District shall be as set out in the
corresponding districts. It shall be permissible that side yards may be
reduced to zero in appropriate circumstances.
B. In the event of any proposed substantial change or uses thereof in the
development plan in any Planned District, the modified site plan must
again be submitted to the Planning Commission and approved by the
City Council before such modification can be made.
SECTION 29-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-8.2
1:611

ARTICLE II
Specific District Regulations
SECTION 29-9. "A-1" General Agricultural District. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art. II § 1, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § II, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007]
A. General Description. This district is intended to provide a location for
the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that is used for
agricultural purposes, but will be undergoing urbanization in the
future. Most of these areas will be in close proximity to residential and
commercial uses. Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in
this district should not be detrimental to urban land uses. It is not
intended that this district provide a location for a lower standard of
residential, commercial or industrial development than is authorized in
other districts. The types of uses, area and intensity of use of land which
is authorized in this district is designed to encourage and protect
agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate
change in district classification is made.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "A-1" General
Agricultural District shall be used only for the following purposes.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
2. The raising of farm animals in accordance with the ordinances of
Lexington but not the operation of commercial feed pens for cattle.
On all tracts of land containing less than forty (40) acres, the
raising of hogs shall be prohibited, and on all other tracts the
number of hogs shall not exceed twenty (20). Hogs shall not be
located closer than two hundred (200) feet from the property line of
the tract on which they are located.
3. Bulletin board or sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises,
which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are
leased, hired or sold.
4. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building,
including barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages
and accessory buildings which are a part of the main building.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21. Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions
contained in Article IX, Section 29-82 of this Chapter.
2. Sign or display, not exceeding two (2) in number, advertising the
residential, commercial or industrial development of the land on
SECTION 29-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-9
1:613
which the sign or display is situated. All signs or displays shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the development, but in
no case shall they be permitted to remain longer than three (3)
years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not
be detrimental to the use of adjacent properties or to restrict sight
distance on public streets.
3. Drilling for oil, water or natural gas or the extraction of said,
gravel, limestone or minerals; provided that the operation is
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of
Lexington and the State laws and regulations relating thereto.
D. Area Regulations.
1. Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way
lines to comply with the following front yard requirements:
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved
with buildings all of which have observed an average setback
line of greater than thirty (30) feet, and no building varies
more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the
minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than
forty (40) feet.
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
2. Side yard.
a. For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building or not less than fifteen (15)
feet, except as hereinafter provided in Article III, Section
29-27. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet; provided however,
that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not
be required to set back more than three (3) feet from an
interior side lot line where all parts of the accessory buildings
are located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front property
line.
b. For dwellings and accessory located on corner lots, there shall
be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than twenty (20) feet in case such lot is back to back with
another corner lot, and twenty-five (25) feet in every other
case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings
and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
SECTION 29-9 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-9
1:614
SECTION 29-10. "R-1" Single-Family Residential District. [Ord. No.
80-22 Art. I § 2, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 88-6 § 1, 4-26-1988; Ord. No.
95-03 § III, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 98-40 § 2, 12-8-1998; Ord. No.
2006-10 § 2, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No.
2008-02 § 1, 1-8-2008]
c. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less
than thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than thirty (30) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory
use may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
4. Lot width. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of one
hundred twenty (120) feet at the front building line, and such lot
shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35)
feet.
5. Intensity of use.
a. For each dwelling and building accessory thereto, there shall
be a lot area of not less than five (5) acres.
b. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all of the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership at
the effective date of this Chapter, that lot may be used for one
(1) single-family dwelling unit or for the uses set forth in
Subsection (B) above, but not for the raising of animals.
c. For churches and main and accessory buildings other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area
shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this
Section and the off-street parking area required in Article V.
6. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area on interior lots and thirty
percent (30%) of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings
shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height except as provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H, or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description.
SECTION 29-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-10
1:615
1. This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of
land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational,
religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the
basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These
areas are intended to be defined and protected from the
encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the
residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order
and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air
and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through
consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element.
2. Single-family dwelling. A single-family dwelling shall consist of
living, dining and sleeping rooms, storage closets, space and
equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all to be used
by one (1) family.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "R-1" Single-
Family Residential District shall be used only for the following
purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
2. Detached single-family dwellings except when used as a group
home as defined by Section 89.020, RSMo.
3. Garden or agricultural crops but not for the raising of livestock.
4. Bulletin board or sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises,
which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are
leased, hired or sold.
5. Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental
to the erection of buildings permitted in this district and which
shall be removed when construction work is completed.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review in accordance with
provisions contained in Article IX, Section 29-82.
2. Sign or display not exceeding two (2) in number advertising the
residential, commercial or industrial development of the land on
which the sign or display is situated. All signs or displays shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the development, but in
no case shall they be permitted to remain longer than three (3)
years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not be
detrimental to the use of adjacent properties or to restrict sight
distance on public streets.
SECTION 29-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-10
1:616
3. Greenhouse; provided the lot shall have a frontage on a major
street of not less than eighty (80) feet with a land area of not less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and the greenhouse
shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a major street
with a setback from the side lot lines of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet and in accordance with front building line requirements.
4. Detached single-family dwelling used as a group home as defined
by Section 89.020, RSMo. The review shall only determine that (1)
the exterior appearance of the group home and property shall be in
reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood standards,
and (2) no group home shall be located within one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) feet of another group home measured as the
shortest distance between any portion of such structures.
a. Should a single-family dwelling or single-family residence as
defined in Subsection (C)(4) above cease to operate for the
purpose set forth in Subsection (C)(4) above, any other use of
such home, other than allowed by Lexington zoning
restrictions, must be approved by the Lexington Zoning
Commission.
b. A group home as allowed in Subsection (C)(4) does not require
the City to allow non-related individuals recovering from
alcohol or drug abuse to live in a single-family residence in a
single-family residential district.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall be set back from the property lines
to comply with the following yard requirements.
1. Front yard.
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved
with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback
line of greater than thirty (30) feet, and no building varies
more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the
minimum setback so established by the existing building; but
this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth
than forty (40) feet.
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
2. Side yard.
a. For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot at the building line, provided that
SECTION 29-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-10
1:617
such side yard shall not be less than five (5) feet in width nor
required to be more than ten (10) feet, except as hereinafter
provided in Article III, Section 29-27. For unattached buildings
of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five
(5) feet; provided however, that unattached one-story buildings
of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three (3) feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty (60) feet from
the front property line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street
of not less than twenty (20) feet.
c. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less
than thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty (20) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use
may be located in the rear yard of a main building with a setback of
five (5) feet from the property line.
4. Lot width.
a. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty-five
(65) feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
b. A lot of record as of the effective date of this Chapter, platted
or existing, at a width of less than sixty-five (65) feet shall be
deemed to meet the minimum lot width requirement.
5. Intensity of use.
a. For each dwelling and accessory thereto, there shall be a lot
area of not less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800)
square feet.
b. For churches and main and accessory buildings other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area
shall be adequate to provide the yard area required by this
Section and the off-street parking area required in Article V.
6. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area on interior lots and thirty
percent (30%) of the lot area on corner lots; accessory buildings
shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
Garages may be detached or integral to the primary structure.
SECTION 29-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-10
1:618
a. The size of a single-family dwelling (comprised of living, dining
and sleeping rooms, storage closets, and space and equipment
for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities) shall not be less than:
(1) One (1) bedroom equals nine hundred fifty (950) square
feet.
(2) For each additional bedroom including closet — add
minimum one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
b. Garages attached to the principal building shall be structurally
a part thereof and shall comply with the requirements of
ordinances applicable to the principal building. Such garage's
total area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the on
foundation first floor living area of the principal residence;
however, a garage area of four hundred eighty (480) square
feet is permitted regardless of the on foundation living area of
the primary dwelling. [Ord. No. 2015-17 § I, 7-14-2015]
c. A garage which is not a part of the principal building shall
conform to the size requirements of Subsection (D)(6)(b) above
and shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the principal
building, shall have a setback of not less than the principal
building, shall share the architectural design of the principal
building and shall conform to the side and rear yard setbacks
of the district in which it is located.
7. Height regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height except as provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
E. Accessory Buildings.
1. Accessory buildings, shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the
principal building and shall conform to the side and rear yard
setbacks of the district in which it is located.
2. The combined square footage of accessory buildings, primary
dwelling (including integral garage) or detached garage (if any)
cannot exceed the limits as set forth in this Section (29-10),
Subsections (D)(6) or (G)(4), as applicable.
3. Side wall height shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
F. Historical Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
G. Non-Conforming Subdivision Plots. Where areas that were platted and
recorded before 1964, and where the lot area or width is less than
specified in the other City ordinances, lots that fall under this
SECTION 29-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-10
1:619
SECTION 29-11. "R-2" Two-Family Residential District. [Ord. No.
80-22 Art. II § 3, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § IV, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007]
regulation will be authorized for single-family dwellings when in
compliance with the following:
1. Front yard. The dwelling is to be placed in line with other existing
homes in the area when possible. If it is not desired to maintain the
existing setback with other dwellings in the area, a variance in the
setback limit must be requested by a use on review permit to be
sent to the Planning and Zoning Committee.
2. Side yard. For interior lots, side yards shall be ten percent (10%) of
the width of the lot and the dwelling located no closer than five (5)
feet to the property line, providing that the dwelling proposed is a
single-story structure. For dwellings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than twelve (12) feet. All outbuildings shall be set back not less
than three (3) feet from the property line.
3. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than ten (10) feet or fifteen percent (15%) of the lot's depth,
whichever is smaller. Outbuildings may be located in the rear yard
with a setback of three (3) feet from alley line and one (1) foot from
property line.
4. Coverage. Main and accessory building shall not cover more than
sixty percent (60%) of the lot area on interior lots and sixty-five
percent (65%) of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings
shall not cover more than fifty-five percent (55%) of the rear yard.
A. General Description. This is a residential district to provide for a
slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar to
the "R-1" District. The principal use of land is for single-family and twofamily
dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provided a balanced and attractive
residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected
from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to
the residential development. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and
efficiency are encouraged by providing adequate light, air and open
space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration
of the proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "R-2" Two-Family
Residential District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
SECTION 29-10 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-11
1:620
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review in accordance
with the provisions contained in Article IX, Section 29-82.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall be set back from street right-ofway
and property lines to comply with the following yard requirements.
1. Front yard.
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved
with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback
line of greater than thirty (30) feet, and no building varies
more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the
minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but
this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth
than forty (40) feet.
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
2. Side yard.
a. For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot at the building line, provided that
such side yard shall not be less than five (5) feet in width nor
required to be more than ten (10) feet, except as hereinafter
provided in Article III, Section 29-27. For unattached buildings
of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five
(5) feet; provided however, that unattached one-story buildings
of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three (3) feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory buildings are located not less than sixty (60) feet
from the front property line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street
of not less than twenty (20) feet in case such lot is back to back
with another corner lot and twenty-five (25) feet in every other
case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings
and accessory buildings as for an interior lot.
c. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less
than thirty-five (35) feet.
SECTION 29-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-11
1:621
3. Rear yard. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there
shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty, (20) feet or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage
apartments may be located in the rear yard of a single-family
dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the
rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located
in the rear yard of a main building.
4. Lot width.
a. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty-five
(65) feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
b. A lot of record as of the effective date of this Chapter, platted
or existing, at a width of less than sixty-five (65) feet shall be
deemed to meet the minimum lot width requirement.
5. Intensity of use.
a. For each single-family dwelling and accessory building, there
shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight
hundred (7,800) square feet.
b. For each two-family dwelling and accessory building, there
shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight
hundred (7,800) square feet. A garage apartment located on
the same lot with a single-family dwelling shall have the same
area requirements as a two-family dwelling. In all other cases a
garage apartment shall be provided with the same lot area
required by a single-family dwelling.
c. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership
on the effective date of the Chapter, that lot may be used for
any use, except churches, permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family
District.
d. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area
shall be adequate to provide the yard area required by this
Section and the off-street parking area required in Article V.
6. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty percent (30%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not
cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height, except as provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
SECTION 29-11 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-11
1:622
SECTION 29-12. "R-3" Multiple-Family Residential District. [Ord.
No. 80-22 Art. II § 4, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § V, 4-11-1995; Ord.
No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007]
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This is a residential district to provide for medium
density ranging to fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. The principal
use of land is for single-family dwellings, town houses, low rise
multiple-family dwellings and garden apartments. Recreational,
religious and educational uses normally located to service residential
areas are also permitted to provide the basic elements of convenient,
balanced and attractive living areas.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "R-3" Multiple-
Family District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review in accordance
with the provisions contained in Article IX, Section 29-82.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall be set back from street right-ofway
or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements.
1. Front yard.
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved
with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback
line of greater than thirty (30) feet, and no building varies
more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the
minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but
this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth
than forty (40) feet.
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
2. Side yard.
a. For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of attached
dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than
five (5) feet shall be provided on the unattached sides of the
main dwelling for the first (1st) story and an additional three
SECTION 29-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-12
1:623
(3) feet of side yard shall be provided for each additional story
or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory use there
shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet; provided
however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use
shall not be required to set back more than three (3) feet
from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front
property line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street
of not less than twenty (20) feet in case such lot is back to back
with another corner lot and twenty-five (25) feet in every other
case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings
and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
c. Churches, main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and trailers, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot
lines a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Rear yard. For main buildings there shall be a rear yard of not less
than twenty (20) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot, whichever is smaller.
4. Lot width.
a. For single-family dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width
of sixty-five (65) feet at the front building line, and the front lot
line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than thirty-five
(35) feet.
b. For town house dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of
twenty-two (22) feet at the front building line, and the front lot
line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than twentytwo
(22) feet.
c. For multiple-family dwellings there shall be a minimum lot
width of seventy (70) feet at the front building line and the
width shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each additional
dwelling unit exceeding three (3) which is located in the
dwelling; however, the lot width at the front building line shall
not be required to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet; and
further provided that the front lot line shall abut a street for a
distance of not less than fifty (50) feet.
5. Intensity of use.
a. For a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there
shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight
hundred (7,800) square feet.
SECTION 29-12 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-12
1:624
SECTION 29-13. "H-1" Historical District. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. II
§ 5, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 88-6 § 1, 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 95-03 § VI,
4-11-1995; Ord. No. 97-10 § I, 5-13-1997; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1,
9-5-2007]
b. For a two-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall
be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight hundred
(7,800) square feet.
c. For each town house dwelling unit and accessory buildings,
there shall be a lot area of not less than three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet.
d. For a multi-family dwelling, other than a town house, there
shall be a lot area of not less than three thousand (3,000)
square feet.
e. Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than
seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet. When a
garage apartment is located on the same lot with a two-family
or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall provide not less
than three thousand (3,000) square feet more than is required
for the two-family or multiple-family dwellings.
f. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership
on the effective date of this Chapter, that lot may be used for
any use, except churches, permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family
Residential District.
g. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area
shall be adequate to provide the yard area required by this
Section and the off-street parking area required in Article V.
6. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty percent (30%) of the lot area.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height, except as provided in Article III Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. Upon designation, a property, structure or district
shall receive the supplemental classification "H" for historic
significance. This is designed to preserve features of historical and
cultural significance to the City, as a primary concern of this zoning
SECTION 29-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-13
1:625
SECTION 29-14. "C-1" Neighborhood Commercial District. [Ord.
No. 80-22 Art. II § 6, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § VII, 4-11-1995;
Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
ordinance is conservation. Lexington is unique in that much of its rich
historical past is recorded and evidenced in the many fine old homes,
shops, public buildings and other structures scattered throughout the
City. It is the purpose of this Section to preserve and protect such
structures and the integrity of their immediate environs. Such
preservation and protection is in keeping with the recommendations of
the Lexington Comprehensive City Plan and is directly related to the
public health, safety and welfare. It is not the intent of this Section
to prohibit any use other than industrial development from occurring
within a designated "H" classification. The Section and designation
is intended to provide conditions and regulations for the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of buildings, structures, areas, places
or works of art in the City which have special historic and cultural
value for the general welfare of the public and community. This Section
is intended to provide standards and guidelines for development and
redevelopment occurring within such properties, within such districts
and on land which abuts such properties or districts.
B. Uses Permitted On Review Only. The following uses may be permitted
on review by the Lexington Historic Preservation Commission and the
Lexington Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions
contained in Articles VIII and IX of this Chapter. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be authorized until such a review has
taken place and until such proposed development or redevelopment has
been approved.
1. Detached one-family dwelling.
2. Church.
3. Office building.
4. Public building.
5. Commercial building.
6. Bed and breakfast as that term is defined under Article I, Section
29-6.
C. Area Regulations. Detached one-family dwellings, churches and public
buildings shall be governed by the area regulations set forth in Article
II, Section 29-10, Subsection (D) of this Chapter. Commercial buildings
and office buildings shall be governed by the area regulations set forth
in Article II, Section 29-16, Subsection (D) of this Chapter.
D. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height except as provided in Article III, Section 29-28 of this Chapter.
SECTION 29-13 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-14
1:626
A. General Description. This commercial district is for the conduct of retail
trade and to provide personal services to meet the regular needs and
for the convenience of the people of adjacent residential area. Because
these shops and stores may be an integral part of the neighborhood
closely associated with residential, religious, recreational and
educational elements; more restrictive requirements for light, air, open
space and off-street parking are made than are provided in other
commercial districts.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in a "C-1"
Neighborhood Commercial District shall be used only for the following
purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
2. Only name plates and signs relating only to the use of the store or
premises or to products sold on the premises shall be permitted.
Lighted signs of flashing or intermittent type shall be prohibited;
provided however, that this shall not prevent the use of animated
signs located entirely within the building which can be seen only
from the street side of the building.
3. Any building used for any of the uses enumerated in Chart #1 may
not have more than forty percent (40%) of its floor area devoted to
purposes incidental to the primary use. No material or goods
offered for sale or stored in connection with the uses enumerated
shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. No open display
will be permitted on sidewalks or public rights-of-way.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review in accordance
with the provisions contained in Article IX, Section 29-82.
2. Automobile service stations provided that open display shall be
limited to merchandise commonly sold by automobile service
stations, i.e., oil, batteries, tires, wiper blades, etc., and no open
display will be permitted on sidewalks or public rights-of-way.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall set back from the street right-ofway
or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements.
1. Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty-five (25)
feet in depth.
2. Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Wherever the rear
lot line of a corner lot abuts a dwelling district, the side yard
SECTION 29-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-14
1:627
adjacent to the street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in
width. In all other cases no side yard shall be required.
3. Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet.
4. Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut a residential district, an opaque
ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge, not less than five
(5) feet high and not more than six (6) feet high, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said abutting
side or rear lot lines up to but not beyond the abutting residential
setback building line, except where the front yard is used for offstreet
parking, then the provisions of Article V, Section 29-47,
pertaining to off-street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
5. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level. However, no screening or fencing in
excess of seven (7) feet in height shall be required except as noted
in Subsection (D)(7) below. As used in this Section, outdoor storage
shall not include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent
open display or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public
rights-of-way.
6. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
ironwork. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
7. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for utilities protection, hazardous or
dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft prevention) but only
after review and written approval by the City Building Inspector.
When electrically charged fences are used, such fences shall be
posted with warning signs or fluorescent markings at intervals not
to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. Use of barbed wire or
electrical fencing for agricultural purposes does not require
approval or marking.
SECTION 29-14 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-14
1:628
SECTION 29-15. "C-2" General Commercial District. [Ord. No.
80-22 Art. II § 7, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § VIII, 4-11-1995; Ord.
No. 2006-10 § 3, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord.
No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This commercial district is intended for the
conduct of personal and business services and the general retail
business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the
surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic
generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only
those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in a "C-2" General
Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
2. Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily
incidental to any of the above uses; provided that there shall be no
manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than
such as are customarily incidental and essential to retail
establishments.
3. New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and
service, and public garages; provided no gasoline is stored above
ground; used automobile and machinery sales, used automobile
and machinery repairing if conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, but not including automobile or machinery
wrecking establishments or junk yards.
4. (Reserved)
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review in accordance
with the provisions contained in Article IX, Section 29-82.
2. Transitional living facility. No transitional living center shall be
located within one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet of any
other transitional living center or substance abuse treatment
SECTION 29-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-15
1:629
facility, nor shall a transitional living center be located within
three hundred (300) feet of any school, church or an "R-1", "R-2",
"R-3" zoned property. Reference Missouri Revised Statutes Section
89.143.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall be set back from the street rightof-
way or property lines to comply with the following yard
requirements.
1. Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty-five (25)
feet in depth.
2. Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Wherever the rear
lot line of a corner lot abuts a dwelling district, the side yard
adjacent to the street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in
width. In all other cases no side yard shall be required.
3. Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet.
4. Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut a residential district, an opaque
ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge, not less than five
(5) feet high and not more than six (6) feet high, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said abutting
side or rear lot lines up to but not beyond the abutting residential
setback building line, except where the front yard is used for offstreet
parking, then the provisions of Article V, Section 29-47,
pertaining to off-street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
5. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level. However, no screening or fencing in
excess of seven (7) feet in height shall be required except as noted
in Subsection (D)(7) below. As used in this Section, outdoor storage
shall not include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent
open display or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public
rights-of-way.
6. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
SECTION 29-15 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-15
1:630
SECTION 29-16. "C-3" Central Business District. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art. II § 8, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 82-7 §§ 2 — 4, 3-25-1982; Ord. No.
87-0019 § 1, 12-22-1987; Ord. No. 95-03 § IX, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008; Ord. No.
2012-01 § IV, 1-10-2012]
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
7. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for utilities protection, hazardous or
dangerous area intrusion prevention, the prevention) but only after
review and written approval by the City Building Inspector. When
electrically charged fences are used, such fences shall be posted
with warning signs or fluorescent markings at intervals not to
exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. Use of barbed wire or
electrical fencing for agricultural purposes does not require
approval or marking.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This commercial district is intended for the
Central Business District as an area for the conduct of personal and
business services and the general retail business of the community and
multiple-family dwellings. Persons living in the community and in the
surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic
generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only
those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in "C-3" Central
Business District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts-Permitted Uses.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions contained
in Article IX, Section 29-82.
SECTION 29-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-16
1:631
D. Area Regulations. All buildings, other than dwellings, shall set back
from the street right-of-way or property lines to comply with the
following yard requirements.
1. Front yard. There are no specific front yard requirements.
2. Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Wherever the rear
lot line of a corner lot abuts a dwelling district, the side yard
adjacent to the street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in
width. In all other cases no side yard shall be required.
3. Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet.
4. Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut a residential district, an opaque
ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge, not less than five
(5) feet high and not more than six (6) feet high, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said abutting
side or rear lot lines up to but not beyond the abutting residential
setback building line, except where the front yard is used for offstreet
parking, then the provisions of Article V, Section 29-47,
pertaining to off-street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
5. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level. However, no screening or fencing in
excess of seven (7) feet in height shall be required except as noted
in Subsection (D)(7) below. As used in this Section, outdoor storage
shall not include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent
open display or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public
rights-of-way.
6. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
7. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
SECTION 29-16 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-16
1:632
SECTION 29-17. "C-4" Office Commercial District. [Ord. No. 80-22,
Art. II § 9, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § X, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
circumstances (such as for utilities protection, hazardous or
dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft prevention) but only
after review and written approval by the City Building Inspector.
When electrically charged fences are used, such fences shall be
posted with warning signs or fluorescent markings at intervals
not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. Use of barbed wire
or electrical fencing for agricultural purposes does not require
approval or marking.
8. Intensity of use. For a multiple-family dwelling, no more than sixty
(60) individual dwelling units per acre; provided however, that such
intensity of use may be increased or decreased on review by the
Planning Commission as required for preservation and protection
of the public health, safety and welfare.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed one hundred twenty (120)
feet in height except as otherwise provided in Article III, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This commercial district is intended to provide a
place for those types of institutional and commercial activities that
require separate buildings and building groups surrounded by
landscaped yards and open areas. Land, space and aesthetic
requirements of these uses make desirable either a central location or a
suburban location near residential neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in a "C-4" Office
Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts-Permitted Uses.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR may be permitted on review in accordance
with provisions contained in Article IV, Section 29-42.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall be set back from street right-ofway
or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements.
1. Front yard.
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty-five (25)
feet.
SECTION 29-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-17
1:633
b. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved
with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback
line of greater than twenty-five (25) feet, and no building varies
more than five (5) feet from this avenge setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the
minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but
this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth
than forty (40) feet.
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
2. Side yard.
a. For detached buildings and for unattached sides of attached
dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than
five (5) feet shall be provided on both sides of the main
dwelling for the first (1st) story and an additional three (3) feet
of side yard be provided for each additional story or part
thereof. For detached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five (5) feet; provided however, that
detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be
required to set back more than three (3) feet from an interior
side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are
located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front property
line.
b. For office and other non-residential buildings located on an
interior lot, a side yard shall be provided on both sides of the
building of not less than twenty percent (20%) of the width of
the lot, except that such side yard shall not be less than fifteen
(15) feet and need not be more than fifty (50) feet.
c. For main buildings and accessory buildings located on corner
lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting
street of not less than fifteen (15) feet in case such lot is back
to back with another corner lot and twenty (20) feet in every
other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for main
and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
d. Churches and accessory buildings shall set back from all
exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Rear yard. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there
shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage
apartments may be located in the rear yard of another dwelling, but
shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line.
Unattached buildings of secondary use may be located in the rear
yard of a main building.
SECTION 29-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-17
1:634
4. Lot width.
a. For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and for a
single-family dwelling and garage apartment located in the
same lot, there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty-five (65)
feet at the front building line, and the front lot line shall abut a
street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
b. For town house dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of
twenty-two (22) feet at the front building line, and the front lot
line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than twentytwo
(22) feet.
c. For multiple-family dwellings there shall be a minimum lot
width of seventy (70) feet at the front building line and the
width shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each additional
dwelling unit exceeding three (3) which is located in the
dwelling; however, the lot width at the front building line shall
not be required to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet; and
further provided that the front lot line shall abut a street for a
distance of not less than fifty (50) feet.
5. Intensity of use.
a. For a single-family dwelling and accessory building, there shall
be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight hundred
(7,800) square feet.
b. For a two-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall
be a lot area of not less than seven thousand eight hundred
(7,800) square feet.
c. For each town house dwelling unit and accessory building,
there shall be a lot area of not less than three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet.
d. For a multi-family dwelling, other than a town house, there
shall be a lot area of not less than three thousand (3,000)
square feet.
e. Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than
seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet. When a
garage apartment is located on the same lot with a two-family
or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall provide not less
than three thousand (3,000) square feet more than is required
for the two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
f. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership
on the effective date of this Chapter, that lot may be used for
SECTION 29-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-17
1:635
any use, except churches, permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family
Residential District.
g. For churches, office buildings, and other non-residential main
and accessory buildings, the lot area shall be adequate to
provide the yard areas required by this Section and the offstreet
parking area required in Article V.
6. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall
not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
7. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level. However, no screening in excess of seven
(7) feet in height shall be required except as noted in Subsection
(D)(10) below. As used in this Section, outdoor storage shall not
include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent open display
or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public rights-of-way.
8. Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut the a lot in a residential district, an
opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge, not less
than five (5) feet high and not more than six (6) feet high, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said abutting
side or rear lot lines up to but not beyond the abutting residential
setback building line, except where the front yard is used for offstreet
parking, then the provisions of Article V, Section 29-47,
pertaining to off-street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
9. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
10. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for detention facilities, utilities protection,
hazardous or dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft
prevention) but only after review and written approval by the City
Building Inspector. When electrically charged fences are used,
SECTION 29-17 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-17
1:636
SECTION 29-18. "I-1" Light Industrial District. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art.
II § 10, 12-20-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § XI, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2005-29 § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No.
2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
such fences shall be posted with warning signs or fluorescent
markings at intervals not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Use of barbed wire or electrical fencing for agricultural purposes
does not require approval or marking.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed one hundred twenty (120)
feet in height except as otherwise provided in Article II, Section 29-28.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This industrial district is intended primarily for
the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication and for
warehousing, wholesale, and service uses. These do not depend
primarily on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but may
require good accessibility to major rail, air, or street transportation
routes.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "I-I" Light
Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses.
2. Any use, except a residential use, permitted in a "C-2" General
Commercial District or "C-4" Office Commercial District, including
sleeping facilities for caretakers and night watchmen employed on
the premises.
3. Building material sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of
rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main
business, but not including a concrete plant or transit mix plant.
4. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level; however; screening shall not be less than
six (6) feet in height. As used in this section, outdoor storage shall
not include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent open
display or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public rightsof-
way.
SECTION 29-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-18
1:637
5. Buildings, structures and uses accessory customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
6. The uses permitted under this Section shall be conducted in such a
manner that no noxious odor, fumes or dust will be emitted beyond
the property line of the lot on which the use is located.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions contained
in Article IX, Section 29-82.
2. Radio, television station and cell phone transmission towers, or
other towers used for the transmission between or among points,
as specified by the user, or information of the users choosing,
without change in the form or content of the information as sent
and received.
D. Area Regulations. All buildings shall comply with the following yard
requirements.
1. Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty-five (25)
feet in depth.
2. Side yard. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to a side lot line.
3. Rear yard. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to the rear lot line.
4. Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and
loading facilities shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of
the lot area.
5. All yard areas required under this Section and other yards and
open spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and
maintained in a neat condition.
6. Whenever any industrial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut a residential district, an opaque,
ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge not less than five
(5) feet high and not more than six (6) feet high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along abutting side
or rear lot lines up to but not beyond the abutting residential
setback building line, except where front yard is used for off-street
parking, then the provisions of Article V pertaining to off-street
parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting, including any
permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be
no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential
buildings in a residential district.
SECTION 29-18 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-18
1:638
SECTION 29-19. "I-2" Heavy Industrial District. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art. II § 11, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-03 § XII, 4-11-1995; Ord. No.
2007-33 § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
7. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
8. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for detention facilities, utilities protection,
hazardous or dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft
prevention) but only after review and written approval by the City
Building Inspector. When electrically charged fences are used,
such fences shall be posted with warning signs or fluorescent
markings at intervals not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Use of barbed wire or electrical fencing for agricultural purposes
does not require approval or marking.
E. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in Article III, Section 29-28 of
these regulations.
F. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
A. General Description. This industrial district is intended to provide for
heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the
districts established by this Chapter. The intensity of uses permitted in
this district make it desirable that they be separated from residential
and commercial uses wherever possible.
B. Uses Permitted By Right. Property and buildings in an "I-2" Heavy
Industrial District may be used for any use except the following:
1. All residential uses except sleeping facilities required by night
watchmen and caretakers employed upon the premises.
2. All uses not complying with this Chapter or any other County, State
or Federal regulation or law.
3. All of the following uses until they have been studied by the
Planning Commission and have received the express approval of
the City Council. The Commission may require approval of the City
or County Health Department, the Missouri Fire Inspection
SECTION 29-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-19
1:639
Bureau, and other State and County regulating agencies and may
attach to the approval specific restrictions designed to protect the
public welfare.
a. Acid manufacture.
b. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
c. Explosives, manufacture or wholesale storage.
d. Gas manufacture.
e. Petroleum or its products, refining of.
f. Wholesale of bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane; or
other petroleum product.
4. Property and buildings in an "I-2" Heavy Industrial District, when
used for the following purposes, shall have the uses thereon
conducted in such a manner that all operation, display or storage of
material or equipment is so screened by ornamental fences, walls
and/or permanent evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from a
public street; however, screening shall not be less than six (6) feet
in height.
a. Automobile salvage or junk yard.
b. Building materials salvage yard.
c. Junk or salvage yard of any kind.
d. Scrap metal storage yard.
5. For uses other than listed in Subsection (B)(4) above, outdoor
storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication, assembly
or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or opaque fence,
or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing, on all sides not
occupied by building walls. The screening shall screen such areas
from adjacent property so that the areas cannot be seen from
adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on
ground level; however; screening shall not be less than six (6) feet
in height. As used in this Section, outdoor storage shall not include
merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent open display or
storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public rights-of-way.
6. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
SECTION 29-19 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-19
1:640
7. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for detention facilities, utilities protection,
hazardous or dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft
prevention) but only after review and written approval by the City
Building Inspector. When electrically charged fences are used,
such fences shall be posted with warning signs or fluorescent
markings at intervals not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Use of barbed wire or electrical fencing for agricultural purposes
does not require approval or marking.
C. Area Regulations.
1. There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses in
this district.
2. Rear yard. Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or
combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet in width or of
adequate area and width to provide for maneuver of service
vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all other cases no rear yard is
required.
3. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the
off-street parking requirements set forth in Article V.
4. Whenever any commercial or industrial district or parking lot or
parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot
in a residential district, an opaque, ornamental fence, wall or dense
evergreen hedge not less than five (5) feet high and not more than
six (6) feet high shall be constructed and maintained in good
condition along said side or rear lot line up to but not beyond the
abutting residential setback building line, except where front yard
is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of Article V
pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
D. Height Regulations. Where a lot adjoins a dwelling district, the building
shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height, unless it is set back one
(1) foot from all front and side yard lines for each foot of additional
height above forty-five (45) feet.
E. Historic Classification. Any lot or structure with the supplemental
classification "H", or within or abutting a district with the supplemental
classification "H", shall be subject to scrutiny and all regulations as
contained in Article II, Section 29-13 and Article VIII, Section 29-76 of
this Chapter.
SECTION 29-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-20
1:641
SECTION 29-20. Highway Commercial "H-C". [Ord. No. 2007-33 § 2,
9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1, 3-11-2008]
A. Purpose And General Description.
1. The purpose of the "H-C" (Highway Commercial) zone is to provide
areas suitable for services dependent on a location near a highway
intersection or access to adjoining major thoroughfares. It is
intended to accommodate trade and businesses oriented toward
automobile and truck usage, tourist trade, and heavy commercial
or light industrial uses. Primarily serving residents of urban areas
and the traveling public, the "H-C" (Highway Commercial) zone is
appropriate on lands designated industrial in the Lexington City
Comprehensive Plan. Because of its closeness to State highways
and a freeway interchange, permitted uses will not create
significant adverse impacts on local streets or residential zones.
2. Uses permitted in this zone are frequently incompatible with
pedestrian-oriented areas such as the Central Business District
zones.
3. Due to its exposure, high appearance standards are important.
B. Uses Permitted By Right.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts-Permitted Uses.
C. Uses Permitted On Review.
1. Refer to: Section 29-21 Table #1: Zoning Districts — Permitted
Uses. Uses marked "PR" may be permitted on review by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions contained
in Article IX, Section 29-82.
D. Area Regulations.
1. Outdoor storage, shipping containers, manufacturing, fabrication,
assembly or work areas shall be screened with a solid wall or
opaque fence, or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing,
on all sides not occupied by building walls. The screening shall
screen such areas from adjacent property so that the areas cannot
be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level; however, screening shall not be less than
six (6) feet in height. As used in this Section, outdoor storage shall
not include merchandise displayed for sale. No permanent open
display or storage will be permitted on sidewalks or public rightsof-
way.
2. All fences shall be constructed from materials which are commonly
used for fencing and shall not be constructed from railroad ties,
wood pallets, tires, chicken wire, welded wire, snow fence,
branches, rubble or salvaged material, or materials originally
intended for other purposes. Commonly used fence materials
SECTION 29-20 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-20
1:642
SECTION 29-21. Zoning Districts Permitted Uses Table #1.112 [Ord.
No. 2007-33 § 2, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-08 § 1, 3-11-2008]
SECTION 29-22. through SECTION 29-25. (Reserved)
include wood, brick, stone, concrete, chain-link, vinyl, ornamental
iron work. Materials not listed are subject to special review.
3. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (such as for detention facilities, utilities protection,
hazardous or dangerous area intrusion prevention, theft
prevention) but only after review and written approval by the City
Building Inspector. When electrically charged fences are used,
such fences shall be posted with warning signs or fluorescent
markings at intervals not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Use of barbed wire or electrical fencing for agricultural purposes
does not require approval or marking.
A. Permitted use in a zoning district is indicated by the letter "P" in the
applicable column and square. Uses that may be permitted "On Review"
in any zoning district is indicated by the letters "PR" in the applicable
column and square. Absence of any notation in a square indicates a use
is not permitted for the selected use type in that zoning district.
B. Permitted use regulations can be found under the applicable Chapter
29 zoning district Sections that precede this Section.
C. Entries in the "Use Standard" column refers to Sections that provide
further use information for the selected use type.
D. Uses Not Listed In A Zoning District. In the event a "Permitted Use on
Review" application is submitted for a "use" not listed in Table No. 1, or
a "use" not listed in a zoning district desired by the applicant, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may take the request under
consideration at their next scheduled meeting. If, after consideration at
that meeting, the requested use appears to be compatible with the
desired zoning district, then the Planning and Zoning Commission will,
at their next scheduled meeting, hold a public hearing on the request in
accordance with Section 29-82 of this Chapter. The results of the
hearing will be forwarded to the City Council for their approval/
disapproval.
112. Editor's Note: Permitted Uses Table #3 is included as an attachment to this Chapter.
SECTION 29-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-22
1:643

ARTICLE III
Additional District Provisions
SECTION 29-26. Conditions of A More Restricted District Applied
to Residential Use. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art III § 1, 12-2-1980]
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit
residential uses of a more restricted district, such residential uses shall
be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more
restricted district unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 29-27. Open Space. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 2,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2012-01 § III, 1-10-2012]
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify
and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set
forth in Article II herein.
1. Open space to serve one building. No open space or lot area required
for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or
counted as open space for, any other building structure.
2. Projections into yards. Open eaves, cornices, window sills, and belt
courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two
(2) feet. Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance
not to exceed five (5) feet.
3. Street right-of-way width. Where the dedicated street right-of-way is
less than fifty (50) feet, the depth of the front yard shall be measured at
a starting point twenty-five (25) feet from the center line of the street
easement, except that the depth of the front yard shall be measured
from a starting point on the future right-of-way line for all parkways,
secondary and primary arterials, freeways and expressways designated
in the comprehensive City Plan.
4. Street access for dwellings. No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which
does not abut on at least one (1) street. A street shall form the direct
and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys,
where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and
egress. A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling
if all other provisions of these regulations are complied with.
5. Commercial and industrial lot sizes. No minimum lot sizes and open
spaces are prescribed for commercial and industrial uses. It is the
intent of this Chapter that lots of sufficient size be used by any business
or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and unloading
space required for operation of the enterprise.
6. Site lines at intersections. On any corner lot including parkway on
which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure
or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between
two and one-half (2 1/2) and eight (8) feet above the crown of the
SECTION 29-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-27
1:645
SECTION 29-28. Height. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 3, 12-2-1980]
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be,
the specific district regulations appearing in Article II.
adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a triangle
formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and
side exterior lot lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along said front
and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a
sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
Reference Section 29-6, Figure 4. (Side yards are not normally required
in "C-2" and "C-3" zoning districts. See 29-15(D)(2) and 29-16(D)(2) for
exceptions.)
7. Location of attached private garage. An attached or detached private
garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than thirty
(30) feet to the street easement line.
8. Time for accessory building construction. No accessory building shall
be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building
has been actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
9. Site planning requirements. Whenever one (1) or more residential,
institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings are proposed to be
located in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement,
orientation, or other site planning variation from that of other
buildings, structures, or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the
architectural design, location, orientation, service and parking areas of
such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of
adjacent of other properties in the area, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
1. In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as
a story, provided that a story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at
a height of four (4) feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds (2/3)
of the floor area of the story immediately below it and which does not
contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
2. Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections
not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
3. Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and semipublic
buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if the
minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards
required in the district are increased one (1) foot for each two (2) feet
by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the
prescribed height limit.
SECTION 29-27 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-29
1:646
SECTION 29-29. Court Requirements for Multiple-Family
Dwellings. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 4, 12-2-1980]
Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings
is designed with an inner or outer court, the following requirements shall
be complied with.
SECTION 29-30. Storage and Parking of Trailers, Recreational and
Commercial Vehicles. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art III § 5, 12-2-1980; Ord.
No. 93-23 § 1, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 2003-03 § 1, 1-14-2003; Ord. No.
2005-31 § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2012-33 § I, 10-9-2012; Ord. No.
2013-16 § I, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 2015-22 § II, 8-11-2015]
1. Outer court width. The width of an outer court upon which windows
open shall be not less than ten (10) feet, or equal to the height of the
opposing wall, whichever is greater; and in no case shall an outer court
be less than five (5) feet in width or equal to seventy percent (70%) of
the height of the opposing wall, whichever is greater.
2. Inner court width. The width of an inner court of a multiple-family
dwelling, except an inner court servicing an individual town house,
shall be not less than two (2) times the height of the lowest wall forming
the court, but in no case shall it be less than twenty (20) feet.
3. Passageway for inner court. An open unobstructed passageway shall be
provided at the grade of such inner court. Such passageway shall be not
less than twelve (12) feet in width, shall have a clearance of not less
than twelve (12) feet in height, and shall provide a straight and
continuous passage from the inner court to a yard or open space having
a direct connection with a street; provided however, than such
passageway servicing an individual townhouse shall be not less than
four (4) feet in width, shall have a clearance of not less than seven (7)
feet in height, and shall provide a straight and continuous passage from
the inner court to a yard open space having a direct connection with a
street.
4. Accessory building permit. Accessory buildings may be located in a
court yard of a multiple-family dwelling, provided such accessory
building shall not be located less than twelve (12) feet from any other
building.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or
regularly used for carrying freight and merchandise, or more than eight
(8) passengers but not including vanpools or shuttle buses.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Includes, but is not limited to, motor
homes, camping/travel trailers, all-terrain vehicles and watercraft,
including boats and jet skis.
SECTION 29-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-30
1:647
VEHICLE — Any device, or component thereof, in, upon or by which
any person or property is or may be transported or pulled upon a
highway, street or waterway, including, but not limited to, travel trailer,
camper, motor home/coach, trailers of all kinds, trucks of all sizes, cars,
buses, boats, and off-road vehicles. Devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks are not deemed to be a
vehicle.
B. Parking And Storage. Commercial vehicles, trailers of all types,
including travel, camping and hauling, watercraft, recreational
vehicles, motor homes, modular homes, manufactured homes, and
mobile homes shall not be parked or stored on any lot or street in any
zoning district except in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle, which does not exceed
one (1) ton rated capacity, shall be permitted per family residence.
In no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives,
gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. Additional
commercial vehicles may be parked temporarily while making a
delivery or providing a service. For the purpose of this Section,
pickup trucks, family passenger vans or SUVs (small utility vehicle)
are not considered commercial vehicles.
2. Campers and travel trailers (with the tow vehicle attached) and
motor homes may be temporarily parked on residential streets for a
single period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours and only if the
street will safely allow two-way traffic while the vehicle is parked.
Vehicles may not be lived in while parked on the street.
3. No vehicle, excluding mobile homes, modular homes,
manufactured homes, shall be parked or stored for more than one
(1) week unless it is located to the rear of the home. Vehicles
parked in the rear of the home must be behind the building, upon a
pad constructed of asphalt, concrete, or not less than three (3)
inches of gravel compacted to prevent rutting when the vehicle is
moved. Side yard parking pads existing at the time of passage of
this Section and meeting the above noted surface requirements
may continue to be used. The vehicle or trailer shall not be parked
or stored within five (5) feet of the rear lot line or within ten (10)
feet of the side lot line. No part of the trailer or vehicle may extend
over a public sidewalk or right-of-way.
4. Mobile homes shall be parked or stored only in mobile home parks
which are in conformity with the ordinances of the City of
Lexington. However, a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home may be temporarily parked on a permitted
residential lot while the lot is being prepared for permanent
installation of such structure. In no case shall such structure be
parked for more than sixty (60) days.
SECTION 29-30 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-30
1:648
SECTION 29-30.1. Manufactured and Modular Homes and
Commercial Buildings — Regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-03 §§ 2 — 5,
1-14-2003; Ord. No. 2007-41 § 1, 11-13-2007]
5. A motor home, camper, or travel trailer may be used for off-street
dwelling purposes for not more than seven (7) consecutive days per
year and shall not be permanently connected to sewer lines, water
lines, or electricity. They may, however, be used for on-site dwelling
purposes permanently while parked in any travel trailer park
authorized under the ordinances of the City of Lexington.
6. All vehicles, including small utility hauling trailers, boat trailers,
small boats and off-road vehicles, when parked on the premises, are
each deemed to occupy one (1) parking space. A parking space is
defined in Lexington City Code Section 29-51 as an area nine (9)
feet by twenty (20) feet plus adequate ingress and egress space.
Lexington City Code Sections 29-10(G)(4), 29-10(D)(6),
29-11(D)(6), 29-12(D)(6) and 29-13(D) set forth the required rear
yard open space that all residential and historical lots must have,
i.e., space not covered by buildings or parking spaces. That
required open space may not be used for parking per Lexington
City Code Section 29-47(B). Also see Section 18-90.2.
7. Operational licensed commercial vehicles including semitrailers
may be parked on any commercial or industrial zoned lot in the
course of servicing a business use on that lot. Both licensed and
non-licensed operational commercial vehicles may be parked on
commercial or industrial zoned lots when business located on the
lot is licensed as a vehicle sales business.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
following definitions:
DWELLING — A building used entirely for residential purposes, but not
hotels or motels, and must have:
A roof pitch of no less than three (3) inches of vertical rise to every
twelve (12) inches of horizontal run.
1.
Roofing material consisting of composition asphalt, shingle,
fiberglass shingle, wood shake, baked tile, crushed rock or other
material commonly accepted in the industry and approved by the
Building Inspector.
2.
A roof overhang of not less than one (1) foot measured from the
vertical side of the home. When attached carports, garages,
porches or similar structures are an integral part of the home, this
overhang may be waived where the accessory structure is attached
to the home.
3.
Siding material consisting of wood or wood products, stucco, brick,
horizontal lap steel or aluminum, horizontal lap vinyl or rock.
4.
SECTION 29-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-30.1
1:649
FACTORY-BUILT COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A structure constructed
of factory-assembled parts that are transported to the building site,
assembled at the building site, and permanently attached to a
foundation meeting the requirements of the City's building codes, to be
used for public or commercial purposes.
MANUFACTURED HOMES — A factory-built structure that is
manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 United States
Code Section 5401 bearing a seal issued by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development according to Section 700.010, et seq.,
RSMo., or meets current BOCA standards. It is to be used as a place
for human habitation but which is not constructed or equipped with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for
the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame wheels or axles. A mobile
home is not a manufactured home.
MODULAR HOMES — Factory-built housing bearing the seal issued
by the Missouri Public Service Commission indicating compliance with
the State of Missouri Modular Standards and Regulations for Modular
Homes.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building that contains only one (1)
living unit. All single-family dwellings must have an exterior dimension,
excluding garages, carports and accessory building of not less than
twenty-four (24) feet by forty (40) feet. Single-family dwelling includes
a manufactured or modular unit which, when placed on-site:
5. Proper guttering attached.
Is permanently installed on a properly engineered, enclosed
foundation system in accordance with the BOCA Basic Building
Code and approved by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector may require a plan to be certified by a registered
architect or engineer. At the Building Inspector's discretion, the
Building Inspector may or may not issue a building permit based
upon code enforcement procedures.
1.
Is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction with
axles, running gear, lights and towing apparatus removed.
2.
B. General Requirements. Manufactured and modular homes shall not be
placed or occupied on an individual lot without a building permit issued
under these regulations.
1. Be occupied only as a single-family dwelling.
2. Be placed in conformance with all zoning and setback requirements
established for the zone in which located.
3. Accessory structures, which are limited to a garage and a shed,
shall be placed in conformance with the setback and dimensional
requirements established for the zone in which located. The
SECTION 29-30.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-30.1
1:650
exterior covering and roofing material of the garage or carport
must be compatible with surrounding residences.
4. Have a minimum width of not less than twenty-two (22) feet with
the main floor level not less than eight hundred (800) square feet.
5. Roof must be gable or hip roof of at least three (3) in twelve (12) or
greater and covered with material that is residential in appearance
including, but not limited to, approved wood, asphalt composition
or fiberglass, shingles but excluding corrugated aluminum,
corrugated fiberglass or metal roof. Except for permitted deck
areas, all roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less
than twelve (12) inches and no greater than thirty (30) inches
excluding gutter dimensions.
6. Have proper guttering attached.
7. Have the main entry door facing the street on which the modular
home is located. A sidewalk shall be installed from the street,
driveway or sidewalk adjoining neighboring lots to the front door.
The unit must be oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel
with the street. A perpendicular or diagonal placement may be
permitted if there is a building addition of substantial landscaping
to the narrow dimension of the unit, as so modified and facing the
street, is no less than fifty percent (50%) of the unit's long
dimension.
8. Have exterior surface and window treatments that the maximum
extent possible are architecturally compatible with those of
neighboring properties, excluding smooth, ribbed or corrugated
metal or plastic panels.
9. Be placed on a parcel according to a pre-submitted and approved
plot plan as describe on the permit. In addition, a manufacturer's
installation manual and an illustration of the finished appearance of
the unit be provided.
10. Home shall be attached to a continuous permanent foundation,
which manner of placement shall be as stated on the building
permit, and meet all manufacturer's specifications for support.
11. The exterior foundation material shall consist of continuous
concrete or masonry suitable for the outer portion of a finished
residence.
12. Have a hard surface (not earthen in nature) driveway not less than
nine (9) feet wide sufficient for the placement of at least two (2)
vehicles.
13. Have the tongue and running gear, including axles, removed.
14. Maintain a minimum of eighteen (18) inches of crawl space under
the entire manufactured or modular home.
SECTION 29-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-30.1
1:651
SECTION 29-31. Child Care Center. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art III § 6,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2001-02 §§ 1 — 2, 1-9-2001]
Child care centers with four (4) or more children authorized under uses
permitted on review in residential districts shall meet the following
provisions.
15. Have permanent steps set at all exits.
16. Manufactured homes must have been built to accommodate Zone 2
weather conditions or better.
17. Must be served by City sewer utilities meeting the established City
requirements prior to receiving service and underground public
utilities shall be required.
18. Property owner shall declare the manufactured or modular home
as real property and must so record with the County Assessor.
C. Non-conformity. All existing occupied manufactured or modular homes
located on an individual lot shall be permitted to remain in place so long
as occupied, but provided that they may not be replaced unless made to
conform with the requirements of this Article. Any such existing
manufactured or modular home shall be removed when unoccupied for
a period in excess of twelve (12) months.
D. Inspections. Each manufactured or modular home approved for
placement on a parcel shall be subject to the following inspections:
1. Siting to insure zoning requirements. Foundations prior to
placement of the manufactured or modular home.
2. Manufactured or modular home permanently fastened to the
foundation.
3. Permanent steps at all exits.
4. The permittee shall give the City of Lexington Building Inspector
notice when the premises are ready for inspection and shall not
proceed further until approval has been given by the official
pursuant to the each inspection.
5. When the requirements of this Section are satisfied, a
manufactured or modular home shall be permitted to be installed in
a "R-1" (Single-Family District).
1. The center shall be located in a single-family dwelling which is the
permanent residence of the operator and shall be operated in a manner
that will not change the character of the residence.
2. The dwelling shall not contain less than thirty-five (35) square feet per
child of floor area dedicated to child care activities. Floor area not
SECTION 29-30.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-31
1:652
SECTION 29-32. Swimming Pools. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 7,
12-2-1980]
Private swimming pools may be constructed as an accessory use, in
conformity with the ordinances of the City of Lexington; provided however,
that a swimming pool shall not be constructed in front of the front building
line and no portion of the pool, equipment, walkway, or other facilities
related thereto, shall be located closer than eight (8) feet to the side or rear
lot line.
SECTION 29-33. Animals. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 8, 12-2-1980]
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with the ordinances
of the City of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 29-34. Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases. [Ord. No.
80-22 Art. III § 9, 12-2-1980]
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage
of liquefied petroleum, gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of
the City of Lexington, Missouri.
SECTION 29-35. Mobile Home Park Regulations.113 [Ord. No.
2007-41 § 2, 11-13-2007]
For the purposes of occupancy, mobile homes and trailers shall be located
only in approved mobile home parks. Mobile home parks are permitted only
upon review by the Planning Commission. Before the location of a mobile
home park can be approved, the conditions must be met in accordance with
Chapter 14.
SECTION 29-36. Uses Shall Have Appropriate Services and
Buildings. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 11, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 81-7
§ 2, 4-7-1981]
accessible to or not used for children in care shall not be included in
determining the number of square feet required.
3. The dwelling shall meet City, County Health Department, and Missouri
State Statutes requirements as to safety, design, facilities and
equipment and other features.
4. The center shall be operated in a manner that will not adversely affect
other properties and uses in the area.
A. Review of Appropriateness. It is the intent of these regulations that all
uses shall be located on a site or within a building which has sufficient
utilities and services and is of appropriate space and design to
113. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2007-41, adopted November 13, 2007, moved previous section
29-35 "mobile home park regulations" to chapter 14, section 14-1 and enacted the new
provisions set out herein.
SECTION 29-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-36
1:653
SECTION 29-37. Architectural Design of Accessory Buildings and
Fences. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. III § 12, 12-2-1980]
The architectural design and material used for the construction of accessory
buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which said
building or fence is accessory.
SECTION 29-37.1. Fence Regulations for All Residential Districts.
[Ord. No. 2012-29 § I, 9-11-2012]
satisfactorily accommodate each use of land or building, in terms of
safety, function, aesthetic quality, and harmony with other uses in the
area. Whenever a request for a use of land or building does not meet
these conditions, in the opinion of the administrative office enforcing
these regulations, but all other provisions of these regulations are
complied with, the administrators shall refer such case to the Planning
Commission for their review and recommendations. Said
recommendations shall be submitted to the City Council who shall
stipulate the requirements which shall be followed to comply with the
intent of these regulations, and said requirements shall be made a part
of the conditions for issuance of the permit authorizing construction
and occupancy.
B. Buildings Designed as Dwellings Shall Not be Occupied by Commercial
Uses. Whenever buildings designed for dwelling purposes are located
in commercial or industrial districts, no commercial or industrial use
shall be permitted on the lot on which the dwelling is situated until said
dwelling building has been completely removed; and further provided
that in no case shall the dwelling building be used for any commercial
or industrial use, except as a permit on review, the procedure for which
is established in Article IX, Section 29-82.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall be
deemed to have the meaning indicated below:
COURTYARD — Enclosure wall, which is architecturally integrated into,
connected at both ends to an existing structural wall of and located
within the general exterior circumference of the main building on a
lot. Courtyards shall not be deemed fences for the purpose of these
regulations.
FENCE — A structure, partition or wall, including gates, forming a
barrier at grade, erected for the purpose of enclosing or separating
contiguous pieces of land or for the purpose of providing shade, privacy
screening or security. Shrubs, hedges, trees and other plant material
are not considered a fence.
GATE — A movable barrier attached to a permanent support structure.
B. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to erect any fence over three and
one-half (3 1/2) feet in height (excepting temporary garden protection
fences within the lot interior) in the City of Lexington without first
SECTION 29-36 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-37.1
1:654
having filed, with the Lexington City Building Inspector, an application
for a fence permit together with a sketch or diagram of the type of
fencing, design, height, and its location and having obtained a permit
approved by the City Building Inspector for its erection. There will be a
fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for such permit.
C. General Regulations.
1. No private fence shall be erected, permitted or maintained in any
zoning district within the dedicated street right-of-way, or on any
publicly traversed right-of-way. Fences over dedicated public
drainage or on utility easements may be installed with written
permission from the City Building Inspector. Fences so permitted
shall not deny or impede necessary official ingress or egress to the
easement area.
2. Every fence, which creates a wholly enclosed area and adjoins an
existing or proposed street right-of-way, shall include a gate to
provide access to the right-of-way.
3. Fences may be located on or within the property lot lines in rear
yards, side yards, and front yards unless prohibited by subdivision
or deed restrictions.
4. Rear yard. Fences not exceeding eight (8) feet in height may be
erected in the rear yard of any lot.
5. Side yard — interior lots. Fences not exceeding eight (8) feet in
height may be erected in the side yard of any lot. Side yard fences,
except on corner lots, may not extend forward past the front
building line.
6. Side yard — corner lots. Side yard fences on corner building lots
may be extended beyond that portion of the front building line
abutting a side street to the front property line or right-of-way.
Fence construction must comply with Zoning Section 29-27.6 (site
lines at intersections).
7. Front yard. Front yard fences cannot exceed four (4) feet in height.
Front yard fences on corner lots must comply with Zoning Section
29-27.6.
8. Except for special fences as noted in (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this
Section, fences shall be constructed of commonly used residential
type fencing. Commonly used fence materials include wood, brick,
stone, concrete, chain-link, ornamental iron work and extruded
rigid vinyl. Rigid vinyl fences shall be constructed in accordance
with the manufacturer's specific guidelines for installation. All
fences shall be constructed with the finished surface facing
neighboring property with support posts placed to the inside,
except in cases where the posts are an integral part of the fence
design which enhances the aesthetic appearance of the fence.
SECTION 29-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-37.1
1:655
9. Fences constructed of poultry wire, rabbit wire, barbed wire, razor
wire, concertina wire, bamboo or other similar material, railroad
ties, plywood, snow fence (both wire/wood and flexible plastic),
sheet metal, wood pallets, tires, welded wire, branches, rubble or
salvaged material, or materials originally intended for other
purposes are prohibited.
10. Except as allowed in Subsection (D)(1) of this Section, no fence
shall be erected, permitted or maintained which is intended to, or
may inflict injury on anyone coming in contact with the fence.
Buried, non-visible electrical dog fences are allowed without
permit.
11. Masonry fences such as brick, concrete block, stone, etc., shall be
set in mortar. Loose stack of material is not allowed unless
specifically designed for mortarless stacking.
12. Fences constructed prior to the adoption of this Section, excepting
those noted in paragraphs (1) and (9) above, which do not conform
to the provisions of this Section, shall be considered legal nonconforming
structures. An existing fence may be maintained,
repaired or structurally altered, however, no such repair or
structural alteration shall create an additional non-conformity or
increase the degree of non-conformity.
D. Special Fences.
1. Barbed wire or electrical fencing, as well as fencing over seven (7)
feet in height, may be permitted or required in special
circumstances (utilities protection, hazardous or dangerous area
intrusion prevention, theft prevention, etc.) but only after review
and written approval by the City Building Inspector. When
electrically charged fences allowed in this paragraph are used,
such fences shall be posted with warning signs or fluorescent
markings on each side of an enclosure at intervals not to exceed
one hundred fifty (150) feet.
2. Commercial agriculture fencing, including barbed wire and
electrified fences, are permitted in agriculture areas. Written
notice to abutting residential property owners is required prior to
installation of electrified fencing along such abutting property
lines. Use of electrical fencing for agricultural purposes does not
require marking. A City building permit is not required for
agriculture fencing.
3. Fences enclosing outdoor swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall
be erected and maintained to surround the entire swimming pool,
spa, or hot tub area, and shall be sufficient to make such body of
water not readily accessible to small children and shall meet or
exceed the requirements of the 2018 International Swimming Pool
SECTION 29-37.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-37.1
1:656
SECTION 29-38. Layout and Construction Specifications and
Requirements For Residential and Commercial Streets. [Ord. No.
99-49 § 1, 12-14-1999; Ord. No. 2006-42 § 1, 9-12-2006; Ord. No.
2010-33 § 2, 10-13-2010]
This Section is applicable to all new development and redevelopment of
properties within the City of Lexington, Missouri.
All streets of the City of Lexington, Missouri, hereafter constructed shall
be built in such a manner as to conform to the most current edition of
the APWA (American Public Works Association, Kansas City Metropolitan
Chapter) design criteria, specifications and requirements for streets and
the following additional specifications and requirements. Where APWA
specifications and the additional specifications and requirements within this
Section conflict, the specifications and requirements within this Section
shall prevail.
and Spa Code and 2018 International Building Code Section 3109.
[Ord. No. 2019-08, 2-12-2019]
4. Tennis court fences surrounding tennis courts shall be open mesh
fences and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
5. All dog runs shall be considered an accessory structure and shall be
of chain-link fence construction. Run dimensions shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in length by five (5) feet in width by six (6)
feet in height, and shall have easily cleanable flooring such as
concrete, pavers or similar material. All dog runs shall meet yard
setback requirements in this Code. Also see Lexington City
ordinance Chapter 5-31(E)(6)(a) Dangerous Animals.
E. Maintenance. All fences, including legal non-conforming structures,
shall be maintained in their original upright condition. Fences designed
to be painted or have other surface finishes shall be maintained in their
original condition as designed. Missing boards, pickets, or posts shall
be replaced in a timely manner with material of the same type and
quality. The Building Inspector or Law Enforcement Officers are hereby
empowered to issue notices to property owners to comply with this
Section. Owners will be given a reasonable time to comply, but not to
exceed thirty (30) days except that an additional fifteen (15) day period
may be given at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
F. Penalty. Every person erecting, repairing or altering any fence, screen,
wall or exterior partition in violation of or contrary to the requirements
of this Section, and every person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to
observe the requirements of this Section or violate the same shall be
guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to
paying the cost of prosecution. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
SECTION 29-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-38
1:657
1. Functional classification of streets (APWA).
A. Major arterial streets (or primary arterial or urban principal
arterial). Streets that serve the highest traffic volume corridors and
longest trip. Provides travel between business districts and
outlying residential areas, between major inner city communities
and between major suburban centers, and connects communities to
major State and interstate highways. No or limited access is
allowed from residential areas. Access is usually partially
controlled. Spacing of major arterial streets is generally from one
(1) mile to five (5) miles.
B. Minor arterial streets (or secondary arterial or urban minor
arterial). Streets that interconnect and augment the major arterial
streets. No or limited access is allowed from residential lots.
Accommodate trips of moderate length at a lower level of travel
mobility than major arterial streets. Spacing of minor arterial
streets is generally from one-half (1/2) mile to three (3) miles.
C. Industrial/commercial collector (or collector or urban collector).
Streets that collect traffic to and from commercial or industrial
areas and distributes it to arterial streets.
D. Residential collector streets (or collector or urban collector).
Streets that collect traffic to and from residential areas and
distributes it to arterial streets. Limited access is allowed from
residential lots. Desirable maximum Average Daily Trips (ADT) =
three thousand (3,000) for residential collector streets.
E. Residential local streets (or local or urban local). Streets that only
carry traffic having its origin or destination within the immediate
neighborhood. Desirable maximum ADT = one hundred (100) for
local streets (ADT = ten (10) trips per day per typical single-family
residence).
F. Residential access sheets. Streets that carry traffic between
residential lots and residential local streets of residential collector
streets. Residential access streets usually carry no through traffic
and include short loop streets, cul-de-sacs, and courts. Desirable
maximum ADT = two hundred (200) for cul-de-sacs and four
hundred (400) for loop streets. Maximum length of cul-de-sacs =
fifty (500) feet and one hundred (100) feet for loop streets (ADT =
ten (10) trips per day per typical single-family residence).
2. Site plan with street layout. A site plan with street layout, in accordance
with APWA specifications, shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval. The arrangements, character, extent,
width, grade, design and location of all streets and alleys, and storm
water control and disposal shall be considered in their relation to
existing or planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and to their appropriate relations to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
SECTION 29-38 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-38
1:658
A. Street grades shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. Combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be
avoided.
B. The street layout shall conform to the existing and proposed land
uses and the most advantageous development pattern for
surrounding areas.
C. Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage the use of
through traffic.
D. Residential and commercial streets shall be laid out to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems.
E. The street arrangement shall not be such as to cause hardship to
owners of adjoining property.
F. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements
be approved for any private street.
G. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
H. Widths of streets and street right-of-ways shall conform to the
widths specified in this Section. These widths may be increased or
decreased by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
I. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or be confused
with an existing street unless the proposed street is an extension of
an existing street.
J. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited unless a cul-de-sac is
provided.
K. Adequate storm sewers will be provided by the contractor in
accordance with APWA design criteria and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Engineer or his
designated representative.
L. Additional street area in the form of turning lanes and/or right-ofways
may be required as deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
M. All streets must be curbed as provided for in this Section.
3. Sub-grade.
A. Preparation of ground surface. All vegetation, such as roots, brush,
heavy sod, heavy growth of grass, and all decayed vegetable
matter, rubbish and other unsuitable material within the proposed
street area shall be removed.
B. Placement of fill. All holes and irregularities shall be filled and
compacted to uniform density. All material that will not compact
when rolled or tamped shall be removed and replaced with suitable
SECTION 29-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-38
1:659
material. All fill under paved surface shall be compacted by a power
roller or other approved equipment. Earth placed for fill shall be
placed in layers not exceeding six (6) inches. Each layer to be
uniformly spread, moistened if required, and then compacted.
C. Compliance. The contractor must notify the City Engineer when fill
is to be placed. The City Engineer shall retain the right to have an
inspector at the sight to assure compliance and to test for
maximum density at optimum moisture content.
4. Residential and commercial street minimum widths and right-of-ways
(r/w). APWA minimum street widths and right-of-way specifications are
modified as follows:
A. Street design and right-of-way for Federal and State numbered
roads shall be determined by the cognizant Federal/State Agency.
All other streets shall have a minimum of two (2) traffic lanes.
B. Individual street right-of-way minimums shall be determined by the
total number of traffic lanes, parking lanes, turn lanes, median,
curbs, and curb backside r/w extensions that are incorporated in
the street design.
C. The right-of-way shall extend from the backside of the curb to
abutting property lines on all streets as noted in the chart below.
NOTE — Utilities installed in street right-of-way may require more
curb-back to property line width than noted below.
D. Street individual component elements shall conform to the
following chart:
1. Traffic lane width 12 feet each
2. Curb width 2 feet each
3. Width from back of curb to
property line residential
6 feet
all others 10 feet
4. Median (if used) 8 feet
5. Parking lane 8 feet each
6. Turning lane 12 feet
Example 1: Traffic lanes 2 each 24 feet
Curbs 2 each 4 feet
Back of curb to property line 2 each 12 feet
Total r/w 40 feet
Example 2: Traffic lanes 2 each 24 feet
Median 1 each 8 feet
Curbs 4 each 8 feet
SECTION 29-38 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-38
1:660
Turning lane 1 each 12 feet
Back of outside curb to property
lines
2 each 12 feet
Total r/w 90 feet
E. Where individual properties are being developed or redeveloped in
tracts platted prior to the enactment of this Section, the Planning
and Zoning Board may make adjustments to the required street
widths and rights-of-way on an individual basis.
F. Streets that do not meet the minimum street width of twenty-four
(24) feet (includes traffic lane and parking lane) less the curb width
shall be considered one-way streets.
5. Cul-de-sacs and "no outlet" streets. Cul-de-sacs and "no outlet" streets
are to be discouraged. Where they must exist, the street and r/w shall
conform to the above chart.
A. The cul-de-sac radius to the inside of the curb shall not be less than
forty (40) feet with no parking within the cul-de-sac or forty-eight
(48) feet with parking allowed. These widths are required to assure
the safe turning of fire trucks and school buses. The r/w must also
extend six (6) feet from the curb back to the abutting property
lines.
B. "No outlet" streets will only be allowed when they are intended to
extend into another development in a reasonably short time. The
street must be terminated in a temporary paved turnaround having
a minimum radius of at least forty (40) feet. Parking will not be
allowed within the turnaround.
6. Half streets. Half streets generally will not be approved. Exceptions
may be made for developments that are to be completed in phases. In
no case will a half street be approved without a firm completion
schedule for the entire street.
7. Adjoining streets. Streets lying adjacent to any boundary of a
subdivision shall conform to the requirements of this Section.
Beginning from the existing center line of such streets and extending
outward to the property to be developed, such street shall be composed
of a minimum of one (1) traffic lane, one (1) parking lane (if required),
one (1) turning lane (if required), one (1) curb, and six (6) feet r/w from
curb-back to property line as described in the "Residential and
commercial street minimum widths and right-of-ways (r/w)" paragraph
above. In the case of unimproved streets adjacent to the property
boundary, there shall be a minimum of two (2) traffic lanes installed.
8. Existing streets within subdivision. Where property is to be developed
is on both sides of an existing street, the entire street within the
development shall conform to the requirements of this Section.
SECTION 29-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-38
1:661
9. Driveway entrance. Driveway entrances shall be constructed of
concrete per APWA standards and must extend from the outer edge of
the street pavement through the right-of-way to the abutting property
line.
10. Street and curb additional construction requirements.
A. Under no circumstances shall the asphalt paving cover any part of
the top surface of the curb.
B. All streets other than residential streets shall have integral straight
back curb and gutters.
C. Residential curb and gutters shall be constructed as an integral
curb and gutter. They may be of a roll back design or straight back
type. Curbs on residential streets not designed with parking lanes
must have straight back curbs.
D. Where properties are being developed/redeveloped within an
existing neighborhood and the abutting street/s has/have curbing,
then any new or replacement curbing shall match the shape and
style of the existing curbing as closely as possible and shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 24, Section 24-22.B,
Design For Persons With Disabilities.
E. All new or replacement curbing installations within the City of
Lexington shall require a building permit and approval of the City
Engineer prior to installation.
STRAIGHT BACK CURB AND GUTTER
(Type CG-1)
ROLL BACK CURB AND GUTTER
(Type CG-2)
SECTION 29-38 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-38
1:662
ARTERIAL STREET
TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL STREET LAYOUT
Street Pavement Types
Classification Option 1 Option 2
Major arterial 9" minimum portland
cement concrete
pavement
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
2" Type 3 asphaltic
concrete surface
10" minimum Type 1
asphaltic concrete base
course
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
Industrial
collector and
minor arterial
8" minimum portland
cement concrete
pavement
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
2" Type 3 asphaltic
concrete surface
9" minimum Type 1
asphaltic concrete base
course
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
SECTION 29-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-38
1:663
SECTION 29-39. Lodging Establishments. [RSMo. § 144.083; Ord.
No. 2012-22 § 2, 6-12-2012]
Street Pavement Types
Classification Option 1 Option 2
Commercial
collector
7" minimum portland
cement concrete
pavement
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
2" Type 3 asphaltic
concrete surface
7" minimum Type 1
asphaltic concrete base
course
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
Residential
access,
residential
local and
residential
collector
6" minimum portland
cement concrete
pavement
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
2" Type 3 asphaltic
concrete surface
6" minimum Type 1
asphaltic concrete base
course
6" minimum compacted
subgrade 95% of
standard maximum
density
AMERICAN PUBLIC WORKS
ASSOCIATION
APWA Kansas City
Metropolitan Chapter
Standard Drawing
Number Table 1
General Notes:
1. The pavement thickness
shown are minimum and the
actual pavement design
thickness should be
determined by an engineering
analysis of the traffic and local
subgrade conditions.
2. Other pavement type
options to be authorized shall
be submitted to the local
government for approval.
3. Concrete pavement joint
detail shall be submitted to the
local government for approval.
Street
Pavement
Types Adopted April 17, 1996
A. This Section provides minimum standards and regulations for lodging
establishments located in residential and commercial districts within
the City limits of Lexington, Missouri. New start-up "lodging
SECTION 29-38 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-39
1:664
establishments" offering four (4) or fewer sleeping rooms, or not
otherwise qualified as a hotel under Chapter 315, RSMo., are required
to apply for a special use permit as authorized by Section 29-21, Chart
No. 1, and Section 29-82, Procedure for Authorizing Uses Permitted on
Review and shall meet the requirements as set forth in this Section.
Lodging establishments offering five (5) or more sleeping rooms are
classified as hotels under Missouri Chapter 315, RSMo., and are subject
to both State and City regulation.
B. All lodging establishments, covered under City Code Section 29-39,
must have a Lexington City business license. The possession of a
Missouri State retail sales license and a statement from the Department
of Revenue that the licensee owes no tax due under Sections 144.010 to
144.510, RSMo., or Sections 143.191 to 143.261, RSMo., shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of any City business license.
The statement of no tax due shall be dated no longer than ninety (90)
days before the date of submission for application or renewal of the City
license.
C. Bed And Breakfast — Residential, Bed And Breakfast In "C-3" Central
Business District, And Commercial District Inn In "C-3" Central
Business District.
1. Are primarily "transient guest lodging establishments". See
Chapter 29, Section 29-6 for definition of each.
2. The establishment owner/manager must be on-site while the
establishment is in operation.
3. Each bed and breakfast establishment in the residential district
shall offer breakfast to its guests, and the cost of said breakfast or
brunch shall be included in the price of the room.
4. Each bed and breakfast establishment in the commercial district
shall offer breakfast or brunch to its guests, and the cost of said
breakfast or brunch shall be included in the price of the room. It
may serve meals to non-guests as well.
5. An annual inspection by the Code Enforcement Department and the
Fire Department, respectively, within thirty (30) days prior to
license issue or renewal is required. Other inspections may be held
if complaints are received.
6. No guest may stay at said establishments more than fifteen (15)
consecutive days out of any thirty (30) day period.
7. A minimum of two (2) bathrooms shall be located within each
establishment with one (1) bathroom designated for the owners
and employees of the establishment and one (1) bathroom
designated for the guests of the establishment. A minimum of one
(1) bathroom for every two (2) guest rooms is required.
SECTION 29-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-39
1:665
8. Adequate parking spaces shall be provided for the guests.
9. Exterior signs. Only one (1) exterior sign is allowed in the
residential district with a three (3) foot square maximum. Sign
cannot be illuminated or animated. Otherwise all signs shall comply
with the City Sign Ordinance Chapter 22A, and with Historic
Preservation Commission regulations if located in a designated
historic district.
10. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in individual guest rooms.
D. Boarding House.
1. See Chapter 29, Section 29-6 for definition.
2. An annual inspection by the Code Enforcement Department and the
Fire Department, respectively, within thirty (30) days prior to
license issue or renewal is required. Other inspections may be held
if complaints are received.
3. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in individual guest rooms.
4. Adequate parking space shall be provided for the guests.
E. Hotel, Motel, Motor Hotel, Apartment Hotel, Tourist Court, Resort,
Cabins, Tourist Home, Inns (All Five (5) Or More Sleeping Rooms), Bed
And Breakfast (Five (5) to Ten (10) Sleeping Rooms).
1. See Chapter 29, Section 29-6, Definitions "Lodging
Establishments" and "Hotel".
2. Subject to all Missouri State regulations concerning lodging
establishments with five (5) or more sleeping rooms.
3. In addition to all other applicable City license requirements, a copy
of the establishment's Missouri lodging permit must be provided
with the new/renewal business license application.
F. RV Parks/Campgrounds.
1. See Chapter 29, Section 29-6, Definitions "Recreation Vehicle Park/
Camp Grounds".
2. Subject to Chapter 29 zoning regulations.
3. An annual inspection by the Code Enforcement Department and the
Fire Department, respectively, within thirty (30) days prior to
license issue or renewal is required. Other inspections may be held
if complaints are received.
G. This Section becomes effective and applies:
1. In its entirety for all first (1st) time licensee's on the date the
Lexington City Council approves and passes this Section and for
the duration of licensee's business.
SECTION 29-39 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-39
1:666
SECTION 29-40. (Reserved)
2. In its entirety for all licensee's, except that:
a. Those lodging establishments already licensed as Bed and
Breakfast or Inns (with four (4) or less sleeping rooms) as of
the effective date of this Section, and not currently having an
owner/manager on-site during guest occupancy, are not
required to meet the on-site owner/manager stipulation. This
exemption expires on transfer of ownership or lease of the
property.
b. Those lodging establishments currently licensed as Bed and
Breakfast or Inns (four (4) or less sleeping rooms), but did not
go through the "Permit on Review" process prior to initial
license issuance, may continue to operate and renew their
licenses without obtaining "Permit on Review" approval. This
exemption expires on transfer of ownership or lease of the
property.
SECTION 29-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-40
1:667

ARTICLE IV
Planned Unit Developments
SECTION 29-41. Planned Unit Development Zoning District "PD".
[Ord. No. 80-22 Art. IV § 1, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2007-10 § 1,
3-13-2006]
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Section to provide for integrated
developments having harmony of design and variety of function. It is
not intended to permit a greater density or uses different from those set
forth in the regulations of the district in which the development is
located, but this Section is to provide for a greater flexibility in the
design of buildings, yards, courts and circulation than would otherwise
be possible through the strict application of district regulations and to
produce:
1. A maximum choice in the type of environment and living units
available to the public.
2. Open space and recreation areas.
3. A pattern of development that preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography and geologic features and prevents soil erosion.
4. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development.
5. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and thereby lower housing costs.
6. An environment of stable character with harmony with surrounding
development.
7. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other Sections of the Chapter.
B. Design.
1. The Planned Unit Development Section is designed to provide for
small and large scale development incorporating a single type or
variety or residential and related uses which are planned and
developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual
lots or it may have common building sites. Common land must be
an essential and major element of the plan which is related to and
effects the long-term value of the homes and other development. A
planned unit shall be a separate entity with a distinct character in
harmony with surrounding development.
2. The sale, subdivision or other partition of the site after zoning
approval does not exempt the project or portions thereof from
complying with the development standards and other conditions
that were committed to at the time of the rezoning. The Planned
Development District must always be used in conjunction with one
SECTION 29-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-41
1:669
SECTION 29-42. Planned Unit Development Authorized "PD". [Ord.
No. 80-22 Art. IV § 2, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2007-10 § 1, 3-13-2007]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall use the requirements and
standards found in the corresponding zoning district regulations and
Chapter 24 (Subdivisions) as a guide in making a determination to authorize
a Planned Unit Development "PD District" and may permit variances from
the corresponding requirements and standards to facilitate efficient land
development and utilization. A planned unit development may be
authorized, provided that all of the following provisions are complied with:
(1) of the other zoning districts, known as the "underlying district".
The requirements of the "P-D" District shall be in addition to the
requirements of the underlying district, except that the "P-D"
District may modify some of the regulations of the underlying
district in specific situations. A "P-D" District may be used in
conjunction with any of the other zoning districts or with any
combination of districts.
1. Location. A planned unit development shall be permitted in any district
except an "A" (Agricultural District).
2. Design characteristics. The proposed planned unit development shall
be designed to provide for the unified development of the area and in
accordance with the spirit and purposes of the district in which the unit
is located. The design may provide for modification of yard, setback and
height requirements, but the use, density, intensity of use and coverage
requirements for the district and the minimum dimensions established
for the design of courts shall not be reduced. Where the proposed
planned unit development is in a district permitting residential uses,
the design may provide for one (1) or more dwelling types.
3. Site development plan. For all uses, a site plan prepared by a licensed
architect, engineer, landscape architect or certified land planner must
be submitted with any application for a Planned Unit Development "PD"
permit. The scale of the site plan is optional but shall not be more than
one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. This application shall be
considered the same as a rezoning request and the same procedures
shall be followed concerning application, Planning Commission review
and public hearings. Upon approval by the City Council, the site
development plan shall become a part of the Zoning Districts Map. The
application must include ten (10) copies of a conceptual plan, which
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. A composite site development plan showing the major details of the
proposed development consisting of the following: conceptual
drainage plans; approximate location of buildings; structures and
off-street parking areas; off-street loading areas; means of ingress
and egress; conceptual landscaping or screening proposals;
location and the conceptual design of signs; open spaces and
pedestrian areas.
SECTION 29-41 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-42
1:670
b. How the site plan and architecture relates to adjacent sites and
structures. Buildings proposed to be developed or redeveloped in
the "Original Town" or other established areas of the community
will be expected to incorporate building materials and architectural
designs consistent with the surrounding area.
c. Architectural styles and buildings must compliment the area's
patterns and preserve its district character. Building quality should
meet or exceed that of the surrounding area. Within any area that
is designated now or in the future as a historic district or a
historical landmark, such plan shall adhere to the requirements of
Section 29-77.3. of the Lexington, Missouri City Code, Chapter 29
(Zoning).
d. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication if any.
e. An attached statement from the developer's engineer that the
proposed development is to be served by sanitary sewer facilities.
f. An attached statement from the developer's engineer that the
proposed development is to be served by an adequate water supply
and with an adequate water distribution system.
g. The plan may provide for staged development of the project and
shall so indicate on the plan.
4. Minimum site size. The minimum size of the site upon which a planned
unit development shall be located shall be not less than three (3) acres
from commercial developments, not less than ten (10) acres for
residential development and not less than forty (40) acres for industrial,
education, medical and other types of institutional development.
5. Off-street parking. The off-street parking requirements set forth in
Article V may be complied with by providing one (1) or more
permanent, common, off-street parking facilities for all uses within the
development, provided that the facility contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use and that the spaces provided for permanent
residents shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces
provided for employees, customers and service. The total spaces
provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements
and the spaces required for each use and shall be under the permanent
control of the owners of the use for which spaces are required.
6. Plan changes. Any substantial deviation from the plans submitted at the
time of rezoning shall constitute a violation of the rezoning and
substantial change in plans shall be resubmitted for review following
the same procedure required in the original adoption of the plan. The
Zoning Administrator shall interpret what constitutes a "substantial"
deviation or change in the plan.
SECTION 29-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-42
1:671
SECTION 29-43. through SECTION 29-45. (Reserved)
7. Time limit. The construction of the planned unit development shall be
started within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of
approval of the plan by the City Council. Failure to begin the
development within said one hundred eighty (180) days shall
automatically void the development plan and the land shall revert to the
same zoning classification which existed immediately preceding the
approval of the planned unit development.
8. The sale, subdivision or other partition of the site after zoning approval
does not exempt the project or portions thereof from complying with
the development standards and other conditions that were committed
to at the time of the rezoning. The Planned Development District must
always be used in conjunction with one (1) of the other zoning districts,
known as the "underlying district". The requirements of the "PD"
District shall be in addition to the requirements of the underlying
district, except that the "PD" District may modify some of the
regulations of the underlying district in specific situations. A "PD"
District may be used in conjunction with any of the other zoning
districts or with any combination of districts.
9. Homes association. A homes association shall be created if other
satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving,
operating and maintaining common facilities including streets, drives,
service and parking areas and recreational areas.
SECTION 29-42 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-43
1:672
ARTICLE V
Off-Street Automobile and Vehicle Parking, Loading and Driveways
SECTION 29-46. General Intent and Application. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art. V § 1, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
SECTION 29-47. Required Open Space. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. V § 2,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
SECTION 29-48. Location. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. V § 3, 12-2-1980;
Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
The off-street parking lot shall be located within two hundred (200) feet,
exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 29-49. Joint Parking Facilities. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. V § 4,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking
requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common
parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains
the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces
provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements.
Spaces provided for permanent residents of dwellings shall be clearly
A. It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading
facilities be provided off the street for each use of land within the City.
Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each
use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts.
B. These requirements are applicable to all new subdivisions,
developments and existing properties when new driveways or parking
spaces are installed or existing driveways or parking spaces are
reconstructed.
C. A building permit is required for new or reconstructed driveways and
parking spaces.
A. Off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required open
space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner.
B. The area required for off-street parking shall be in addition to the yard
areas herein required, except that the front yard required in a "C-1"
Neighborhood Commercial District may be used for uncovered parking
area for six (6) or fewer vehicles associated with a residential use when
the area is surfaced and maintained in accordance with Section 29-54
and may be used for uncovered parking area for more than six (6)
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of Section 29-53 below.
SECTION 29-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-49
1:673
designated and separated from spaces provided for employees, customers
and service.
SECTION 29-50. Ownership or Control of Lot. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art.
V § 5, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
The land upon which the off-street parking lot is located shall be owned or
controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the
principal use is located.
SECTION 29-51. Size of Off-Street Parking Space. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art V § 6, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1, 6-23-2009]
The size of a parking space for one (1) vehicle shall consist of a rectangular
area having dimensions of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet plus
adequate area of ingress and egress.
SECTION 29-52. Amount of Off-Street Parking and Loading
Required. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art V § 7, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2009-23
§ I, 6-23-2009]
A. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts
except "C-3" in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Dwelling. Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Parking
spaces may be integral with garage driveway and are exclusive of
garage interior space.
2. Boarding or rooming house or hotel. One (1) parking space for each
two (2) guests provided overnight accommodations.
3. Hospitals. One (1) space for each four (4) patient beds, exclusive of
bassinets, plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
one (1) space for each three (3) employees including nurses, plus
adequate area for the parking of emergency vehicles.
4. Medical or dental clinics or offices. Seven (7) spaces per doctor
plus two (2) spaces for each three (3) employees.
5. Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing homes. One (1) space for
each six (6) patient beds plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting
doctor plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees including
nurses.
6. Community center, theater, auditorium. One (1) parking space for
each five (5) seats, based on a maximum seating capacity.
7. Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement
or recreation. One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet
of floor area used for assembly or recreation in the building.
SECTION 29-49 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-52
1:674
8. Office building. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross space in the building, exclusive of basement
storage areas.
9. Commercial establishment not otherwise classified. One (1)
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross
space in the building exclusive of basement and storage areas
except in "C-3".
10. Industrial establishments. Adequate area to park all employees'
and customers' vehicles at all times and adequate space for
loading, unloading and storing all vehicles used incidental to or as a
part of the primary operation of the establishment, but not less
than one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees nor less than
one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area.
11. Church sanctuary. One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats,
based on maximum seating capacity; provided however, that
churches may establish joint parking facilities not to exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the required spaces with public institutions and
agencies that do not have a time conflict in parking demand. The
joint parking facility shall be located not to exceed four hundred
(400) feet from the church sanctuary.
B. For all uses not covered in Subdivisions (1 — 11) above, the Planning
Commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be
created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus
determined shall be the off-street parking requirements for the
permitted use.
C. Off-street loading berths for non-residential uses shall be provided in
accordance with the following:
Size of
Establishment Berths Required
(Gross Area Sq. Ft.) No. Size Ft.
1,000 — 20,000 1 (10 x 25)
20,000 — 25,000 2 (10 x 25)
25,000 — 40,000 2 (10 x 50)
40,000 — 100,000 3 (10 x 50)
100,000 — 250,000 4 (10 x 50)
For each additional 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one
additional berth shall be added at the size of 10 by 25 feet.
D. Paved driveways are required for ingress and egress to all garages,
parking lots and parking spaces.
SECTION 29-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-52
1:675
SECTION 29-53. Off-Street Parking Lot Construction and
Maintenance. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art V § 8, 12-2-1980; Ord. No.
2009-23 § I, 6-23-2009]
E. Driveways and entry ways used for ingress and egress to parking
spaces and garages shall be confined to and shall not exceed twentyfive
(25) feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
F. Driveways for all one- and two-family dwellings shall be located upon
the same parcel in which the principal use is constructed and shall have
a direct access to a public street or public alley in areas previously
platted for alley entrance.
G. All driveways, entry ways and parking spaces addressed under the
provisions of this Section shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with Section 29-54.
A. Lots in Residential Districts. Whenever off-street parking lots for more
than six (6) vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a residential
district, the following provisions shall apply:
1. All sides of the lot abutting the residential district shall be enclosed
with an opaque, ornamental fence, wall, or dense evergreen hedge
having a height of not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6)
feet. Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good
condition.
2. No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established ten (10) feet back of the property line of interior and
corner lots whenever the parking lot is located in a residential
district or immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In
all other cases no setback shall be required; provided however, that
on any corner lot formed by two (2) intersecting streets, no parking
shall be permitted, and no wall, fence, sign, structure or plant
growth having a height in excess of three (3) feet above the
elevation of the crown of the adjacent roadway surface shall be
maintained in a triangle formed by measuring a distance of thirty
(30) feet along said front and side lot lines, from their point of
intersection, and connecting the points so established to form a
triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
3. All yards shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs and evergreen
ground cover and maintained in good condition all the year round.
4. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, exclusive of curb
returns.
5. The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as
not to interfere with residential district use.
SECTION 29-52 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-53
1:676
SECTION 29-54. Driveway and Parking Space Pavement
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2009-23 § I, 6-23-2009]
All driveways, entry ways, parking spaces and parking lots required under
the provisions of this Article shall be paved and constructed of concrete,
asphalt or other sealed surface pavement material capable of supporting all
vehicles used thereon and in all weather conditions without emitting dust
or mud onto the adjacent street or adjoining property during use. Driveway
or entryway street entrances shall be constructed of concrete per APWA
standards and must extend from the outer edge of the street pavement
through the right-of-way to the abutting property line. Driveways, parking
spaces and parking lots shall be maintained in such a manner that no dust
will result from continued use.
SECTION 29-55. through SECTION 29-60. (Reserved)
6. No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of
the lot. Only non-intermittent lighting of signs shall be permitted.
SECTION 29-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-55
1:677

ARTICLE VI
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses of Land
SECTION 29-61. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures. [Ord.
No. 80-22 Art VI § 1, 12-2-1980]
A. A non-conforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption
of this Ordinance may be continued and maintained except as otherwise
provided in this Section.
B. Alteration or Enlargement of Buildings and Structures. A nonconforming
building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in
any manner unless said building or structure, including additions and
enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district
in which it is located; provided however, that if a building or structure is
conforming as to use, but non-conforming as to yards or height or offstreet
parking space, said building or structure may be enlarged or
added to provided that the enlargement or addition complies with the
yard and height and off-street parking requirements of the district in
which said building or structure is located. No non-conforming building
or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on
the lot unless every portion of said building or structure is made to
conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Restoration of Damaged Building. A non-conforming building or
structure which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind,
earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy, to the
extent that not more than seventy-five percent (75%) of its value,
exclusive of foundations, may be restored and the occupancy of use of
such building, structure or part thereof, which existed at the time of
such partial destruction, may be continued or resumed, provided that
such restoration is started within a period of one (1) year and is
diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event such damage or
destruction exceeds seventy-five percent (75%) of the value, exclusive
of foundation of such non-conforming building or structure, no repairs
or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building or
structure is made to conform to all regulations for new buildings in the
district in which it is located; provided, however, that any building or
structure that is non-conforming due to off-street parking
requirements, and is conforming in every other respect, may be
restored regardless of the extent of damage.
D. Outdoor Advertising Signs and Structures. Any advertising sign,
billboard, commercial advertising structure or statuary, which is
lawfully existing and maintained at the time this Ordinance became
effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof shall not
be structurally altered and all such non-conforming advertising signs,
billboards, commercial advertising structures and statuary, and their
supporting members shall be completely removed from the premises
not later than five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 29-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-61
1:679
SECTION 29-62. Non-Conforming Uses of Land. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art
VI § 2, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2005-31 § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2007-41
§ 1, 11-13-2007]
E. Building Vacancy. A non-conforming building, structure, or portion
thereof, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied
for a continuous period of one (1) year shall not thereafter by occupied
except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
F. Change in use. A non-conforming use of a conforming building or
structure (i.e., commercial use in a dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded
or extended into any other portion of such non-conforming building or
structure nor changed except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming
use of a portion thereof is discontinued or changed to
conforming use, any future use of such building, structure, or portion
thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which such building or structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant
non-conforming building or structure may be occupied by a use for
which the building or structure was designed or intended if occupied
within a period of one (1) year after the effective date of this Ordinance.
The use of a non-conforming building or structure may be changed
to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification; but
where the use of a non-conforming building or structure is changed to
a use of a more restricted district classification it thereafter shall not
be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification.
A. A non-conforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all
permanent buildings or structures is less than one thousand dollars
($1000.00), existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, may be
continued for a period of not more than three (3) years therefrom,
however:
1. Said non-conforming use may not be extended or expanded.
2. If said non-conforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued
for a period of one (1) month, or changed, any future use of such
land, or change in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of
the district in which said land is located.
B. Non-conforming uses of land, where the use consists of a mobile home,
existing at the time of adoption of this Section, not located in a mobile
home park.
1. Said non-conforming use may not be extended or expanded.
2. If said non-conforming use of land has been discontinued,
unoccupied or removed for a period of sixty (60) days, such nonconforming
land use shall not be re-established and must conform
to the regulations of that zoning district. All non-conforming land
SECTION 29-61 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-62
1:680
SECTION 29-63. Variances. [Ord. No. 2008-16 § 1, 5-13-2008]
uses shall be regulated by Chapter 6 "Building and Building
Regulations" and the Sections relating to abatement of nuisances.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission may hear, decide and act upon
applications for a variance to the terms of Chapter 29 under the
following circumstances and conditions:
1. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or
location of a specific piece of property at the time of the original
adoption of this Section or by reasons of exceptional topographical
conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of a specific piece of property, which condition is not
generally prevalent in the area, or the strict application of this
Chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and demonstrable undue hardships
upon the owner of such property to the effect that it is an
unreasonable deprivation of use as distinguished from the mere
grant of a privilege or for the betterment of the City of Lexington,
the Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby empowered to
authorize or deny, after a duly published and held public hearing, a
variance from the terms of this Chapter.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, in making its findings
on any specific case, determine that there will be no substantial
detriment to the public good, upon the supply of light and air to
adjacent property, upon the congestion in the public streets, upon
the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon established
property values within the surrounding area and upon other factors
relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general
welfare of the people of the City of Lexington and will not
substantially impair the purpose, intent and integrity of the zoning
plan. It is further provided that in exercising its power to grant
variances, the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose any
reasonable condition which shall be necessary to protect
surrounding property values and to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare and may also establish such additional
requirements relative to such property as would carry out the spirit
of this Chapter.
B. The applicant shall request an informal meeting with the Planning and
Zoning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting to discuss the
request. The request shall be made to the City Clerk prior to the public
posting of the regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning meeting. If the
Planning and Zoning Commission determines the request has merit,
then the applicant must file an application with the City Clerk
specifying the grounds thereof and by paying a filing fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) at the office of the City Clerk at the time the notice is
filed. No portion of the filing fee shall be refunded and any expenditures
in excess of the one hundred dollars ($100.00) incurred by the City
SECTION 29-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-63
1:681
SECTION 29-64. through SECTION 29-65. (Reserved)
incidental to the processing of the appeal shall be billed to the
applicant. The applicant shall, in addition to the foregoing, pay to the
City Clerk the cost of legal publication.
The City Clerk, in conjunction with the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing, give public
notice thereof (no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing) as
well as due notice to the parties in interest. The applicant may appear
at the hearing in person or be represented by an agent or attorney.
C. At the conclusion of the formal hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission will forward the hearing results and their
recommendations concerning the variance request to the Lexington
City Council for Council approval or disapproval. No building or
construction may commence on the subject property until the Council
has heard and approved the requested variance.
D. Revocation. Any variance granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, not exercised within twelve (12) months from the date of
approval, may be revoked by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SECTION 29-63 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-64
1:682
ARTICLE VII
Board of Adjustment
SECTION 29-66. Board of Adjustment Created. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art.
VII § 1, 12-2-1980]
There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment with the powers and duties
as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 29-67. Membership. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. VII § 2,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2001-63 § 1, 11-13-2001]
The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five (5) members,
freeholders, citizens of the City of Lexington and one (1) member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission each appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council for a term of five (5) years, the original
appointments to the Board to be made in accordance with the State Statutes
for the following terms:
One (1) member appointed for a term of one (1) year.
One (1) member appointed for a term of two (2) years.
One (1) member appointed for a term of three (3) years.
One (1) member appointed for a term of four (4) years.
One (1) member appointed for a term of five (5) years.
All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of five (5) years.
The Board of Adjustment members, once appointed, can thereafter be
removed only for cause, upon written charges, and after a public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term
of any member whose office becomes vacant. The members shall not serve
more than two (2) complete terms consecutively, however, they may be
reappointed after a one (1) year absence.
The Board shall elect a Chairman and an Acting Chairman from its
membership who shall serve for a term of office of one (1) year.
SECTION 29-68. Procedure. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art VII § 3, 12-2-1980]
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance
with the provisions of this Article and the State Statutes governing their
operation. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may
determine after public notice of seven (7) days is given. Such Chairman, or
in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
SECTION 29-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-68
1:683
immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be public
record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon, shall be taken
down by a recorder employed by the Board of Adjustment for that purpose.
SECTION 29-69. Powers. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art VII § 4, 12-2-1980;
Ord. No. 95-27 § 1, 9-26-1995]
A. Powers Relative to Interpretations. To hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there in an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Inspector or any other
administrative official in the interpretation and enforcement of this
Chapter.
B. Powers Relative to Social Exceptions. To hear and decide, upon appeal,
applications for a Special Exception to the terms of this Chapter under
the following circumstances and conditions.
1. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a platted lot in single ownership as shown of record.
2. To interpret the provisions of this Chapter where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as platted or as
shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is a part
of this Chapter as if fully set out herein and on file in the City
Clerk's office.
3. To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth
in Article V when it is determined that the size or shape of the lot to
be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be
complied with and that the proposed use will not create undue
traffic congestion in the adjacent streets.
C. Powers Relative to Variances. Where by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the
time of the original adoption of this Ordinance, or by reasons of
exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or
exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, which
condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict application of
this Chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and demonstrable, undue hardships upon
the owner of such property to the effect that it is an unreasonable
deprivation of use as distinguished from the mere grant of a privilege,
the Board of Adjustment is hereby empowered to authorize upon an
appeal in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Chapter, as
will not be a substantial detriment to the public good, and will not
substantially impair the purpose, intent and integrity of the zone plan,
and substantial justice will be done. The Board of Adjustment may
establish such requirements relative to such property as would carry
out the spirit of this Chapter.
SECTION 29-68 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-69
1:684
SECTION 29-70. Appeals. [Ord. No. 81-7 § 3, 4-7-1981]
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved
or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Lexington affected
by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
The applicant or petitioner shall, in addition to the foregoing, pay to the City
Clerk the cost of legal publication.
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall be taken within thirty (30) days
from the date of the decision by filing with the Building Inspector or Zoning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken and with the City Clerk a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the office of the City Clerk at the time
the notice is filed. No portion of the filing fee shall be refunded and any
expenditures in excess of the one hundred dollars ($100.00) incurred by
the Board of Adjustment incidental to the processing of the appeal shall be
billed to the applicant or petitioner.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Adjustment certified copies of all papers constituting the record
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment
may, in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, reverse or
affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions,
or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken. In considering all the appeals from rulings made under this
Chapter, the Board of Adjustment shall, in making its findings on any
specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon the
supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion in
the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards,
upon established property values within the surrounding area, and
upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
and general welfare of the people of the City of Lexington. It is further
provided, that in exercising its power to grant Special Exceptions and
Variances, the Board of Adjustment may impose any reasonable
condition which shall be necessary to protect surrounding property
values and to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which the Board of Adjustment is
required to pass or to effect any variation of this Chapter.
Every ruling made upon any appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall
be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on the testimony
received at the hearing afforded by the Board of Adjustment and shall
specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal.
SECTION 29-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-70
1:685
of said matter together with a copy of the ruling or orders from which the
appeal is taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by a Court of Record on application or notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
The Board of Adjustment shall not rehear any appeal once decided unless
it is shown by the appellant that all pertinent facts of the case were not
brought before the Board of Adjustment at the public hearing, and that for
some reason he was prevented from presenting such facts; or that the facts
of the case may have materially changed since the public hearing.
SECTION 29-71. Appeal to Circuit Court. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. VII
§ 6, 12-2-1980]
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City
of Lexington, may present to the Circuit Court of the County in which the
property affected is located, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after
the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of Adjustment. Upon
the presentation of such petition the court may allow a writ of certiorari
directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision of the Board
of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return
thereto must be made and served upon the realtors attorney, but shall not
be less than ten (10) days and may not stay proceedings upon the decision
appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the Board and
on due course shown, grant a restraining order. The Board of Adjustment
shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it
shall be sufficient to return the certified or sworn copies thereof or of such
portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely
set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the
grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. If, upon the
hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the
proper disposition of the matter, it may take additional evidence or appoint
a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the
court with his finding of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute
a part of the proceedings upon which a determination of the court shall be
made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
SECTION 29-70 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-71
1:686
decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board
unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in
bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
SECTION 29-72. through SECTION 29-75. (Reserved)
SECTION 29-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-72
1:687

ARTICLE VIII
Historical Preservation Commission114
SECTION 29-76. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-28 § 1, 12-12-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 1,
5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to promote the educational,
cultural, economic and general welfare of the community by:
1. Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive
historic, archaeological and architectural characteristics of
Lexington which represent elements of the City's cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history;
2. Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of
the past as represented in Lexington's landmarks and historic
districts;
3. Conserving and improving the value of property designated as
landmarks or within historic districts;
4. Providing for economic benefits to encourage business and
residential owners to locate and invest in historically significant
properties;
5. Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the City to home
buyers, tourists, visitors and shoppers, and thereby supporting and
promoting business, commerce and industry, and providing
economic benefit to the City;
6. Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation of the historic structures, areas and neighborhoods,
and thereby preventing future urban blight;
7. Promoting the use of historic districts and landmarks for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City;
8. Promoting the identification, evaluation, protection and
interpretation of the prehistoric and historic archaeological
resources within the incorporated limits of the City.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this
Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they
have in common usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable
application.
114. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2000-05 § 1, adopted April 11, 2000, amended article VIII
§§ 29-76 — 29-79 by enacting the new provisions set out herein. Former §§ 29-76 — 29-79
derived from ord. no. 80-22 art. VIII §§ 1 — 4, 12-2-1980; ord. no. 92-29 §§ 2, 4, 2-9-1993;
ord. no. 94-38 § I, 2-28-1995; ord. no. 95-03 §§ XIII — XIV, 4-11-1995; ord. no. 97-10 § I,
5-13-1997.
SECTION 29-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76
1:689
ALTERATION — Any act or process that changes one (1) or more
historic, architectural or physical features of an area, site, landscape,
place and/or structure including, but not limited to, the erection,
construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure; the expansion
or significant modification of agricultural activities; and clearing,
grading or other modification of an area, site or landscape that changes
its current condition.
AREA — A specific geographic division of the City of Lexington.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to Article
VII.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Historical Preservation Commission (HPC) indicating its approval of
plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark
or of a structure within a historic district.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding as addition to an existing
structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory on a lot or
property.
CULTURAL RESOURCES — Districts, sites, structures, objects and
evidence of some importance to a culture, a subculture or a community
for scientific, engineering, art tradition, religious or other reasons
significant in providing resource and environmental data necessary for
the study and interpretation of past lifeways and for interpreting human
behavior.
DEMOLITION — Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole
a landmark or a structure within a historic district, or which threatens
to destroy a landmark or a structure within a historic district, or which
destroys or threatens to destroy a potentially significant property or
structure by failure to maintain it in a condition of good repair and
maintenance.
DESIGN GUIDELINE — A standard of appropriate activity that will
preserve the historic, architectural, scenic or aesthetic character of a
landmark or historic district.
DETERMINATION OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — A determination
made by the City Council upon recommendation by the HPC authorizing
an alteration, construction, removal or demolition even though a permit
therefore has previously been denied by the City Council.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural
character and general composition of the exterior of a structure
including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building
materials, paint color and the type, design and character of all
windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated as a "historic district" by
ordinance of the City Council which may include individual landmarks,
as well as other properties or structures which, while not of such
historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as
SECTION 29-76 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-76
1:690
landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics
and historical significance of the historic district.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — Character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or culture of the community, County, State or
country; as the location of an important local, County, State or national
event; or through identification with a person or persons who made an
important contribution to the development of the community, County,
State or country.
HPC — Members of the Historical Preservation Commission.
LANDMARK — A property or structure designated as a "landmark"
by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed
herein, which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, interpretation
and preservation because of its historic, architectural or archaeological
significance to the City of Lexington.
MINIMUM MAINTENANCE — The minimum regulations governing the
conditions and maintenance of all existing structures as set out in the
Uniform Building Codes, current edition, and adopted by reference,
with certain amendments thereto by the City Council of the City of
Lexington, Missouri, as such Existing Structures Code shall be
amended from time to time by the City of Lexington.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Any work for which a building permit
is not required by municipal ordinance, where the purpose and effect
of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of, or damage
to, a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly
as may be practical, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, decay or damage and does not involve change of
materials nor of form.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person, corporation or other legal entity
listed as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
PERMITS RELATING TO A HISTORIC DISTRICT OR LANDMARK —
A permit issued by the Building Inspector in response to a certificate
of appropriateness issued by the Historical Preservation Commission
(HPC) or a decision by the City Council indicating approval of plans for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of any
structure located within a historic district.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECT — An action by the City of
Lexington or any of its departments or agents involving major
modification or replacement of streets, sidewalks, curbs, street lights,
street or sidewalk furniture, landscaping, parking, or other portions of
the public infrastructure servicing commercial, residential, recreational
or industrial development; or any undertakings effecting City parks or
City-owned structures.
REMOVAL — Any relocation of a structure, object or artifact on its site
or to another site.
SECTION 29-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76
1:691
SECTION 29-76.1. Historic Preservation Commission. [Ord. No.
2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2001-65 § 1, 11-13-2001; Ord. No.
2004-17 § 3, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No.
2012-11 § 1, 3-27-2012]
REPAIR — Any change that is not construction, alteration, demolition or
removal and is necessary or useful for continuing normal maintenance
and upkeep.
SITE — The traditional, documented or legendary location of an event,
occurrence, action or structural significance in the life or lives of
person, persons, groups or tribe, or any place with evidence of past
human activity. Sites include, but are not limited to, cemeteries, burial
grounds, occupation and work area, evidence of farming or hunting
and gathering, battlefields, settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river
crossings, routes and trails, caves, quarries, mines or significant trees
or other plant life.
STOP WORK ORDER — An order directing an owner, occupant,
contractor or subcontractor to halt an action for which a certificate
of appropriateness is required and notifying the owner, occupant,
contractor or subcontractor of the application process for a certificate
of appropriateness.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground
including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, building,
fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis
courts, radio and television antennae and towers, and swimming pools.
SURVEY — The systematic gathering of information on the
architectural, historic, scenic and archaeological significance of
buildings, sites, structures, areas or landscapes through visual
assessment in the field and historical research for the purpose of
identifying landmarks or districts worthy of preservation.
A. Composition Of Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission (HPC) shall consist of seven (7) members, five
(5) of whom shall be citizens of Lexington. Up to two (2) members of the
Commission may be non-residents owning or operating businesses in
Lexington and/or living in adjacent areas of Lafayette County. In
addition, a member of the City Council and of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be appointed to serve as liaison. The Mayor shall
make every reasonable effort to appoint persons with a demonstrated
interest in the history and preservation of the City of Lexington. To the
extent available in the community the HPC shall include professional
members representing such disciplines as architecture, law, real estate
brokerage, banking, history or other fields related to historic
preservation and residents of historic districts or potential historic
districts.
SECTION 29-76 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-76.1
1:692
B. Terms. The terms of office of the members of the HPC shall serve a term
of three (3) years until their successors are appointed. Vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired term only. Action to fill vacancies shall be
initiated within sixty (60) days. The HPC shall hold at least six (6)
meetings per year and any member of the HPC who fails to attend at
least fifty percent (50%) of all meetings, regular and special, in any
calendar year shall automatically vacate the membership. The terms
shall be staggered so that no more than three (3) members are
appointed in any one (1) year. The members shall not serve more than
two (2) complete terms consecutively, however they may be
reappointed after a one (1) year absence. An unexpired term of more
than eighteen (18) months to which a member is appointed shall be
considered a complete term.
C. Officers. Officers shall consist of a Chairman and a Vice Chairman
elected by the HPC who shall each serve a term of one (1) year and shall
be eligible for re-election. No officer shall serve more than two (2)
consecutive terms in any office. The Chairman shall preside over
meetings. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall
perform the duties of the Chairman. If both are absent, a temporary
Chairman shall be elected by those present. The Secretary of the HPC
shall be elected by the HPC and shall have the following duties:
1. Take minutes of each meeting;
2. Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports and decisions to the members of the HPC and the
City Clerk;
3. Give notice as provided herein by law for all public hearings
conducted by the HPC;
4. Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the HPC and expiring terms of
members; and
5. Prepare to submit to the Council a complete record of the
proceedings before the HPC on any matter requiring Council
consideration.
D. Meetings. A quorum shall consist of four (4) of the members. All
decisions or actions of the HPC shall be made by a majority vote of
those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum
exists. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be
established by HPC or at any time upon the call of the Chairman. No
member of the HPC shall vote on any matter that may materially or
apparently affect the property, income or business interest of that
member. No action shall be taken by the HPC that could in any manner
deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use, modification,
maintenance, disposition or demolition until such owner shall first have
had the opportunity to be heard at public meeting of the HPC as
provided herein. All meetings of the HPC shall be open to the public
except as allowed by State law. The HPC shall keep minutes of its
SECTION 29-76.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76.1
1:693
proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be public
record. All HPC rules of procedure shall be available to the public at
City Hall.
E. Funding. The City Council may annually appropriate funds, within the
budget limitations, for the operation of the HPC. The HPC may, with the
consent of the City Council, apply for, receive or expend any Federal,
State or private grant, grant-in-aid, gift or bequest in furtherance of the
general purpose of this Article.
F. Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for expenses they incur while on Commission
business.
G. Powers And Duties. The HPC shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To conduct ongoing survey and research to identify and document
buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts that are of historic,
archaeological, architectural, engineering, cultural or scenic
significance to the locality, the State or the nation;
2. To recommend to the City Council designation of significant
historic properties as historic landmarks and historic districts, to
prepare documentation supporting such nomination and to
maintain a register of designated landmarks and districts and of
significant historical, architectural and archaeological properties, a
copy of which should be kept at City Hall;
3. To recommend to the City Council the establishment of regulations,
guidelines and policies to preserve the integrity and ambience of
designated landmarks and districts. The Commission shall have the
authority to review ordinary maintenance as deemed appropriate,
new construction, alterations, removals and demolitions proposed
within the boundaries of a landmark or district, including review of
plans for vacant lots and non-historic buildings and structures;
4. To provide information and technical assistance to owners of older
and historic, architectural, archaeological, cultural and scenic
properties concerning the preservation and maintenance of the
property. To collect information of sources, suppliers, construction
contractors/workers, artisan, appropriate color palettes, of
qualified historical restoration providers, which would be kept at
City Hall for interested citizen reference;
5. To recommend to the City Council programs and policies and
economic incentives to encourage the preservation of significant
historic landmarks and districts;
SECTION 29-76.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-76.1
1:694
SECTION 29-76.2. Surveys and Research. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
The HPC shall undertake an ongoing survey and research effort in the City
of Lexington to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures and objects
that have historic, cultural, archaeological, architectural or aesthetic
importance, interest or value. Before the HPC shall on its own initiative
nominate any landmark or district for designation, it shall develop a plan
and schedule for conducting a comprehensive survey of the City of
Lexington to identify significant resources. As part of the survey, the HPC
shall review and evaluate any prior survey and studies by any unit of
government or private organization and compile appropriate descriptions,
facts and photographs. The HPC shall systematically identify potential
landmarks and historic districts and adopt procedures to nominate them to
the City Council for consideration based upon the following criteria:
6. To formulate plans and programs for public and private action for
encouraging and promoting the preservation of historic landmarks;
7. To suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration
activities and acquisitions, including Federal, State, local, private
and foundation sources;
8. To conduct comprehensive studies into the field of historic
preservation in this community, including programs now being
offered, what still needs to be done and cooperative efforts among
various groups which could be effected toward a common goal;
9. To provide for the community an overall view of historic
preservation and provide data for individuals or organizations
interested in historic preservation;
10. To educate the community about its rich historical legacy and to
encourage historical preservation as inspiration for future
generations;
11. To work with the Federal and State Government, City planning and
zoning, the historical society and other boards or organizations to
help coordinate restoration or preservation projects;
12. To establish pertinent information about preservation and color
charts to be kept at City Hall for individuals interested in doing
preservation work on their or other properties;
13. To participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal and other
City activities affecting landmarks and districts; and
14. To acquire by gift or bequest fee title or lesser interest, including
preservation restriction or easements, in designated properties and
adjacent or associated lands which are important for the
preservation and use of the designated properties.
SECTION 29-76.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76.2
1:695
SECTION 29-76.3. Nomination of Landmarks and Historic Districts.
[Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 §§ 4 — 6,
5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
1. The potential landmarks and historic districts in one (1) identifiable
neighborhood or district geographical area of the City of Lexington;
2. The potential landmarks and historic districts associated with a
particular person, event or historical period;
3. The potential landmarks and historic districts of a particular
architectural style or school or of a particular architect, engineer,
builder, designer or craftsman;
4. The potential landmarks and historic districts containing historic and
prehistoric archaeological resources with the potential to contribute to
the understanding of historic and prehistoric cultures;
5. Such other criteria as may be adopted by the HPC to assure systematic
survey and nomination of all potential landmarks and historic districts
within the City of Lexington.
A. General. Nominations shall be made to the HPC on a form prepared by
it and may be submitted by the HPC, owner of record of the nominated
property or structure or the City Council. Nominations shall be turned
in to the City Clerk who will within seven (7) days of receipt mail a
notification of intent to nominate to the owner of record of the
nominated property. Forms and criteria for nomination will be available
at the office of the City Clerk.
B. Criteria For Consideration Of Nomination. The HPC shall, upon such
investigation as it deems necessary, make a determination as to
whether a nominated property, structure, site, area or district meets
one (1) or more of the following criteria:
1. Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage
or cultural characteristics of the Community, County, State or
Country;
2. Its overall setting and harmony as a collection of buildings,
structures, objects where the overall collection forms a unit;
3. Its potential to be returned to an accurate historic appearance
regardless of alterations or insensitive treatment that can be
demonstrated to be reversible;
4. Its location as a site of a significant local, County, State or national
event;
5. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the Community, County, State or
Country;
SECTION 29-76.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-76.3
1:696
6. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction
or use of indigenous materials;
7. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect
or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the
development of the community, County, State or country;
8. Its embodiment of elements or design, detailing, materials or
craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant;
9. Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
10. Its unique location or singular physical characteristic that make it
an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community or City;
11. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian
structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouse, gas station or
other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or
architectural significance;
12. Its suitability for preservation or restoration; and
13. Its potential to yield information important to history and
prehistory.
Any structure, property or area that meets one (1) or more of
the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of location,
design, materials and workmanship to make it worthy of
preservation or restoration.
C. Public Hearing On Landmarks And Historic Districts. Upon receipt of a
completed nomination of a landmark or historic district, the HPC shall
schedule a public hearing to solicit input and comment on the proposed
nomination and guidelines for certification of appropriateness.
D. Report And Recommendation Of HPC.
1. The HPC shall within forty-five (45) days from receipt of a complete
nomination in proper form adopt by resolution a recommendation
that the nominated landmark or historic district does or does not
meet the criteria for designation in Section 29-76.3 of this Article.
The resolution shall be accompanied by a report to the City Council
containing the following information:
a. Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or historic district as it relates to the
criteria for designation;
b. Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the
nominated landmark or historic district.
SECTION 29-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76.3
1:697
2. In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for
designation:
a. The significant exterior architectural features of the nominated
landmark that should be protected;
b. The types of construction, alteration, demolition and removal,
other than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that
should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the
provisions of Section 29-76.3 through Section 29-77 of this
Article;
c. Archaeological significance and recommendations for
interpretation and protection.
3. In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet the
criteria for designation:
a. The types of significant exterior architectural features of the
structure within the nominated historic districts that should be
protected;
b. The types of alterations and demolitions that should be
reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of
Section 29-76.3 through Section 29-77 of this Article;
c. The type and significance of historic and prehistoric
archaeological sites within the nominated historic district;
d. Proposals for design guidelines of HPC review of certificates of
appropriateness within the nominated landmark or historic
district;
e. The relationship of the nominated landmark or historic district
to the ongoing effort of the HPC to identify and nominate all
potential cultural resources that meet the criteria for
designation;
f. Recommendations as to appropriate permitted uses, special
uses, height and area regulations, minimum dwelling size, floor
area, sign regulation, lot size and parking regulations
necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the nominated
landmark or historic district, including recommendations for
buffer zones to protect and preserve visual integrity;
g. A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and/or
the boundaries of the nominated historic district.
The recommendations and report of the HPC shall be sent to
the Planning and Zoning Commission within seven (7) days
following the vote on the resolution and shall be available to
the public in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 29-76.3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-76.3
1:698
E. Notification Of Nomination. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
schedule and hold a hearing on the nomination following receipt of a
report and recommendation from the HPC that a nominated landmark
or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation.
The meeting shall be scheduled, held and conducted in the same
manner as other meetings to consider applications for zoning map
amendments or ordinance amendments. Notice of the date, time, place
and purpose of the meeting and a copy of the completed nomination
form shall be sent by regular mail to the owner(s) of record and to the
nominators.
F. Public Hearing. Oral or written testimony concerning the significance
of the nominated landmarks or historic district shall be taken at the
public hearing from any person concerning the nomination. The HPC
may present expert testimony or present its own evidence regarding
the compliance of the nominated landmark or historic district with the
criteria for consideration of a nomination set forth in Section 29-76.3 of
the ordinance. The owner of any nominated landmark or of any property
within a nominated historic district shall be allowed reasonable
opportunity to present evidence regarding significance and shall be
afforded the right of representation by counsel and reasonable
opportunity to cross-examine expert witnesses. The hearing shall be
closed upon completion of testimony.
G. Determination By Planning And Zoning Commission. Within sixty (60)
days following close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall make a determination upon the evidence whether the
nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the
criteria for designation. Such a determination shall be made upon a
motion and vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be
accompanied by a report stating the findings of the Planning and
Zoning Commission concerning the relationship between the criteria
for designation in Section 29-76.3 of the ordinance and the nominated
landmark or historic district and all other information required by
Section 29-76.3 of this Article.
H. Notification Of Determination. Notice of the determination of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, including a copy of the report, shall
be sent by regular mail by the City Clerk to the owner of record of a
nominated landmark and of all property within a nominated historic
district and to the nominator within seven (7) days following adoption of
the resolution. Within seven (7) days following a determination by the
Planning and Zoning Commission that the nominated landmark or
historical district does or does not meet the criteria for designation, a
copy of the resolution and report shall be sent to the City Council.
I. (Reserved)
J. Action By City Council. The City Council shall, within sixty (60) days
after receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, either reject or agree with the recommendation and by
SECTION 29-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-76.3
1:699
SECTION 29-77. Application for Permits Within a Historic District
or in Regard to Landmarks. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord.
No. 2000-28 § 1, 12-12-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 7, 5-11-2004; Ord.
No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
formal resolution so reject the recommendation or by ordinance accept
such recommendation and declare the property a landmark or historical
district. The City Council shall hold a public hearing before enacting
the resolution or ordinance and provide notice and take testimony in
the same manner as provided in Section 29-76.3 of the ordinance. Any
resolution or ordinance shall be accompanied by a written statement
explaining the reasons for the action of the City Council. The City
Clerk shall provide written notification of the action of the City Council
by regular mail to the nominator, the applicant and the owner(s) of
record of the nominated landmark or of all property within a nominated
historic district. The notice shall include a copy of the designated
ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council and shall be sent
within seven (7) days of the City Council action. A copy of each
designation ordinance shall be sent to the HPC, Planning and Zoning
Commission and Building Inspector.
K. The Designation Ordinance. Upon designation, the landmark or historic
district shall be classified as a "District Historic" and the designating
ordinance shall prescribe the significant exterior architectural features;
the type of construction, alteration, demolition and removal, other than
those requiring a building or demolition permit, that should be
reviewed for appropriateness; the design guidelines for applying the
criteria for review of appropriateness; permitted uses; special uses;
height and area regulations; minimum dwelling size; floor area; lot size;
sign regulations; and parking regulations. The Official Zoning Map of
the City of Lexington shall be amended to show the location of the
"District Historic" as on overlay zone.
L. Interim Control. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector for alteration, construction, demolition or removal of a
nominated landmark or of any property or structure within a nominated
historic district from the date of the meeting of the HPC at which a
nomination form is first presented until the final disposition of the
nomination by the City Council unless such alteration, removal or
demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the City Council as
necessary for public health, welfare or safety. In no event shall the delay
be for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
M. Amendment And Rescission Of Designation. Designation may be
amended or rescinded upon petition to the HPC and compliance with
the same procedure and according to the same criteria set forth herein
for designation.
A. Building Design Standards.
SECTION 29-76.3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-77
1:700
1. Overview. These standards are prepared to provide general
assistance to building, property and business owners of the
Lexington downtown area and the Historic Preservation District(s).
The standards are designed to advise building, property and
business owners on the preservation and rehabilitation of
properties located in the designated area. The intent of these
standards is to assist the long-term preservation of the area's
significance through preservation of historical materials and
features. The focus of rehabilitation includes materials,
construction types, sizes and encompasses the facade of buildings
within the designated district.
"Rehabilitation" is defined as the process of returning a property to
a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible
an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and
features of the property which are significant to its historic,
architectural and cultural values. It is recognized that
rehabilitation may require repairs or alterations to provide efficient
contemporary use; however, these repairs or alterations should
not damage or destroy materials or features that are important in
defining the building's historical character.
2. Introduction to the standards. Primary concerns for building
rehabilitation focus on the building's important or "character
defining" architectural materials and features; yet, make possible
an efficient, contemporary use of the property. Identified below are
key terms related to an approvable restoration/rehabilitation
project:
Identify, retain and preserve. It is important to identify, retain
and preserve the architectural materials and features that are
important in defining the historic character of the property. These
architectural features should include, but are not limited to,
windows, doors ornamental ironwork, transoms, storefront
ornamental brick work.
Protect and maintain. After materials and features are identified,
issues to protect and maintain must be addressed. Protection and
maintenance generally involves the least degree of intervention
and is preparatory to other work.
Repair and replace. Repair of character-defining materials and
features is recommended whenever possible. Guidance for repair
work is available from a variety of resources. Replacement of an
entire feature with new material may be required due to a high
degree of deterioration or damage. When replacement is
appropriate, the entire feature should be replaced "in kind", as
near to the original feature as possible, with a solution that is
compatible to the property.
SECTION 29-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-77
1:701
B. Permits for any of the following activity within a historic district or in
relation to a landmark shall be granted by the Building Inspector
subject to review and approval as defined in Section 29-77.1 below:
1. Any construction, alteration or removal requiring a building permit
from the City of Lexington;
2. Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a demolition permit
from the City of Lexington;
3. Any construction, alteration, demolition or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature or appearance with paint
colors to be selected from a paint manufacturer's historic palette as
specified in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic
district; There will no building permit charges for painting.
4. Any construction, alteration or removal involving earth distribution
activities that might affect archaeological resources;
5. Any action to correct a violation of a minimum maintenance
standard.
It shall be the function of the HPC to initially consider and issue
a certificate of appropriateness for a permit to be granted. The
Building Inspector shall forward any application for such a permit
within a historic district or in relationship to a landmark to the
HPC within seven (7) days following receipt of the application. The
application shall include accompanying plans and specifications
affecting the exterior architectural appearance of a designated
landmark or of a property within a designated historic district.
Applications to demolish a building shall include plans and
specifications for the contemplated use of the property.
Any applicant may request a meeting with the HPC before the
application is reviewed by the HPC or during the review of the
application. Application for review of construction, alteration,
demolition or removal not requiring a building permit shall be
made on a form prepared by the HPC and available at the office
of the City Clerk. Such matters will be considered at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the HPC after the application is
submitted.
C. Violations Within A Historic District. Whenever the HPC has reason to
believe that an action within a historic district or on a designated
landmark has been initiated or is about to be initiated or that a violation
of a permit has occurred, it shall notify the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector shall make every reasonable effort to contact the
owners, occupants, contractor or subcontractor and inform them of
proper procedure and, if applicable, provide them a copy of an
application for a proper permit. If compliance is not immediately
obtained, the Building Inspector shall take whatever action he deems
appropriate including a stop work order.
SECTION 29-77 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-77.1
1:702
SECTION 29-77.1. Determination by the Historic Preservation
Commission. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2008-05
§ 1, 2-12-2008]
SECTION 29-77.2. Review of Public Improvements and Land
Acquisition Projects. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No.
2004-17 § 8, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
Public improvements and land acquisition projects by the City of Lexington
or any of its departments or agencies shall be reviewed by the HPC in the
following manner:
A. The HPC shall review each application for a building or demolition
permit within a historic district or in relation to a landmark and issue or
deny a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the application. Written notice of the approval or denial of the
certificate of appropriateness shall be provided to the applicant and the
Building Inspector or, where a "permitted on review use" or "rezoning"
change is required, to the Planning and Zoning Commission within
seven (7) days following the determination. In the case of approval, the
Building Inspector shall issue to the applicant an appropriate permit
which shall be accompanied by the certificate.
B. A building permit based on a certificate of appropriateness shall
become void unless construction is commenced with six (6) months of
date of issuance. Such permits shall be issued for a period of twelve
(12) months and are renewable. If the project is not completed
according to the guidelines provided in the certificate of
appropriateness, the project shall be deemed in violation of this Article.
C. Denial Of A Certificate Of Appropriateness. If HPC denies the
application and does not issue the certificate of appropriateness, a
written statement of the reason for the denial shall be forwarded to the
Building Inspector and the City Clerk within forty-eight (48) hours, to
be included in the agenda for review at the next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting. The HPC shall make recommendations to the
applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed application that
would allow the HPC to issue a certificate of appropriateness and shall
confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible
the differences between the applicant and the HPC. If they so choose,
the applicant may resubmit an amended application that takes into
consideration the recommendations of the HPC. If no such resolution is
achieved, the applicant and HPC may choose to appear at the City
Council meeting to state their opinions and/or opposition concerning
the application. The City Council then will make the final decision
whether to issue a permit.
1. The HPC shall review and comment upon any public improvement
project proposed by the City of Lexington or any of its agencies or
departments that lie within any historic district, on the site of or within
two hundred (200) feet of any landmarks or within two hundred (200)
SECTION 29-77.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-77.2
1:703
SECTION 29-77.3. Standard for Review. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 9, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1,
2-12-2008]
In considering its recommendation for any permits required in a historic
district or in regard to a landmark, the HPC shall be guided in principle
by the Secretary of the Interior's standards and any design guideline in the
ordinance designating the landmark or historic district as follows:
feet of any boundary of a historic district. The City Engineer shall send
a completed preliminary design for a public improvement project to
the HPC simultaneously with its submission to the City Council for
approval. The HPC shall have at least thirty (30) days to complete
its review and report to the City Council, except when the Planning
and Zoning Commission, if necessary to accelerate the design review
process, may specify a time less than thirty (30) days within which the
HPC shall complete its review and report to the Council.
2. The HPC shall review and comment upon any proposed acquisition of a
landmark or of land or buildings within a historic district by the City of
Lexington or any of its agencies or departments. The City Council or the
City Engineer shall, at the earliest possible date that will not interfere
with acquisition negotiations, send the HPC information concerning the
location, size, current use and proposed use of the land or building to be
acquired and specify the date by which the HPC shall report to the City
Council.
3. The HPC shall review the public improvement of land acquisition
projects to determine its effect upon the historic, archaeological or
architectural character of the landmark or historic district and report to
the City Council within any time specified by the City Council or the
Planning and Zoning Commission but not to exceed forty-five (45) days.
The report by the HPC shall include any recommendations for changes
to the preliminary design or land acquisition that will lessen or alleviate
any adverse effect of the proposed project upon the historic,
archaeological or architectural character of the landmark or historical
district.
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new
use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved.
The removal of historic materials or alterations of features and spaces
that characterize a property shall be avoided if possible; if the historic
material is too deteriorated, then it should be replaced with materials
or features as close to the original as possible. It is recognized that
rehabilitation may require repairs or alterations to provide efficient
contemporary use; however, these repairs or alterations should not
damage or destroy materials or features that are important in defining
the building's historical character.
SECTION 29-77.2 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-77.3
1:704
SECTION 29-77.4. Public Safety Exclusion. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 3, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1,
2-12-2008]
None of the provisions of this Article shall be construed to prevent any
measures of construction, alteration or demolition necessary to correct or
abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place
and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from
other buildings, should not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time; those changes could have acquired
historic significance in their own right and should be retained and
preserved if they are significant to the property and its (the building or
the City's) history.
5. Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples
of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property should be
preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced if
at all possible. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old
in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible,
materials. When replacement is appropriate, the entire feature should
be replaced "in-kind", as near to the original feature as possible, with a
solution that is compatible to the property. Replacement of missing
features can be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial
evidence or by traditional design elements of the buildings
architectural style.
7. Chemical or physical treatment, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
8. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall
not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural
features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its
environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential
form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be
unimpaired.
SECTION 29-77.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-77.4
1:705
part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous
by the Building Inspector and where the proposed measures have been
declared necessary, by such department or departments, to correct the
said condition; provided however, that only such work as is reasonably
necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed
pursuant to this Section. In the event any structure or other feature shall
be damaged by fire or other calamity or by act of God or by the public
enemy to such an extent that in the opinion of the aforesaid department
or departments it cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be
removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws.
SECTION 29-77.5. Fees and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 13, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2007-33 § 3,
9-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
The City Council shall establish appropriate fees for the HPC review of
permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake or cause an alteration,
construction, demolition or removal of any nominated or designated
landmark or structure within a nominated or designated historical district
without approval of the City.
It shall be unlawful to not maintain designated landmarks or structures
within designated historic districts within the minimum maintenance
requirements of Section 29-78.2 of the ordinance.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Article shall be
punished by a fine no greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
confinement for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or both such fine
and confinement. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation.
SECTION 29-78. Design Guidelines. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-28 § 1, 12-12-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 10,
5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
The HPC shall at a minimum consider the following architectural design
guidelines in making their recommendations as to the issuance of permits
within a historic district or in relationship to a landmark:
1. Height. The height of any proposed alteration of construction should be
compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with
surrounding structures in a historic district.
2. Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationship
between doors and windows should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and with surrounding
structures within a historic district.
SECTION 29-77.4 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-78
1:706
SECTION 29-78.1. Determination of Economic Hardship. [Ord. No.
2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2004-17 § 11, 5-11-2004; Ord. No.
2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008]
If the City Council denies the issuance of any permit within a historic
district or in regard to a designated landmark, the applicant may request
reconsideration on the basis of economic hardship. An application for
3. Relationship of building masses and space. The setback and
relationship of a structure within a historic district to the open space
between it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
4. Roof shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and with surrounding
structures in a historic district.
5. Landscaping. Immediate landscaping of the building itself should be
compatible with the architectural character and appearance of the
landmark and of surrounding structures and landscapes in historic
districts.
6. Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction or partial
demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a historic district.
7. Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend with
other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or
vertical expression of surrounding structures. The directional
expression of a landmark after alteration, construction or partial
demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style and
character.
8. Architectural detail. Architectural details including materials, paint
color and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character and to
preserve and enhance the architectural style or character of a landmark
or historic district.
9. Signage. The character of outside signs should be in keeping with the
historic architectural character of a landmark or historic district.
Character of a sign includes the number, size, scale, location, type (e.g.,
off-site advertising signs and on-site business signs), letter size or style
and intensity and type of illumination.
10. Minimum maintenance. Significant exterior architectural features
should be kept in a condition of good repair and maintenance. All
structural and mechanical systems should be maintained in a condition
and state of repair that will prevent decay, deterioration or damage to
significant architectural features or otherwise adversely affect the
historic or architectural character of structures within a historic
district.
SECTION 29-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-78.1
1:707
determination of economic hardship shall first be made to and on a form
prepared by the HPC. The HPC shall schedule a public hearing concerning
the application and provide public notice and individual notice to the
applicant, owners of record and owners adjacent to the property in the same
manner as in Section 29-76.3 and any person may testify in the hearing
concerning economic hardship. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings
at such public hearings shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the
City for that purpose or if electronic tape recording equipment is available
by such electronic means.
The HPC may solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant for a
determination of economic hardship make submissions concerning any or
all of the following before it makes a determination on the application:
SECTION 29-78.2. Maintenance of Historic Properties. [Ord. No.
2000-05 § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2008-05 § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No.
2008-10 § 1, 3-25-2008]
1. An estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal as well as an estimate of any additional costs that
would be incurred to comply with any recommendations of the HPC for
charges necessary for their recommendation for the issuance of the
permit;
2. A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the
property and their suitability for rehabilitation;
3. An estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after
completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or
removal; after any changes recommended by the HPC; and in the case
of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for
continued use;
4. In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate
professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility
of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure.
Upon completion of the hearing the HPC shall make its
recommendation to the City Council as to whether a permit should be
issued because of economic hardship. The City Council shall at their
next meeting make its determination.
A. Ordinary Maintenance Exclusion. Nothing in the Section shall be
constructed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any
exterior elements of any building or structure described in Section
29-76.3.
B. Definition Of Ordinary Maintenance. Any work, for which a building
permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such
work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a
SECTION 29-78.1 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-78.2
1:708
SECTION 29-78.3. Review of Application for Zoning Amendments,
Special use Permits and Variances. [Ord. No. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000]
Applications for zoning amendments, special use permits or variances for
a landmark or structures within a historic district shall be referred to
structure or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as
may be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, decay or damage.
C. Minimum Maintenance Requirement. All buildings and structures
designated by City ordinance as "H" shall be preserved against decay
and deterioration and free from certain structural defects in the
following manner. The owner thereof or such other person or persons
who may have the legal custody and control thereof shall repair such
building if it is found to have any of the following defects:
1. The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
2. The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
3. The deterioration of external chimneys;
4. The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortar;
5. The deterioration or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls,
roofs and foundations, including broken windows or doors;
6. The peeling of paint, rotting, holes and other forms of decay;
7. The lack of maintenance of surrounding environment, e.g., fences,
gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory structures and
landscaping;
8. The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.
If minimum maintenance is not being maintained, the owner of
the property or other person having legal custody thereof shall be
notified by the Building Inspector. The notice shall be by certified
mail and/or hand delivered by the Lexington Police Department
and shall specify each item in the property or landmark that fails
to meet minimum maintenance requirements. The owner or other
persons having legal custody of the property shall have thirty
(30) days from the receipt of notice to comply with the minimum
maintenance requirements. The HPC, for good cause shown, may
extend the thirty (30) day period or any extension granted by the
Building Inspector. If the owner or person having legal custody
of the property should fail to meet the minimum maintenance
requirements, the owner or persons having legal custody of the
property shall be in violation of this Section and punished in
accordance with Section 29-77.5.
SECTION 29-78.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-78.3
1:709
the HPC by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The HPC may review
these applications using any format which it deems appropriate, provided
however, that the applicant shall be notified of the time and place of such
review and shall be given the opportunity to appear and be heard. Within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of said application, the HPC shall forward its
comments for presentation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their
consideration in reviewing the application.
SECTION 29-79. (Reserved)115
SECTION 29-79.1. through SECTION 29-79.2. (Reserved)116
115. Editor's Note — Ord. no. 2004-17 § 12, adopted May 11, 2004, repealed section 29-79
"appeals" in its entirety. Former section 29-79 derived from ord. no. 2000-05 § 1,
4-11-2000. At the editor's discretion, this section has been reserved for the city's future
use.
116. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 2007-33 § 3, adopted September 5, 2007, renumbered sections
29-79.1-29-79.2 as 29-77.4 — 29-77.5.
SECTION 29-78.3 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-79.1
1:710
ARTICLE IX
Administration
SECTION 29-80. Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 29-81. (Reserved)117
A. There is hereby established the office of Zoning Administration.
B. The Mayor with the approval of the City Council shall appoint a person
who in their opinion is qualified through education and experience to
hold the title of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may
hold another office or position concurrently.
C. The budget for the office of Zoning Administration and the salary for the
Zoning Administrator shall be established by the City Council in the
same manner as for all other departments and staff salaries.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the issuance of all
permits required by these zoning regulations unless otherwise
specified.
E. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter and to refuse to issue any permit for any
building or structure or for the use of any premises which would violate
any provisions hereof, and to cause any building, structure, place or
premises to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the
remedying of any conditions found to exist therein or thereat in
violation of any provision of this Chapter. Said Zoning Administrator is
hereby authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, and to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
F. The Zoning Administrator shall act as an agent of the Planning
Commission in the receipt of all requests, application or
communications and shall provide review reports to said Planning
Commission as requested. The Zoning Administrator shall also act in
behalf of the Planning Commission in the presentation of Planning
Commission recommendations to the governing body, wherever such
action is necessary and for such purpose shall be considered as staff for
the Planning Commission.
117. Editor's note — Ord. no. 96-27 § 1, adopted November 26, 1996, repealed § 29-81 for
permit fees, see ch. 6, art. III. Former § 29-81 derived from ord. no. 80-22, art. IX § 1,
12-2-1980 and ord. no. 81-7 § 5, 4-7-1981.
SECTION 29-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-82
1:711
SECTION 29-82. Procedure for Authorizing Uses Permitted on
Review. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. IX § 2, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 81-7 § 6,
4-7-1981; Ord. No. 2005-29 § 2, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2008-32 § 1,
11-25-2008]
The Lexington City Council may, by a "permitted on review" use permit,
subject to such protective restrictions as it deems necessary, authorize any
one or more of the uses listed in Section 29-21 in each respective district
as "permitted on review" use in that district. The following procedure
is established to integrate properly the uses permitted on review with
the other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed
and authorized or rejected under the following procedure. A "permitted
on review" use permit will not be granted until the Planning and Zoning
Commission has held a public hearing and submitted its recommendations
to the City Council.
1. Introduction.
a. "Permitted on review" uses (except in the HC District) are those
types of uses which, due to their nature, are dissimilar to the
normal uses permitted within a given zoning district. Within the
various zoning districts, specific uses may be permitted only after
additional requirements are complied with as established within
this Section.
b. "Permitted on review" use permits are required for all property
uses (excepting agriculture) in the Highway Commercial (HC)
District. These permits are required to allow the City to plan and
control growth and use in an orderly fashion in this district.
2. Application for "permitted on review" permit. A written application
shall be filed with the City Clerk to obtain a "permitted on review" use
permit for the uses hereinafter set forth in this Section or for users
previously issued a "permitted on review" use permit where alteration
or an extension is requested. Said application shall show the location
and intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners and
existing land uses within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet (excluding
widths of streets, roads and alleys), and any other material pertinent to
the request which the City Planning and Zoning Commission may
require.
Upon receipt of an application, together with a site plan and necessary
descriptive material of the entire parcel including all permitted and
"permitted on review" uses, the City Clerk shall submit the application
to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The fee to be paid to the City
Clerk, upon the filing of an application for "use permitted on review",
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
3. Planning and Zoning Commission review. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon after public notice
(published in the local newspaper) of fifteen (15) days is given and, in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein, review the application
SECTION 29-82 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-82
1:712
based on the criteria set forth in Subsection (5) of this Section, approve
or disapprove the application and submit a report of its
recommendations to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the
hearing.
4. Action by the City Council. No action shall be taken by the City Council
on any applications for a proposed building or use referred to above
until the Planning and Zoning Commission report has been filed with
the Council. However, if no report is received from the Commission
within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the City Council may
proceed with its own action upon the application.
The City Council shall vote on the "permitted on review" use permit at
their next regular meeting after receipt of the report. A majority vote
of the entire City Council shall be required to authorize and approve
the issuance of any "permitted on review" use permit contrary to the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
5. Criteria for reviewing all applications. In considering whether or not
such application for a "permitted on review" use permit should be
granted, it shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the City Council to give consideration to the effect of the requested
use on the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of
the area in the vicinity of the property in question and the residents of
the City generally. In considering the permit, the Commission and the
Council shall consider the following:
a. The proposed permit complies with all applicable provisions of
Chapter 29 regulations, including intensity of use regulations, yard
regulations, open space requirements, fencing, signage and use
limitations.
b. The proposed use at the specified location will not interfere the
health, safety, welfare or convenience of the public.
c. The proposed use will not cause substantial reduction to the value
of other property in the surrounding neighborhood or to the City's
overall tax base.
d. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operation involved in or conducted in connection with it, the need
for buffering and screening, and the location of the site with
respect to streets giving access to it are such that the proposed use
will not dominate the immediate neighborhood so as to prevent
development and use of neighboring property in accordance with
the applicable zoning district regulations.
e. Adjacent streets have the capacity to handle increased traffic
volumes both on a daily basis and at peak times.
f. Adequacy of ingress and egress to and within the site; traffic flow
control provided to minimize traffic congestion and hazards in
SECTION 29-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-82
1:713
SECTION 29-83. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. IX
§ 3, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 93-28 § 1, 12-14-1993]
public streets and alleys; accessibility of the property to police, fire,
refuse collection and other municipal services; and the adequacy of
off-street parking and loading areas.
g. Off-street parking and loading areas will be provided in accordance
with the standards set forth in Zoning Sections 29-49 through
29-59, and such areas will be screened from adjoining residential
uses and located so as to protect such residential uses from any
injurious effect.
h. The size, floor area, mass and general appearance of a proposed
structure is compatible with adjacent structures and buildings in
the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
i. Adequate utilities, drainage and other facilities will be provided.
j. The impact of night lighting in terms of intensity, duration and
frequency of use on adjacent properties is minimized.
k. The added noise created by activities associated with the proposed
use on adjacent properties is minimal.
6. Additional conditions for "permitted on review" uses. In granting a
"permitted on review" use permit, the City may impose such conditions,
safeguards and restrictions upon the premises benefited by the permit
as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potential injurious
effect of such permit upon other property in the neighborhood, and to
carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations. Such
restrictions may implement general City plans and policies,
requirements of the zoning ordinance and other City ordinances.
7. Transferability. "Permitted on review" use permits are not transferable
to new users, tenants or operators.
8. Revocation/expiration. The City Council, after a public hearing, may
revoke a "permitted on review" use permit for failure of compliance
with the regulations and restrictions of this Section or the requirements
of the permit. The permit will expire if it is not put into use within six (6)
months of the date of approval by the City Council. After being put into
use, the permit shall become null and void when the activity for which
the permit was issued has ceased and has not been used for that
purpose during the preceding ninety (90) days.
A. A violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine, and/or imprisonment. Any person, firm, or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that
such violation continues, but if the offense be willful, on conviction
SECTION 29-82 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-83
1:714
SECTION 29-84. Amendments (Zoning). [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. IX § 4,
12-2-1980; Ord. No. 95-04 § 1, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 2005-29 § 3,
8-9-2005; Ord. No. 2006-37 § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-46 § 1,
11-14-2006]
thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by
imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation
continues, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court.
B. The City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings against
any firm, person or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent occupancy
of such building, structure, or land, or prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises.
A. The City Council, from time to time, on its own motion or on
recommendation of the City Planning Commission or on petition from a
property owner, may change, supplement, amend, modify or repeal the
regulations, restrictions, boundaries or districts herein established.
B. Every such proposed amendment (change) shall be referred to the City
Planning and Zoning Commission for review and report at the Planning
and Zoning Commission's next regular scheduled meeting.
Before submitting an application for a zoning amendment, the applicant
should schedule a meeting with the Planning and Zoning Commission
to discuss the amendment process.
C. Zoning changes made under this Section may be classified as either
permanent or conditional.
1. Permanent changes will be made only after consideration and
evaluation of the following criteria:
a. Impact on neighborhood.
(1) Traffic.
(2) Parking.
(3) Proposed hours of operation.
(4) Noise.
(5) Proximity to schools.
(6) Proximity to churches.
(7) Affect on any adjoining business/s.
SECTION 29-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-84
1:715
(8) Past usage history of the property/s.
(9) Compatibility with historical district requirements.
(10) Visual compatibility with surrounding area.
b. Impact on the City.
(1) Traffic and control.
(2) Available infrastructure to support proposed usage.
(3) Impact of the potential costs and benefits derived by the
City community from the proposed change.
(4) Compatibility with existing neighborhood.
(5) Compatibility with any existing business/s.
(6) Visual impact.
(7) Compatibility with Comprehensive Plan land use.
c. Public hearing input.
d. Submitted "Letter of Intended Use".
2. Conditional use changes will be considered and recommended only
after evaluation of the following criteria:
a. Items (a) through (d) above.
b. Change will be for a defined use and/or time period only as
delineated in the required "Letter of Intended Use" noted in
Subsection (F) below.
c. Other considerations that may be determined by Planning and
Zoning to be pertinent to the use of the property.
D. A conditional use property zoning classification will revert to the
original property classification within a defined period of time if so
requested in the "Letter of Intended Use" or if it ceases to be used for
the purposes set forth in the "letter" or is not used for the stated
purposes for a period of ninety (90) days. A conditional use zoning
classification remains with the property regardless of ownership,
subject to the foregoing conditions.
E. A completed "application for zoning change" submitted by a landowner
shall be signed by the landowner or an authorized representative of the
landowner. Said application or petition shall be accompanied by a plat
or map drawn to scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to the
inch showing the land in question, its location, the length and location
of each boundary thereof, the current zoning classification and the
location and zoning classification of property within three hundred
(300) feet of such land, a "Letter of Intended Use" and a filing fee
SECTION 29-84 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-84
1:716
payable to the City. Incomplete applications will be returned to the
applicant.
F. The applicant must provide a "Letter of Intended Use" at the time of
application for amendment. The "Letter of Intended Use" shall describe
in detail, including pictures, sketches or drawings, the use the applicant
plans for the parcel after an approved zoning change and shall be
considered binding.
G. An affidavit from the property owner stating that the applicant, if
different from the property owner, has permission to make this
application.
H. For each petition for amendment to the zoning ordinance a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the cost of legal publication shall be
paid to the City Clerk.
I. No portion of the filing fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Any
expenditures in excess of the filing fee incurred by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the City Council that are necessary and incident
to the processing of the application shall be billed to the applicant or
petitioner.
J. Every such proposed amendment (change), along with all of the
documentation required in Subsections (E) thru (G) above, shall be
referred to the City Planning and Zoning Commission for review at the
Planning and Zoning Commission's next regular scheduled meeting.
K. After review, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall then schedule
and hold a public hearing upon said application or petition. At least
fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall
be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in the
City of Lexington.
L. No change in regulations, restrictions or district boundaries shall
become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. If a protest against such amendment be presented, duly signed
and acknowledged by the owners of thirty percent (30%) or more,
either of the areas of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included
in such proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn
parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distant from the
boundaries of the territory included in such proposed change, such
amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of twothirds
(2/3) of all the members of the City Council.
M. Following the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
thereupon approve or deny the application. Following the
determination by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the application
shall be forwarded to the City Council for review at their next regularly
scheduled meeting. The City Council may overturn the decision of the
SECTION 29-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-84
1:717
SECTION 29-85. Classification of New Additions. [Ord. No. 80-22
Art. IX § 5, 12-2-1980; Ord. No. 2007-32 § 1, 9-5-2007]
Planning and Zoning Commission only through a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of its entire membership.
N. Whenever any application or petition presented under this Section has
been finally acted upon by the Lexington City Council under the
provisions of this Section and the decision of the City Council has been
adverse to the applicant, neither the Planning and Zoning Commission
or the City Council shall, for a period of six (6) months from the date of
the City Council decision, receive or entertain any identical or similar
application seeking the same or similar relief as requested in the
application first denied.
A. All new additions and annexations of land to the City of Lexington shall
be in an "A-1" Agricultural Zone, unless otherwise classified by the City
Council. Within a period of time not to exceed one (1) year from the
effective date of the ordinance annexing said addition, the City Planning
Commission shall study and make recommendations concerning the use
of land within said annexation to promote the general welfare and in
accordance with the Comprehensive City Plan and upon receipt of such
recommendations the City Council shall, after public hearings as
required by law, establish the district classification of said annexation;
provided however, that this shall not be construed as preventing the
City Planning Commission and the City Council from holding public
hearings prior to annexation and establishing the district classification
at the time of said annexation.
B. At a public hearing held by the Lexington, Missouri Planning and
Zoning Commission on August 28, 2007, and approved by the
Lexington, Missouri City Council on September 5, 2007, the following
areas annexed in the year 2000 were zoned as follows:
1. All of Areas I and IV zoned to "R-1": (Single-Family Residential).
2. All of Area II zoned to "R-1" (Single-Family Residential) with the
exception of the property lying at the northwest corner of Summit
Camp Road and Route O, known as Summit Ridge Villas, previously
zoned "R-3" (Multiple-Family Residential District).
3. All of Area III zoned to "H-C" (Highway Commercial) except
property south of Highway U.S. 24 currently being used by Tri-
County Propane for propane storage. That property was zoned
"LI-2" (Light Industrial -2)
C. At a public hearing held by the Lexington, Missouri Planning and
Zoning Commission on August 28, 2007, and approved by the
Lexington, Missouri City Council on September 5, 2007, the following
areas lying within the Lexington City limits prior to the year 2000
SECTION 29-84 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-85
1:718
SECTION 29-86. Official Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 80-22 Art. IX § 5,
12-2-1980]
SECTION 29-87. through SECTION 29-99. (Reserved)
annexations but being adjacent to and abutting Area III were zoned as
follows:
1. All the land area within the Lexington City limits north of Highway
224; beginning at the intersection of Martin Lane/Arrowhead Road
and U.S. 224, thence northward along Martin Lane to the
northernmost Lexington City limits, thence eastward to annexed
Area III, zoned "H-C" (Highway Commercial).
2. All the land area south of Highway U.S. 224 within the Lexington
City limits, beginning at the intersection of U.S. 224 and South 26th
Street, thence south along South 26th Street approximately one
hundred sixty-five (165) feet more or less to the south side of the
alley right-of-way of the alley running east from South 26th Street,
thence eastward in a straight line to annexed Area III, zoned "H-C"
(Highway Commercial).
D. At a public hearing held by the Lexington, Missouri Planning and
Zoning Commission on August 28, 2007, and approved by the
Lexington, Missouri City Council on September 5, 2007, Lot 214, Estill
Heights Subdivision, was zoned to Highway Commercial (H-C).
A. The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown
on the Official Zoning Map. This map shall have affixed thereon:
1. The date of adoption by the Lexington City Council.
2. The signature of the Mayor and the City Clerk.
The Official Zoning Map for the City of Lexington shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk.
B. The Official Zoning Map may be amended in accordance with Article IX,
Section 29-84 of this Chapter. At least twice each year the Planning
Commission shall update the map to indicate any zoning changes that
have taken place.
SECTION 29-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-87
1:719

ARTICLE X
Enhanced Enterprise Zone Board
SECTION 29-100. Creation. [Ord. No. 2011-10 § 1, 3-22-2011]
There is hereby established the Enhanced Enterprise Zone Board organized
pursuant to Sections 135.950 through 135.970, RSMo., as amended.
SECTION 29-101. Membership and Terms. [Ord. No. 2011-10 § 1,
3-22-2011]
SECTION 29-102. Functions and Duties. [Ord. No. 2011-10 § 1,
3-22-2011]
SECTION 29-103. Procedures. [Ord. No. 2011-10 § 1, 3-22-2011]
A. The Board shall have seven (7) members comprised as follows:
1. Five (5) people appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council;
2. One (1) person appointed by the school district located within the
designation area; and
3. One (1) person appointed by the remaining affected taxing
districts.
B. The school district member and the affected taxing district member
shall each have initial terms of five (5) years. Of the five (5) members
appointed by the Mayor and Council, two (2) shall have initial terms of
four (4) years, two (2) shall have initial terms of three (3) years, and one
(1) shall have an initial term of two (2) years. Thereafter, members shall
serve terms of five (5) years. Each member shall hold office until a
successor has been appointed. All vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment. For inefficiency or neglect of duty
or misconduct in office, a member of the Board may be removed by the
applicable appointing authority.
A. Advise the City Council on the designation of the Enhance Enterprise
Zone and any other advisory duties as determined by the City Council.
B. Review and assess zone activities, once the designation of the zone has
been completed.
C. Submit an annual report to the Missouri Department of Economic
Development Director regarding the status of the zone and business
activity therein as set forth in Section 135.960, RSMo.
A. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of such Board for
the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the
Board and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Board
upon a vote of a majority of the members present.
SECTION 29-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 29-103
1:721
B. The members of the Board annually shall elect a Chairman from among
the members.
SECTION 29-103 LEXINGTON CITY CODE SECTION 29-103
1:722